5 



- 





^SSilSKJf? 




\ '-' r , Y'-\~--\V\ ; ■ 



jfeK 




£H?525*f£Hj < ; ■*•: •:: zi 3i 2 2 /: ?; V • ?■- : 1 ’ • ?< 5 * i;? ‘:i .- ;>r £; > r .• :;; f 
:-sic:?ic-*5• ?Ur.s >H2; S ^J - • i - « - • ; ;• j>« 

£>;f S? a;* ?2<i*3csclrS££ ?;*uh.?jj-|; :?f?5 i j| 






l-Hi :•? i -IHHU im&&n 

; 3: ^fcw if!?!'!i ofn n if ini i;i fpi-st 

jsfe 4 *‘ * ■•' I - JC -' •■ ■ -■-—■■=*■• if " ^§g&|g 










if£&&%npizifiu Hz mil . 

rail* 


rfttf 


:?%:?RR|?>£?< JiSriSisr r HS>:- 

■gmg 


j-'IM 5 ?. 

f 4 sll 

SM; 




1 §H 


:i?J^a58i?iJ?Sisfs3 




Igf: 


. . ' "i ■■ ; '. '■■ 

:^f.; 

■r i ::■ ? -.?££'? rfites v;lrH^®Sl3i p 

- - - ;:-. -fir*. r j .*5 • t..,.- - ■ • 







- : ; - sc i 

’"t!|fesrJsi|5; 







ra 3 £.*i r y*a.~; _ 













V: ; :- ■ - ;: 


ia;i.v '•;..* 2 -•: 
•ific'. 


. i: • 
£=jf§~llllll 


S I 

L-I,- j .-.'irn .r- -. 


: '.jj| 




















I 

































BHARATIYA VIDYA BHAVAN’S 
HISTORY AND CULTURE OF THE INDIAN PEOPLE 

VOLUME VII 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
Public.Resource.Org 


https://archive.org/details/mughulempireOObhar 


THE HISTORY AND CULTURE 
OF THE INDIAN PEOPLE 


THE 


MUGHUL 
EMPIRE 




A 


It* 





GENERAL EDITOR 


R. C. MAJUMDAR, M.A., Ph.D., D. LITT. (Hony.) 

Vice-President of the International Commission for a History 
of the Scientific and Cultural Development of Mankind set up 
by UNESCO ; Hon. Fellow of the Asiatic Society, Calcutta', 

Hon. Fellow of the Royal Asiatic Society 
of Great Britain and Ireland', 

Hon. Fellow of the Asiatic 
Society of Bombay, 


Hon. Head of the Department of History, 
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Bombay, 

Formerly Vice-Chancellor, University of Dacca, 
Principal, College of Indology, Hindu University, Banaras, 
and Visiting Professor of Indian History, Universities 
of Chicago and Pennsylvania (TJ.S.A.) 


ASSISTANT EDITORS 

J. N. CHAUDHURI, ma.phd, 

Formerly Lecturer , Brahmananda Keshabchandra College , Barrackpur 

S. CHAUDHURI, M. A .,Ph. D .. 

Lecturer , Calcutta University. 



1974 

BOMBAY 


BHARATIYA VIDYA BHAVAN 



All rights reserved by the Publishers 


FIRST PUBLISHED IN 1974 


Walls College 



Library 



PRINTED IN INDIA 
BY 

V. VARADARAJAN 

AT ASSOCIATED ADVERTISERS & PRINTERS, 
505, TARDEO ARTHUR ROAD, BOMBAY-400 034 

AND 

PUBLISHED BY 

S. RAMAKRISHNAN, EXECUTIVE SECRETARY, 
BHARATIYA VIDYA BHAVAN, 
KULAPATI K. M. MUNSHI MARG, 


bombay-400 007 


CONTRIBUTORS 


R. C. MAJUMDAR 
M.A., PH.D., D.LITT. (Hony.) 

(late) A. L. SRIVASTAVA 

M.A., D.LITT. 

Formerly Professor, Agra University 

S. ROY 

M.A., PH.D. 

Formerly Professor of Islamic History, University of Calcutta 

J. N. CHAUDHURI 

M.A., PH.D. 

Formerly Lecturer, Brahmananda Keshabchandra College, Barrackpur 

ABDUR RASHID 

Formerly Professor, Aligarh University 

(late) G. S. SARDESAI 

B.A. 



H. R. GUPTA 

M.A., PH.D., D.LITT. 

Formerly Professor and Head of the Department of History, 
Punjab University, Chandigarh 

A. K. MAJUMDAR 

M.A., D.PHIL. 

Formerly Director, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Bombay 

RAGHUVIR SINGH 

M.A., LL.B., D.LITT. 

N. VENKATARAMANAYYA 

M.A., PH.D. 

Deputy Director (Epigraphy), Department of Archaeology, Hyderabad 

(late) RAO SAHIB C. S. SRINIVASACHARI 
Professor of History, Amamalai University 

SHRI RAM SHARMA 

Formerly Professor, D. A. V. College, Lahore, and Lecturer, 

University of Punjab 

\ 

S. K. CHATTERJI 
M.A., PH.D., D.LITT. (Hony.) 

Na tio na l Professor 

M. G. BHAGAT 

M.A., LL.B., PH.D. 

L.I.C. Bombay 

G. S. TALIB 

M.A. 

Reader in English, Kurukshetra University 


S. G. MALSHE 

M.A., PH.D. 

Professor of Marathi, S.N.D.T. University, Bombay 

S. A. GAVASKAR 

M.A. 

Professor of Marathi, Khalsa College, Bombay 

K. R. S. IYENGAR 

M.A., D.LITT. 

Ex-Vice-Chancellor, Andhra University, Waltair 

S. V. JOGA RAO 

M.A., PH.D. 

Head, Department of Telugu, Andhra University Postgraduate Centre, Guntur 

S. SRIKANTA SASTRI 

M.A., D.LITT. 

Professor of History (Rtd.) University of Mysore 

S. K. NAYAR 

M.A., PH.D. 

University of Madras 

S. H. RITTI 

M.A., PH.D. 

Professor and Head, Department of Ancient Indian Culture, 
Karnatak University, Dharwar 

ABDUS SUBHAN 

M.A., PH.D. 

Lecturer, Maulana Azad College, Calcutta 
(late) B. B. MAJUMDAR 

M.A., PH.D. 

Formerly Principal, H. 2>. /ai/i College, Arrali, Professor of History 

(University Grants Commission ) 

M. W. MIRZA 

M.A., PH.D. 

Formerly Professor and Head of the Department of Arabic, Lucknow University 

P. N. CHOPRA 

M.A., PH.D. 

Editor, The Gazetteer of India 

S. K. SARASWATI 

M.A. 

Formerly Professor, Hindu University , Varanasi 


ASOK KUMAR DAS 
m.a., ll.b., ph.d. (London) 

Diplomate in Museology , Director, Sawai Man Singh II Museum, Jaipur 


IN MEMORIAM 

KULAPATI DR. K. M. MUNSHI 


This is the first volume of this series (out of ten so far pub¬ 
lished) which appears without a Foreword from the pen of its inau- 
gurator, the late lamented Kulapati Dr. K. M. Munshi. He died full 
of years and honours, and his activities and achievements are only 
too well-known. His death is mourned by all classes of people from 
one end of India to the other and also abroad. But it has been an 
irreparable loss to the Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan which sponsored 
not only the project of publishing this historical series but many 
other books calculated to promote a knowledge of the culture of 
India. To me the loss is also a personal one. I still cherish the 
memory of my first meeting with Dr. Munshi in 1945. I was sur¬ 
prised to receive an invitation to meet him at Bombay, for I was a 
complete stranger to him at the time. Far greater was my surprise 
when I listened to him explaining the ideals and method envisaged 
by him for the publication of a series of ten volumes on the history 
and culture of the Indian People, laying particular stress on the 
two words ‘culture’ and ‘people’. I need not expatiate on this, as 
he has himself expressed, in the Foreword to the First Volume, his 
own concept of the scope of this series. These lines would bear re¬ 
petition. “Some years ago”, wrote Munshiji, “I defined the scope 
of history as follows: 

“To be a history in the true sense of the word, the work 
must be the story of the people inhabiting a country. It must 
be a record of their life from age to age presented through the 
life and achievements of men whose exploits become the bea¬ 
con-lights of tradition; through the characteristic reaction of 
the people to physical and economic conditions; through poli¬ 
tical changes and vicissitudes which create the forces and con¬ 
ditions which operate upon life; through characteristic social 
institutions, beliefs and forms; through literary and artistic 
achievements; through the movements of thought which from 
time to time helped or hindered the growth of collective har¬ 
mony; through those values which the people have accepted or 
reacted to and which created or shaped their collective will; 
through efforts of the people to will themselves into an organic 
unity. The central purpose of a history must, therefore, be to 
investigate and unfold the values which, age after age, have in¬ 
spired the inhabitants of a country to develop their collective 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


will and to express it through the manifold activities of their life. 

Such a history of India is still to be written.” 

I was very much surprised to hear all this from one who was 
not a professional historian. But my surprise reached its climax 
when he requested me to accept the post of the General Editor, for 
we never met each other before. 

I accepted his offer and since that day up to the very end of his 
life—a long period of twenty-five years—our relations had always 
been very cordial. Though I generally lived in Calcutta, I visited 
him from time to time in connection with the publication of this 
history and was always his guest. Our discussion on some disputed 
points of what I wrote was always carried on in a very cordial spirit. 
He used to read the type-script of each volume before it was pub¬ 
lished. Occasionally, though very rarely, when he felt some diffi¬ 
culty in accepting some statement in any volume, he discussed the 
matter with me. There was a tacit understanding between us that 
no objection would be made to any statement which is based on 
fact and supported by reasonable argument. In other words, we 
both agreed to accept, without hesitation, whatever is proved to be 
true by all canons of historical criticism, however unpleasant or 
disagreeable it might appear to any of us. Munshiji never violated 
this agreement or understanding. I specially lay stress on this 
point, as I have learnt from personal experience that men in high 
position in India seldom exhibit this spirit. When, as the whole¬ 
time Director, I prepared the draft of the History of the Freedom 
Movement in India, sponsored by the Government of India, I met 
with constant interference and obstruction from men in authority, 
having no knowledge of history, and I could not help contrasting 
their attitude with that of Dr. K. M. Munshi. When this unpleasant 
situation was reported to Munshiji by an important member of the 
Board of Editors for the compilation of the History of the Freedom 
Movement in India, Munshiji said: “Leave the matter of writing to 
Dr. Majumdar as I have done, and don’t interfere with his freedom, 
subject to the final discussion and decision by the Board of Editors.’’ 

If Munshiji’s advice were followed, the History of the Freedom 
Movement i'n India would have been published fifteen years before 

it has been actually published, and several lakhs of rupees would 
have been saved. 

Munshiji s attitude was put to a severe test when I prepared 
the first draft of the role played by Mahatma Gandhi in the struggle 
for freedom of India in Vol. XI. He read through it and invited 
me to Bombay. I stayed in his house and we read together all the 


vm 



IN MEMORIAM 


relevant portions line by line. We had discussions on many points, 
but ultimately with a few minor changes in expressions, he agreed 
to my draft. I mention this incident in detail, for I knew that he 
v/as a great devotee of Mahatma Gandhi and his views on some 
points were different from mine. But the fact that he still ac¬ 
cepted my draft after I convinced him by facts and arguments, re¬ 
vealed to me what I consider to be one of the noblest traits in his 
character. He had already earned my love and respect, but to this 
was now added admiration for a very high degree of intellectual 
integrity—so very rare in the leaders of Free India. 

It will ever remain a matter of deep regret to me that Munshiji 
did not live to see the completion of this cherished project of his. 
My only consolation is that he saw nine volumes comprising seven 
thousand five hundred pages already published, and this, the tenth 
volume, already in the press. Whether I shall live long enough to 
bring out the one remaining volume, I cannot say, but if I do, the 
day of its publication, and completion of Munshiji’s dear project, 
will be the proudest and happiest day of my long life. 

March 1, 1974 R. C. MAJUMDAR 


IX 















































i 















. 













- 

•* 

% 



















v . 




■ • 



r 


• 




■ •> - 



< * +■ 

S 


*' - * tr 







PREFACE 

By 

DR. R. C. MAJUMDAR 
(General Editor) 

The reasons for the postponement of the publication of this and 
the next volume (Vols. VII and VIII) till after Vols. IX, X and XI 
were published have been stated in the Preface to Vol. IX of this 
series (p. xxxiv). 

This, the seventh volume of the series, deals with the period 
from 1526 to 1707 A.D. during which the Mughuls gradually esta¬ 
blished their authority over nearly the whole of India. This is the 
brightest Chapter in the history of Mjuslim rule in India, which 
began in the 13th century A.D. and covers a period of nearly six 
hundred years in north and five hundred years in south India. 
The Mughul rule is distinguished by the establishment of a stable 
Government with an efficient system of administration, a very high 
development of architecture and paintings and, above all, wealth 
and splendour such as no other Islamic State in any part of the 
world may boast of. 

So far as the Hindus were concerned, there was no improve¬ 
ment either in their material and moral conditions or in their rela¬ 
tions with the Muslims. With the sole exception of Akbar, who 
sought to conciliate the Hindus by removing some of the glaring 
evils to which they were subjected, almost all the other Mughul 
Emperors were notorious for their religious bigotry. The Muslim 
law which imposed many disabilities and indignities upon the 
Hindus, mentioned in Vol. VI (pp. 617-20), and thereby definitely 
gave them an inferior social and political status, as compared to the 
Muslims, was followed by these Mughul Emperors (and other 
Muslim rulers) with as much zeal as was displayed by their pre¬ 
decessors, the Sultans of Delhi. The climax was reached during the 
reign of Aurangzlb, who deliberately pursued the policy of destroy¬ 
ing and desecrating Hindu temples and idols with a thoroughness 
unknown before or since. Such disclosures may not be liked by 
the high officials and a section of the politicians, but it is the solemn 
duty of the historian to state the truth, however unpleasant or dis¬ 
creditable it might be to any particular class or community. Un¬ 
fortunately, political expediency in India during this century has 
sought to destroy this true historic spirit. This alone can explain 
the concealed, and mostly unsuccessful, attempt to disparage the 
statements about the Hindu-Muslim relations made in Volume V 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


(pp. 497-502) and Vol. VI (pp. 615-636), though these were based 
mainly on Muslim chronicles and accounts of a Muslim traveller, 
supported by contemporary Indian literature. 

The difficulty of writing the true history of Hindu-Muslim re¬ 
lations as well as the editorial policy followed in this matter has 
been stated at some length in the Preface to Vol. VI (pp. xxix- 
xxx) Of this series. The same policy is followed in this volume also. 

It is very sad that the spirit of perverting history to suit poli¬ 
tical views is no longer confined to politicians, but has definitely 
spread even among professional historians. 

In the present volume, reference has been made in some detail 
to the Muslim bigotry in general and the persecution of the Hindus 
by Aurangzib in particular (pp. 233-36, 305-6). Although the state¬ 
ments are based on unimpeachable authority, there is hardly any 
doubt that they will be condemned not only by a small class of 
historians enjoying official favour, but also by a section of Indians 
w o are quite large in number and occupy high position in politics 
and society. It is painful to mention, though impossible to ignore, 
the fact that there is a distinct and conscious attempt to rewrite the 
whole chapter of the bigotry and intolerance of the Muslim rulers 
towards Hindu religion.* This was originally prompted by the poli¬ 
tical motive of bringing together the Hindus and Musalmans in a 
common fight against the British but has continued ever since. A 
history written under the auspices of the Indian National Congress 
sought to repudiate the charge that the Muslim rulers broke Hindu 
temples, and asserted that they were the most tolerant in matters 
of religion. Following in its footsteps a noted historian has sought 
to exonerate Mahmud of Ghazni’s bigotry and fanaticism, and seve¬ 
ral writers in India have come forward to defend Aurangzib against 
Jadunath Sarkar’s charge of religious intolerance. It is interesting 
to note that in the revised edition of the Encyclopaedia of Islam, one 
of them, while re-writing the article on Aurangzib originally written 
by Sir William Irvine, has expressed the view that the charge of 
breaking Hindu temples brought against Aurangzib is a disputed point. 
Alas for poor Jadunath Sarkar, who must have turned in his grave 
if he were buried. For, after reading his History of Aurangzib, one 
would be tempted to ask, if the temple-breaking policy of Aurangzib 
is a disputed point, is there a single fact in the whole recorded his¬ 
tory of mankind which may be taken as undisputed? A noted his¬ 
torian has sought to prove that the Hindu population was better 
off under the Muslims than under the Hindu tributaries or inde- 
pendent rulers. “W hile some historians have sought to show that 
Cf. Quarterly Review of Historical Studies, Vol. Ill (1964), p. 58. 


Xil 







PREFACE 


the Hindu and Muslim cultures were fundamentally different and 
formed two distinct and separate units flourishing side by side, the 
late K. M. Ashraf sought to prove that the Hindus and Muslims 
had no cultural conflict.” But the climax was reached by the poli- 
tician-cum-historian Lala Lajpat Rai when he asserted that “the 
Hindus and Muslims have coalesced into an Indian people very 
much in the same way as the Angles, Saxons, Jutes, Danes and 
Normans formed the English people of today.”* His further asser¬ 
tion that “the Muslim rule in India was not a foreign rule” has now 
become the oft-repeated slogan of a certain political party. I have 
discussed the question in some detail elsewhere** and need not 
elaborate the point any further. 

The policy adopted in regard to this question in this and the 
preceding volumes, and discussed at some length in Vol. VI (pp. 
xxix-xxx), was most eloquently expressed by Jadunath Sarkar as 
far back as 1915 in his Presidential speech at a historical conference 
in Bengal. The following is a literal English translation of the ori¬ 
ginal Bengali passage: 

“I would not care whether truth is pleasant or unpleasant, and 
in consonance with or opposed to current views. I would not mind 
in the least whether truth is or is not a blow to the glory of my 
country. If necessary, I shall bear in patience the ridicule and 
slander of friends and society for the sake of preaching truth. But 
still I shall seek truth, understand truth, and accept truth. This 
should be the firm resolve of a historian.” 

I may conclude this topic by referring to the views expressed 
by Jadunath Sarkar and Dr. Rajendra Prasad at a much later date 
when Dr. Rajendra Prasad launched a scheme to write a compre¬ 
hensive national history of India on a co-operative basis, and re¬ 
quested Jadunath to become its chief editor. Jadunath wrote to him 
on 19 November, 1937: “National history, like every other history 
worthy of the name and deserving to endure, must be true as re¬ 
gards the facts and reasonable in the interpretation of them. It 
will be national not in the sense that it will try to suppress or 
white-wash everything in our country’s past that is disgraceful, but 
because it will admit them and at the same time point out that 
there were other and nobler aspects in the stages of our nation’s 

evolution which offset the former. In this task the historian 

must be a judge. He will not suppress any defect of the national 
character, but add to his portraiture those higher qualities which, 


* Young India, pp. 73-5. 

** Historiography in Modern India (Asia Publishing House), pp. 48, 54-7. 


xm 






THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


taken together with the former, help to constitute the entire indi¬ 
vidual.” 

In his reply to the above, dated 22 November, 1937, Dr. Rajen- 
dra Prasad wrote: “I entirely agree with you that no history is 
worth the name which suppresses or distorts facts. A historian 
who purposely does so under the impression that he thereby does 
good to his native country really harms it in the end. Much more 
so in the case of a country like ours which has suffered much on 
account of its national defects, and which must know and under¬ 
stand them to be able to remedy them.” 

An apt illustration of the truth of the observation in the last 
sentence is furnished by the religious bigotry of the Mughul Em¬ 
perors. If we consider the relevant facts of history as discussed 
in this volume, in an open mind, without either any rancour or 
resentment on the one hand, and a desire to suppress the truth on 
the other, we can never deny that religious bigotry contributed to 
a very large extent to the downfall of the mighty Mughul empire. 
If we realize fully this great historical truth we may learn a valu¬ 
able lesson from the teachings of history which might serve as a 
useful guide in shaping our destiny in future. If we deny it out 
of misguided sentiments, it would be a perversion of historical 
truth. For, the rebellion of the Rajputs, who were a pillar of 
strength to the Mughul Emperors, against Aurangzib, and the rise 
of the Marathas and Sikhs as great military powers—the three great 
events which brought about the decline and fall of the Mughul em¬ 
pire—were direct consequences of the bigotry of the Mughul em¬ 
perors in general and of Aurangzib in particular. It is not perhaps 
a mere coincidence that the reign of Aurangzib, during which the 
religious bigotry reached its climax, was followed almost immediate¬ 
ly after his death by a rapid process of decline and disintegration 
of the Mughul Empire. It is true that other causes were also at 
work, such as the fratricidal wars of succession. We should re¬ 
member, however, that there were similar wars also just before 
Aurangzib ascended the throne, but the Mughul Empire survived 
it—because it could still count on the loyal support of the Rajputs 
and had not to encounter the opposition, either of the Rajputs or 
of the Marathas and the Sikhs whom Aurangzib’s bigotry had con¬ 
verted into deadly enemies. 

It is, however, only fair to point out in this connection that 
in spite of his religious bigotry and cruelty to his father and bro¬ 
thers Aurangzib must be regarded as a very able ruler. For it was 
he who had extended the southern boundary of the Mughul Empire 
which then included the vast region from the Hindu Kush and the 


xiv 



PREFACE 


Himalayas to Cape Comorin, for a near parallel to which we have 
to look back to the Maurya Empire that flourished about 2000 years 
before. The Mughul period should also be credited with great 
artistic achievement whose extant remains far exceed in skill and 
grandeur those of any other period in the history of India. A visible 
embodiment of its brilliance is the Taj Mahal of Agra, which is 
justly regarded as one of the eight wonders of the world. The 
Mughul paintings have also received a world-wide renown. 

Finally, India during the Mughul period enjoyed a proverbial 
reputation for wealth and splendour and attracted a large number 
of visitors from Europe who have left records of their impression. 

Next to the Mughuls, the Rajput States in the north, the five 
Sultanates of the Deccan arising out of the ruins of the Bahmani 
Kingdom, and the Hindu Empire of Vijayanagara in South India 
played the dominant role in history at the beginning of the period. 
The end of the period witnessed the rise of the two great powers, 
the Marathas and the Sikhs who were destined to play the most 
prominent role in the eighteenth century, which would be describ¬ 
ed in the next volume. 

One of the most characteristic features of the period is a galaxy 
of great personalities who have left a deep impress upon the poli¬ 
tical history of India. These are Babur, Sher Shah, Hemchandra 
(Himu), Akbar, Chand Sultan, Rana Pratap Singh, Nur Jahan, 
Shivaji, Baji Rao and Guru Govind Singh, who have secured a per¬ 
manent niche in the shrine of Indian history and of whom any coun¬ 
try might well feel proud. 

This volume may claim the credit of rescuing from oblivion 
the name of Himu or Hemchandra, a forgotten Hindu hero who 
began his life as a greengrocer, and by dint of his own efforts and 
personality ascended the throne of Delhi—the only Hindu to do so 
since the Battle of Tarain in 1192 A.D. Historians of India have 
so far done scant justice to his personality and achievement with 
the result that he is hardly known to Indians today as a remark¬ 
able and distinguished person during the Medieval Age. For this 
reason his career has been discussed in some detail in an Appendix 
(pp. 97-101). 

To the distinguished names in the political field mentioned 
above we may add those of Tulasirdasa and Tansen, whose influence 
still persists, respectively, over Hindi literature and classical music 
of India. 


xv 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


This volume gives a brief account of fourteen local vernacular 
literatures, most of which were yet merely at their formative stage. 
There is a popular view that special credit for the rise and growth 
of many of them is due to the Muslim rulers. An eminent Muslim 
scholar, for example, has expressed the view that the development 
of Bengali literature was rendered possible only by the enlightened 
rule of Hussain Shah, the Sultan of Bengal, whose rule ended in 
A.D. 1519 after Babur had begun his expeditions against India and 
only seven years before the first Battle of Panipat. A faint 
echo of such sentiments will be found in Vol. VI of this series 
(pp. 219, 513). The Editor, however, feels, after a very careful 
study of the materials now available, that Hussain Shah has no 
reasonable claim to be regarded as the promoter of the develop¬ 
ment of Bengali literature. Other claims of a similar nature in 
respect of the development of other vernacular literatures have 
hardly any basis to stand upon.* 

It is remarkable that the patronage of Muslim rulers has not 
been even claimed, except in a very few cases, as a contributing 
factor to the development of other vernacular literatures of India. 
So this development must be regarded as essentially due to the ope¬ 
ration of natural laws in the evolution of Indian literature. It is 
also very noteworthy that the local vernacular literatures show few 
traces of Muslim influence except a large number of loanwords from 
Arabic and Persian languages. This would be evident from a com¬ 
parison of British influence on Bengali literature in the 19th cen¬ 
tury with that of Muslim influence during the preceding six 
centuries. 

The Editor takes this opportunity to place on record his high 
esteem of the scholarship of G. S. Sardesai of international fame, 
and C. S. Srinivasachari, who wrote, respectively, Chapter IX 
(Shivaji) and Chapter XVI (European Settlements), of this 
volume. Both of them passed away long ago and it reflects great 
credit on them that their writings required, comparatively speak¬ 
ing, so little changes to bring them up to date. The Editor had the 
advantage of revising Sardesai’s Chapter in the light of his pub¬ 
lished work, the “New History of the Marathas” (1957), and took 
the liberty of adding some comments on the views of the learned 
scholar. The Editor also notes with deep regret the recent death 
of Prof. Biman Bihari Majumdar, the author of the section on 
Hindu Religion in Chapter XX and Dr. A. L. Srivastava who contri¬ 
buted Chapters I (Sources), XVIII (Law and Legal Institutions) 

* The whole question has been discussed by the Editor in an article contri¬ 
buted to the Srivastava Memorial Volume. 


XVI 



PREFACE 


and XXII (Economic Condition). Both of them were alive when 
the volume was sent to the press. Dr. Srivastava himself corrected 
the proofs of his three chapters and it is a matter of great sorrow 
that he passed away before the publication of this volume. The 
death of these four scholars has left a void in Indian scholarship 
which it would be difficult to fill up. The Editor takes this oppor¬ 
tunity to place on record his deep sorrow at the death of these four 
leading historians and his high appreciation of the great services 
rendered by them to the cause of Indian history and culture. 

The Editor also takes this opportunity to place on record his 
deep regret at the death of Dr. A. D. Pusalkar, M.A., LL.B., Ph.D., 
the Assistant Editor of the first six volumes of this series. He was 
a great scholar and a specialist in the domain of Puranic and Epic 
literature, as would be amply evidenced by the four chapters con¬ 
tributed by him to the first volume of this series, as well as his 
learned publications on Bhasa and the Epics and Puranas. The 
Editor recalls with pleasure and gratitude his loyal and ungrudging 
services and has no hesitation in saying that the success of this series 
is largely due to the care and devotion with which he had perform¬ 
ed his duty. He was associated with the Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan 
for over twenty years as its Assistant Director and Assistant Editor 
of this series, and donated his library of valuable books to the Bha¬ 
van. A man of very modest disposition and loving nature, he was 
a life-long bachelor and may be truly said to be a God’s good man. 
He died on 6 June, 1973, at the age of 68, leaving a large number 
of friends to mourn his loss. May his soul rest in peace. 

The Editor conveys his sincere thanks to all the contributors 
of this volume and places on record his high appreciation of the 
services rendered by them in the preparation of this volume and 
maintaining the standard of this series. 

Dr. Jadunath Sarkar had very kindly agreed to write the two 
Chapters (VIII, X) on Aurangzib, and it is a matter of great regret 
that he passed away before he could do the work himself. The 
Assistant Editor, Dr. J. N. Chaudhuri, who was closely associated 
with him, and had the benefit of his oral instructions, wrote the 
Chapters on the basis of Sir Jadunath’s monumental work on 
Aulrangzib. 

The Editor notes with regret that in spite of his best efforts 
he could not establish contact with Prof. Abdur Rashid who wrote 
Chapters VI and VII (Jahiangir and Shah Jahan) and Prof. M. W. 
Mirza who wrote the section on Islam in Chapter XX, both of whom 


XVI1 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


were in Pakistan, and could not revise the proofs of their articles. 
The Editor had not, therefore, the advantage of discussing with Prof. 
Rashid some points on which serious differences of opinion made this 
course a very desirable one. He has therefore kept unaltered the 
text of Prof. Rashid and expressed his own views in the footnotes. 

The Editor begs to convey his thanks to ‘The Associated Adver¬ 
tisers & Printers, Bombay,’ for the great care they took in maintain¬ 
ing the high standard of printing and get-up of this series, and to 
Shri B. Srinivasa Rao for the great care and ability with which he 
corrected the proofs at the initial stage. The Editor also thanks the 
editors of various journals for their appreciative reviews of the pre¬ 
ceding volume. He also thanks the Archaeological Department of 
the Government of India, and the Indian Museum, Calcutta, for lend¬ 
ing photos for illustrations. Special thanks are due to H. E. the 
Governor of West Bengal, Mr. A. L. Dias, I.C.S., for his personal 
interference in removing the difficulties created in respect of some 
of the photos supplied by the Indian Museum. 

In conclusion, the Editor places on record his high appreciation 
of the valuable services rendered by the two successive Assistant 
Editors, Dr. J.N. Chaudhuri and Dr. S. Chaudhuri. Dr. J.N. Chau- 
dhuri had to give up his work for troubles in his eyes and the work 
was taken up by Dr. S. Chaudhuri. The thanks of the Editor are 
due to both of them as also to Dr. C. M. Kulkarni, for their valuable 
assistance in the preparation of this volume. 


XVlll 


CONTENTS 


In Memoriam 

Preface by the General Editor 
Acknowledgements 
List of Illustrations 
Abbreviations 


CHAPTER I 

THE SOURCES 

By A. L. Srivastava 

I. Literary Sources 

II. Archaeological Sources 
III. Accounts of Foreign Visitors 

CHAPTER II 

BABUR 

By S. Roy 

I. Early History 

II. Conquest of Hindusthan 
III. Personality of Babur 

APPENDIX 

Note by the Editor 

CHAPTER III 

HUMAYUN 

By S. Roy 

I. Struggle (1530-1540) . 

II. Exile (1540-1545) . 

III. Return 

IV. Restoration 

CHAPTER IV 

SHER shah and HIS SUCCESSORS 
By J. N. Chaudhuri 

I. Sher Shah (1538-1545) . 

II. Islam Shah (1545-1554) . 

III. Firuz Shah (1554) 

IV. Muhammad Adil Shah (1554-1556) 


Page 

• • 
Vll 

xi 

XXV 

xxvi 

xxviii 


2 

17 

20 


25 

29 

39 


41 


46 

56 

60 

62 


68 

90 

94 

94 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


APPENDIX 

Hlmu—A FORGOTTEN HINDU HERO . . . . 97 

By The Editor 

CHAPTER V 

AKBAR 

By S. Roy 


I. Period of Tutelage . . . . . . . . •. 194 

II. Early Conquests .. .. .. • • •• H5 

III. Religious Policy .. .. .. .. •• 133 

IV. Conquests in North India . . . . . . . . 140 

V. Foreign Policy .. .. .. •• •• 153 

VI. Conquests in the Deccan . . . . . . . . 160 

VII. Revolt of Salim . 166 

VIII. Death of Akbar—His Personality .. .. .. 168 

CHAPTER VI 

JAHANGIR . 175 

By Abdur Rashid 

CHAPTER VII 

SHAH JAHAN . . . : . . 197 


By Abdur Rashid 

CHAPTER VIII 
AURANGZIB (1658-1680) 
By J. N. Chaudhuri 


I. Fate of Dara . . . . . . . . . . . . 220 

II. Aurangzib and North India . . . . . . . . 223 

III. Orthodoxy and Bigotry . . . . . . . . 233 

IV. Reaction against Bigotry . . . . . . . . 236 

V. Fight with the Rajputs . . . . . . . . 238 

VI. Aurangzib and Shivaji . . . . . . . . . . 242 


CHAPTER IX 
SHIVAJI 
By G. S. Sardesai 


I. The Rise of the Bhosles . . . . . . . . 247 

II. Shivaji’s Early Life . . . . . . . . . . 248 

III. The First Experiment in Swaraj . . .. .. 251 

IV. First Conflict . . . . . . . . . . . . 252 

V. Independence Takes Shape .. .. .. .. 255 

VI. Afzal Khan Overcome . . . . . . . . 257 

VII. Shayista Khan and Plunder of Surat . . . . 259 


xx 



















CONTENTS 


VIII. 

ShivajI Submits to Jay Singh 


261 

IX. 

The Wonderful Escape 


263 

X. 

A Fresh Wave of Fanaticism 


265 

XI. 

The Grand Coronation 


266 

XII. 

The Last Great Venture in Karnatak 


269 

XIII. 

ShambhujI’s Defection and Death of ShivajI . . 


273 

XIV. 

Conclusion 


274 


CHAPTER X 




AURANGZIB (1681-1707) 




By J. N. Chaudhuri 



I. 

The Deccan 

• • 

281 

II. 

North India 

• • 

290 

III. 

The Triumph of the Marathas 

• • 

293 

IV. 

General Review 

• • 

298 


1. The Empire 

• • 

298 


2. Personality of Aurangzlb 

.. 

300 


3. India at the end of Aurangzlb’s R§ign . . 

• • 

303 


CHAPTER XI 




THE SIKHS 




By H. R. Gupta 



I. 

The Muslim Oppression in the Punjab at the time 

of 



Nanak 


305 

II. 

Martyrdom of Guru Arjun 


307 

III. 

Guru Har Govind (1606-1644) 


310 

IV. 

Guru Tegh Bahadur (1664-1675) 


315 

V. 

Guru Govind Singh (1675-1708) 


316 


CHAPTER XII 




HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


I. 

Mewar—By A. K. Majumdar 

• • 

327 

II. 

Marwar—By A. K. Majumdar 

• • 

346 

III. 

Maharashtra after ShivajI (1680-1707) 




—By R. C. Majumdar 

• • 

359 

IV. 

The Jats—By J. N. Chaudhuri 

• • 

371 

V. 

The Bundelas—By Raghuvir Singh 

• • 

376 


APPENDIX 

Akbar’s Mewar Policy—By A. K. Majumdar . . . . 381 


xxi 














THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


CHAPTER XIII 

MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (I) 

By A. K. Majumdar 

I. Gujarat .. .. .. .. •• •• 391 

II. Kashmir . . . . .. . . .. • • 402 

CHAPTER XIV 

MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 

THE FIVE SULTANATES OF THE DECCAN 

By J. N. Chaudhuri 

I. General Review .. .. .. .. .. 412 

II. The Nizam-Shahi Kingdom of Ahmadnagar . . . . 415 

III. The Adll-Shahi Dynasty of Bijapur .. . . . . 445 

IV. The Tmad-Shahl Dynasty of Berar . . . . .. 463 

V. The Barld-Shahl Dynasty of Bidar . . . . . . 466 

VI. The Qutb-Shahl Dynasty of Golconda .. .. 468 

APPENDIX I 

NOTES ON THE CHRONOLOGY 

ADOPTED IN THIS CHAPTER . . . . 479 

By The Editor 
APPENDIX II 

THE GRAND ALLIANCE OF THE MUSLIM STATES 480 

By The Editor 

CHAPTER XV 

VIJAYANAGARA . . . . 486 

By N. Venkataramanayya 

CHAPTER XVI 

EUROPEAN SETTLEMENTS 

By C. S. Srinivasachari 

I. Portuguese Enterprise and Dominance in the 

Indian Ocean . . .. .. . . . . 502 

II. The Dutch and the English .. .. . . . . 510 

CHAPTER XVII 

POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE 

ORGANISATION 

By Shri Ram Sharma 

I. Nature of the Mughul Government . . .. . . 522 

II. The Emperor . 524 


XXII 






CONTENTS 


III. High Officers of the State . . . . . . .. 528 

IV. Taxation in Mughul India . . . . . . . . 531 

V. The Mughul Army . . . . .. .. . . 534 

CHAPTER XVIII 

LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS . . 537 

By A. L. Srivastava 

CHAPTER XIX 

LITERATURE 


I. Bengali—By R. C. Majumdar . . .. .. . . 555 

II. Assamese—By Dr. S. K. Chatterji . . . . . . 562 

III. Oriya—By Dr. S. K. Chatterji . . . . . . 564 

IV. Hindi—By Dr. S. K. Chatterji . . . . . . 564 

V. Gujarati—By M. G. Bhagat . . . . . . . . 569 

VI. Punjabi—By G. S. Talib . 572 

VII. Kashmiri . . . . . . . . . . . . 577 

VIII. Marathi—By S. G. Malshe and S. A. Gavaskar .. 578 

IX. Tamil—By K. R. S. Iyengar . . . . . . . . 584 

X. Telugu—By S. V. Joga Rao . . . . .. . . 588 

XI. Kannada—By S. Srikanta Sastri . . . . . . 597 

XII. Malayalam—By S. K. Nayar . . . . . . . . 600 

XIII. Sanskrit—By S. H. Ritti . 606 

XIV. Arabic—By Abdus Subhan . . . . . . . . 615 

XV. Persian—By Abdus Subhan . . . . . . . . 620 

XVI. Proto-Urdu—By Dr. S. K. Chatterji . . . . . . 628 


(Nos. II, III, IV and XVI prepared by the Editor 
on the basis of S. K. Chatterji’s book, Language 
and Literature of Modern India and 
approved by him.) 


CHAPTER XX 

RELIGION 

I. Hindu Religion—By B. B. Majumdar . . . . 633 

II. The Sikh Religion—By Hari Ram Gupta . . .. 655 

III. Islam—By M. W. Mirza . . .. .. .. 665 

CHAPTER XXI 

SOCIAL CONDITION .. . . 679 

By P. N. Chopra 

CHAPTER XXII 

ECONOMIC CONDITION .. .. 713 


By A. L. Srivastava 


xxi n 









THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


CHAPTER XXIII 

MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


By S. K. Saraswati 


I. 

Beginnings 

• • • • 

741 

II. 

Foundation 

• • • • 

752 

III. 

Development and Culmination 

• • • • 

772 

IV. 

Decay and Disintegration 

• • • • 

799 


CHAPTER XXIV 




MUGHUL PAINTING 




By Asok Kumar, Das 



I. 

Pre-Mughul Period 

• • • • 

803 

II. 

Period of Transition 

• • • • 

806 

III. 

Early Mughul Painting 

• • • • 

807 

IV. 

New Tradition under Jahangir 

• • • • 

812 

V. 

Period of Decadence 

• • • • 

817 

VI. 

Regional Centres 

• • • • 

819 


General Bibliography 

• • • • 

822 


Chronology 

• • • • 

895 


Genealogy 

• • • • 

949 


Index 

• • • • 

953 


Maps and Plates 

at the 

end 


LIST OF MAPS 



1 . 

India in 1525 



2. 

India in 1605 



3. 

India in 1707 



4. 

India in 1761 




XXIV 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


We are indebted to the following institutions for permission to 
reproduce illustrations noted against each, and express our sincere 
thanks for such courtesies. The reproduction in each case is pro¬ 
hibited without the permission of the authority concerned, the copy¬ 
right being reserved. 

1. Archaeological Survey of India, New Delhi: Nos. 1-56. 

2. Trustees of the Indian Museum, Calcutta: Nos. 57, 61, 62, 
64, 66, 67, 70 & 72. 

3. Bodleian Library, Oxford: No. 58. 

4. Bharat Kala Bhavan, Banaras: No. 60. 

5. Raza Library, Rampur: Nos. 59 & 63. 

6. Prince of Wales Museum, Bombay: Nos. 68 and 69. 

7. India Office Library, London: No. 65 and Col. PI. 1. 

8. Freer Gallery of Arts, Washington D.C.: Col. PI. 2. 

9. School of Oriental & African Studies, University of London: 
Col. PI. 3. 

10. Victoria & Albert Museum, London: Col. PL 4. 

11. Chester Beatty Library, Dublin: No. 71 and Col. PI. 5. 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


Plates 

1. Sasaram: Tomb of Sher Shah. (pp. 744-45) 

2. Delhi: Purana Quila: Gateway, (p. 746) 

3. Delhi: Jamala Mosque: (p. 745) 

4. Delhi: Purana Quila: Quila-i-Kuhna Moslque. (pp. 746-47) 

5. Delhi: Purana Quila: Quila-i-Kuhna Mosque, Principal Mihrab. (p. 747) 

6. Delhi: Tomb of Humayun. (pp. 748-50) 

7. Delhi: Tomb of Isa Khan. (p. 751) 

8. Delhi: Tomb of Adham Khan. (p. 751). 

9. Gwalior: Tomb of Muhammad Ghaus. (pp. 751-52) 

10. Gwalior Fort: Rampart from the east. (p. 754) 

11. Gwalior Fort: Elephant Gateway, (p. 754) 

12. Gwalior Fort: Man Singh’s Palace, (pp. 754-55) 

13. Agra Fort: Elephant Gate. (pp. 756-57) 

14. Agra Fort: Jahangiri Mahal, View from front, (p. 758) 

15. Fathpur Sikri: Jami Masjid, View of facade, (p. 762) 

16. Fathpur Sikri: Jami Masjid, Principal Mihrab. (pp. 762-63) 

17. Fathpur Sikri: Buland Darwaza. (pp. 763-65) 

18. Fathpur Sikri: Tomb of Shaikh Salim Chisti. (pp. 765-66) 

19. Fathpur Sikri: Diwan-i-Khas, General view. (pp. 766 67) 

20. Fathpur Sikri: Diwan-i-Khas, Interior, (p. 767) 

21. Fathpur Sikri: Jodha Bai’s Palace, View from court, (pp. 767-68) 

22. Fathpur Sikri: Jodha Bai’s Palace, another view. (pp. 767-68) 

23. Fathpur Sikri: House of Birbal. (p. 768) 

24. Fathpur Sikri: House of Birbal, Brackets, (p. 768) 

25. Fathpur Sikri: Turkish Sultana’s House with the Hauz. (p. 769) 

26. Fathpur Sikri: House of Mariam, (p. 769) 

27. Fathpur Sikri: Panch Mahal, (pp. 769-70) 

28. Agra, Sikandra: Mausoleum of Akbar, Facade, (pp. 772-74) 

29. Agra, Sikandra: Akbar’s mausoleum, Gateway, (p. 773) 

30. Agra: Tomb of Itimad-ud-Daula. (pp. 778-80) 

31. Agra: Tomb of Itimad-ud-Daula, General view. (pp. 778 80) 

32. Agra: Tomb of Itimad-ud-Daula, Marble grilles (p. 779) 

33. Delhi: Tomb of Abdur Rahim Khan-i-Khanan. (p. 780) 

34. Agra Fort: Diwan-i-Am, General view. (p. 784) 

35. Agra Fort: Diwan-i-Am, Interior, (p. 784) 

36. Agra Fort: Khas Mahal, (p. 785) 

37. Agra Fort: Musamman Burz. (p. 786) 

38. Agra Fort: Musamman Burz, View from the river, (p. 786) 

39. Agra: Moti Masjid. (pp. 786-87) 

40. Delhi: Red Fort: Lahore Gate. (p. 788) 

41. Delhi: Red Fort: Diwan-i-Am, General view. (p. 789) 

42. Delhi: Red Fort: Diwan-i-Am. (pp. 788-89) 

43. Delhi: Red Fort: Diwan-i-Am, Interior with throne platform, (pp. 788-89) 

44. Delhi: Red Fort: Diwan-i-Khas. (p. 790) 

45. Delhi: Red Fort: Scales of justice, (p. 790) 


XXVI 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


46. Delhi: Jami Masjid, Facade, (p. 792) 

47. Delhi: Red Fort: Rang Mahal, (pp. 790-91) 

48. Agra: Jami Masjid. (pp. 792-93) 

49. Agra: Taj Mahal, View from front, (pp. 794-95) 

50. Agra: Taj Mahal, Gateway, (pp. 793-94) 

51. Agra: Taj Mahal, Gateway, Back view. (p. 794) 

52. Agra: Taj Mahal, View from the river, (pp. 793-95) 

53. Agra: Taj Mahal, Marble rail around cenotaphs, (p. 795) 

54. Agra: Taj Mahal, Cenotaphs, (p. 795) 

55. Agra: Taj Mahal, Mosque, (p. 794) 

56. Delhi: Red Fort: Moti Masjid. (pp. 800-01) 

57. Majnun in the Wilderness by Basawan, Indian Museum, Calcutta, (p. 810) 

58. St. Mathew writing, Mughul copy by KesavdaS, Bodleian Library, Oxford. 

(p. 816) 

59. Folio from the Diwan-i-Hafiz, Raza Library, Rampur. (p. 811) 

60. Portrait of Raja Birbal, Bharat Kala Bhavan, Banaras. 

61. Portrait of Suraj Mai by Nanha, Indian Museum, Calcutta, (p. 815) 

62. Jahangir hunting a Lioness, Indian Museum, Calcutta, (p. 814) 

63. Jahangir celebrating the festival of ‘Ab-Pashi’ by Govardhan, Raza Library, 
Rampur. (p. 813) 

64. Bengal Florican by Ustad Mansur, Indian Museum, Calcutta, (p. 815) 

65. Squirrels on a Chanar Tree, India Office Library, London, (p. 816) 

66. Madonna and child, Mughul copy, Indian Museum, Calcutta. 

67. Shah Jahan witnessing Sufis dancing, Indian Museum, Calcutta, (p. 818) 

68. Portrait of Shah Jahan in old age, Prince of Wales Museum, Bombay, 
(p. 819) 

69. Portrait of a Mughul Officer. 

70. A Mughul Princess, Indian Museum, Calcutta, (p. 819) 

71. Lady with a Myna, Bijapur School, Chester Beatty Library, Dublin, (p. 820) 

72. Sultan with his Minister, Golconda School, Indian Museum, Calcutta. 
(P- 821) 

Colour Plates 

1. Folio from the Nimatnama, India Office Library, London, (p. 805) 

2. Folio from the Dastan-i-Amlr Hamza, Freer Gallery of Arts Washington 

D.C. (p. 808) 

3. Folio from the Anwar-i-Suhaill, School of Oriental and African Studies 
University of London, (p. 809) 

4. Celebration of the birth of a Prince. Folio from the dispersed Akbarnama 
Victoria and Albert Museum, London, (p. 811) 

5. Folio from the Raj Kunwar, Chester Beatty Library, Dublin, (p. 812) 


xxvii 


ABBREVIATIONS 


Ain 


Bib. Ind. 

I.O. 

M.T.I. 


(In addition to those used in Vol. VI) 

Ain-i-Akbaft by Shaikh Abu-’l-Fazl. English 
translation published by the Asiatic Society, 
Calcutta, in the Bibliotheca Indica Series. 
Vol. I by Blochmann and Vols. II and III by 
Jarrett. 

Bibliotheca Indica Series published by A.S.B. 
(Asiatic Society of Bengali). 

India Office. 

Muntakhab-ut-Taw\alrikh by ‘Abdul Qadir 
Badauni also known as Tarikh-i-Badauni. 
English translation (Bib. Ind.)—Vol. I by 
Lt. Col. Ranking, Vol. II by Rev. W. H. 
Lowe, Vol. Ill by Lt. Colonel Haig. 


XXVlll 


CHAPTER I 


THE SOURCES 

The sources for the Mughul period are full and copious. We 
have not only the chronicles of the reigns of all the Mughul mon- 
archs from 1526 to 1707, but often more than one work dealing 
with the history of each reign. These contemporary works, most¬ 
ly in Persian, were written by court historians (who had access to 
the State papers and other documents) and sometimes by other 
competent writers who were interested in the history of their 
times. There are also quite a few general histories of Muslim rule 
in India from the advent of Islam as a political force in this land 
to the time of the Mughul emperor during whose reign these works 
were written. It is worthy of note that there are two autobio¬ 
graphies written by the rulers themselves, e.g., the Tuzuk-i-Bdbun 
by Babur and the Tuzuk-i-JakdngW by Jahangir. Shah Jahan, 
though he did not write his autobiography, had the history of his 
reign written under his supervision, and it was read out to him 
during the progress of its composition. Another peculiarity about 
the sources of the period is the fact that there is extant at least 
one history written by a woman, besides the poetical and literary 
compositions left by a few cultured princesses. These compositions 
are entitled D%wuns. Fourthly, quite a large number of royal 
farmans and official orders of various descriptions, dating from the 
time of Akbar, and many semi-official papers have survived, unlike 
those of the Sultanate period, and serve as the most reliable source 
of some aspects of Mughul history. Fifthly, the sources of the 
period include statistical surveys and accounts of the empire and 
the first Imperial Gazetteer in the world, and revenue rules, regu¬ 
lations and statistics called the Dastur-ul-Amal. Sixthly, there are 
court bulletins and news-papers described as Akhbdrdt-i-darbdr- 
i~mu‘alla. Several hundreds of these are preserved in the Rajasthan 
Archives, and elsewhere. Seventhly, many important officers and 
secretaries (munshls) have left behind a series of collections of 
historical letters to serve as models of epistolary style for posterity, 
which are available to us in several volumes, called by various 
names— Insha or Maktubat or Ruq‘at. These are of great histo¬ 
rical value. Eighthly, we have a few accounts of the description of 
the country, its physical aspect, towns, rivers and mountains, and 
other important details which throw a flood of light on the condi¬ 
tion of the times. Ninthly, there is a good deal of religious litera- 


M.E—1. 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


ture, called Malfuzut, which gives a clear indication of the social 
and religious life of the age. And finally, a stream of European 
missionaries and travellers, besides those from Islamic countries, 
who visited India from time to time have recorded their observa¬ 
tions in dozens of volumes. These observations supplement the in¬ 
formation contained in the works referred to above, and, in some 
particulars, serve as correctives to them. At least from the time 
of Akbar onward every happening and transaction at the court and, 
in fact, all that the emperor said or did were recorded then and 
there every day, and preserved in the Royal Record Office. Un¬ 
fortunately, this kind of valuable material has perished. Time, 
weather and human neglect have also wrought havoc with all types 
of written records. Still, what remains of the various categories of 
historical and literary sources is enormous and can scarcely be mas¬ 
tered by a syndicate of scholars in the course of a lifetime. 

I. LITERARY SOURCES 

A — Turki, Persian and Arabic 
(i) Chronicles, Memoirs and Letter Books 

The first work of the period entitled Tuzuk-i-Bdburl or the 
Memoirs of Babur is by Babur himself, who had laid the first stone 
in the foundation of the Mughul empire in India. It is his auto¬ 
biography, written in Turki, during his leisure. Unfortunately, it 
is not complete, and all the known copies have three gaps—from 
1508 to 1519, from 1520 to 1525, and from 1529 to 1530. The text 
was edited by N. Ilminski in 1857 and subsequently from a fac¬ 
simile of the more reliable Hyderabad Codex by Mrs. A. S. Beve¬ 
ridge in 1905. The Tuzuk-i-Bdburl was so popular throughout the 
Mughul period that it was four times translated into Persian—first 
by Zain Khan, next by Payandah Hasan (in the time of Humayun), 
a third time at Akbar’s orders by ‘Abdur-Rahim Khan Khanan, and 
lastly, by Mir Abu Talib Turbati during the reign of Shah Jahan. 
It is easily the most important authority on Babur’s reign, and on 
the early life of Humayun. The author’s style is at once plain and 
graceful, and the entire work reads like a novel. It is characterized 
by candour and freshness. Babur has frankly mentioned his 
faults, foibles and vices as well as his virtues, besides describing 
political and military events and giving pen-pictures of notable 
celebrities of the age. He has given a detailed description of the 
physical features and social and economic conditions of the country, 
its animals and birds, flowers and trees. Nevertheless, it will be 
uncritical to take for granted all that he has written in this re- 


2 



THE SOURCES 


markable book. For example, in order to magnify the importance 
of his victory over Ibrahim Lodi, he writes that whereas he had 
come with 12,000 men, all told, Ibrahim Lodi brought an army of 
one lakh of men and one thousand elephants into the field. He had, 
moreover, a foreigner’s and an invader’s prejudice about the coun¬ 
try, its people and civilization. Notwithstanding these and similar 
deficiencies, the third volume of the Memoirs is considered the most 
authentic and valuable authority on the history of the third decade 
of the sixteenth century and the condition of India during that 
epoch. The Tuzuk-v-Baburl has: been reckoned “among the most 
enthralling and romantic works in the literature of all time.” 

The next important source of information on Babur and Huma- 
yun is the Tdrikh-i-Rashidi (Persian) 1 of Babur’s cousin Mirza 
Muhammad Haidar Dughlat, who was a friend and admirer of Babur. 
It was completed in A.D. 1551 (958 A.H.). As the author was an 
eye-witness of many of the incidents described by him, especially 
Babur’s struggle, Humayun’s contest with Sher Shah, the battle of 
Bilgram, his flight and the affairs of Kashmir, the Tamkh-i-Rashtdi 
supplements the Tuzuk-i-Baburi and the Humayun-nama, and con¬ 
stitutes a first-rate authority on the reigns of Babur and Humayun. 
Then follow the well-known historian Khvand Amir’s two works, 
Habib-us-Siyar and Humayun-nama. The author was born in Herat 
in A.D. 1475 (880 A.H.) and died at Gwalior in A.D. 1534 (941 
A.H.). The Hablb-us-Siyar, lithographed at Tehran (1855) and 
at Bombay (1857), throws welcome light on Babur and on the first 
three years of Humayun’s rule. Humayun-nama 2 was written at 
the suggestion of that ruler and describes in detail the history of 
the first three years of his reign. It must be reckoned as the first- 
rate authority for that period, Humayun’s initial difficulties and 
plans. Another equally contemporary work is the Ahsan-us-Siyar 3 
by Mirza Barkhwardar Turkman which describes Babur’s relations 
with Shah Isma‘11 of Persia. The Shaibanl-ndma , 4 written in Turki 
by Muhammad Salih, is an authority on Babur’s relations with that 
Uzbeg ruler. The text was edited and translated into German by 
H. Vambery in 1885. It was also edited by P. M. Melioransky 
and A. N. Samoilovich in 1908. The Tdrikh-i- Alamdrdi ‘Abbasi 5 of 
Iskandar Munshi in Persian, lithographed at Tehran (1896), is 
valuable for the relations between India and Persia in the sixteenth 
century. The Humdyun-ndma 6 of Gulbadan Begam, Babur’s 
daughter, was written (A.D. 1587) in Persian at Akbar’s desire and 
is a first-rate authority on the domestic relations of the first two 
Mughul rulers with their wives, sons, daughters and other members 
of the family, and on their social and harem life. 


3 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


reign. The work was published by the Nawal Kishore Press, 
Lucknow, in April, 1913. 

(4) Inshd-i-Abu-l-Fazl, 15 also called Maqtubdt-i-Alldmi. This 
contains official despatches written by Abu-’l-Fazl. It is divided in¬ 
to two parts, the first of which contains Akbar’s letters to ‘Abdullah 
Khan Uzbeg of Turan, Shah ‘Abbas of Persia, the ruler of Kashghar, 
the divines of Mecca, the wise men of Europe, Raja ‘All Khan of 
Khandesh, Burhan-ul-Mulk of Ahmadnagar, and his own nobles such 
as ‘Abdur-Rahim Khan Khanan, Khan A‘zam Mirza Aziz Kuka, etc. 
The second part consists of Abu-’l-Fazl’s letters to Akbar, Daniyal, 
Mirza Shah Rukh, the Khan Khanan, etc. It is a very valuable col¬ 
lection and throws fresh light on many incidents and matters which 
have been only very briefly alluded to in the Akbar-ndma. 

Khvaja-Nizam-ud-din Ahmad, the next great writer of the age, 
was the author of Tabaqat^i-Akbari, 16 a general history from the be¬ 
ginning of the Muslim rule to the thirty-ninth year of Akbar’s 
reign. It is divided into three volumes and is published by the 
Asiatic Society of Bengal in the Bibliotheca Indica Series. The 
first volume commences with the advent of Islam to India and gives 
the history of the Sultanate period. The second volume describes 
the reigns of Babur, Humayun, and Akbar, and the third gives the 
history of provincial kingdoms in the country. The author be¬ 
longed to an influential family which held high posts under Babur 
and Humayun. Nizam-ud-d’in himself was Akbar’s Mir Bakhshl 
and a highly polished courtier, enjoying friendship of the orthodox 
as well as liberal-minded Musalmans of all grades of society. He 
was liked by Abu-’l-Fazl and also by ‘Abdul-Qadir Badauni. In 
fact, the latter considered him one of his best friends. The work 
of such a polished courtier was bound to be a cautious chronicle 
with no comments of his own. Nevertheless, it is of considerable 
importance, particularly with regard to the history of Gujarat dur¬ 
ing Akbar’s reign. 

The Muntakhab-ut-Tawdrikh or Tdrlkh-i-Baddunl, 11 by the famous 
historian ‘Abdul-Qadir Badauni, son of Muluk Shiah, is a general 
history of the Muslim world in three volumes. The first volume 
contains an account of Babur and Humayun. The second volume is 
exclusively devoted to Akbar’s reign and comes down to 1594. It 
is an unusually frank and critical account of Akbar’s administrative 
measures, particularly religious, and his conduct. It was conse¬ 
quently kept concealed till that emperor’s death, and was publish¬ 
ed after Jahangir’s accession. The book is written from the point 
of view of a bigoted Sunni Musalman, and gives a biassed account of 


6 


THE SOURCES 


the development of Akbar’s views on religion and his religious 
policy. It serves as a corrective to the liberal presentation of the 
great emperor’s latitudinarian views by Abu-’l-Fazl. The third 
volume describes the careers, lives and works of Muslim saints and 
scholars. 

The book is defective in dates and sometimes in the presenta¬ 
tion of the sequence of events. 

The Takmil-i-Akbar-nama 18 by Tnayat-Ullah is a continuation of 
Abu-’l-Fazl’s Akbar-nama beginning with the 46th regnal year where 
Abu-’l-Fazl’s work stops on account of his death, and comes down 
to the death of Akbar in October, 1605. It was obviously com¬ 
pleted in 1605 A.D. It is a dry chronicle and omits the account of 
many happenings between 1602 and 1605. 

The Gulshan-i-Ibrdhimi alias Tdrikh-i-Fii’ishta, 19 of Mulla 
Muhammad Qasim Hindu Shah, was written in 1606-07 (1015 
A. H.) . It is a general history of Muslim India and comes down 
to the accession of Jahangir. It also describes the history of pro¬ 
vincial kingdoms, particularly the Deccan Sultanates, during the 
medieval age. Although it is a compilation based on the works of 
earlier writers, particularly Nizam-ud-dln Ahmad’s Tabaqdt-i<- 
Akbari, yet it gives at places fresh information which is not found 
in other works. The author was an eye-witness of many events 
that took place in the Deccan and of which he has left an account. 
The work was lithographed—first in Bombay in 1832, and later by 
the Nawal Kishore Press, Lucknow, in 1864 and again in 1905. 

Tdrikh-i-Haqq^i of ‘Abdul-Haqq was written in 1596-97. The 
author was the father of Nur-ul-Haqq who wrote Zubdat-ut-Tawdrikh. 
He was an orthodox Musalman and was opposed to Akbar’s liberal 
religious policy . He also wrote a series of letters which were sub¬ 
sequently collected and published under the title of Maktubat-i- 
Hazrat c Abdul-Haqq . The copy of Tdrikh-i-Haqcfi is preserved in the 
Sarasvatli Bhavan Library of Udaipur. The Zubdat-ut-Tawdrikh of 
Shaikh Nur-ul-Haqq, written during the early years of Jahangir’s 
reign (Ms. copy in the Sarasvati Bhavan Library, Udaipur), is a 
work of value for the reigns of Akbar and Jahangir. ‘Alahdad 
FaizI Sarhindl wrote two valuable chronicles, named Tarikh-i- 
Humayun Shahi and Akbar-ndma. 19a Both are well-written works, 
and supply useful details about the reigns of these two monarchs. 
The details regarding the siege and capture of Aslrgarh in the 
Akbar-nama are valuable. Some extracts from FaizI Sarhindi’s 
Akbar-nama are translated in Elliot and Dowson’s History of India, 
Vol. VI. Hasan Beg Romlu’s Ahsan-ut-Tawdrikh , written in 


7 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


A.D. 1577, is a contemporary work on Persia and Mirza ‘Ala-ud- 
daulah Qazvini’s Nafais-ul-Madsir, written in A.D. 1575, gives bio¬ 
graphical accounts of Persian poets of Akbar’s time. A manu¬ 
script copy of this work is available in the Rampur Library. Among 
the works written at Akbar’s suggestion is the well-known chro¬ 
nicle, ‘Abbas Sarwani’s Tdrikln-i-Sher Shdhi 20 alias Tuhfd-i-Akbar 
Shdhi written in 1587. It deals principally with the reign and ad¬ 
ministration of Sher Shah and is indispensable. 

Among the general histories of the period, mention may be 
made of An-nur-us-Safir 21 of Muhi-ud-dln ‘Abd-ur Qadir, written 
about 1603, and Rauzai-ut-Tdhirin 22 written in 1605, which are 
available in manuscript form. Muhammad Amin’s Anjdul-i-Akbhar 23 
is a general history of the Muslim world and was completed in 
A.D. 1626. Yahya-bin-‘Abdul Latif’s Muntakhab-ut-Tawdrikh 24 
gives an account of Babur, Humayun and Akbar. It was written 
towards the end of Akbar’s reign and is available in manuscript 
form in the Khuda Bakhsh Library, Patna. The Wdqaya or Hdltit- 
i-Asad Beg by Asad Beg (Aligarh Ms.) was written about 1631-32. 
It is primarily a memoir of the author, but it also gives an 
authoritative account of the murder of Abu-’l-Fazl and the pursuit 
of his murderer, Bir Simha Deva Bundela, and of the conspiracy to 
place Khusrav on the throne by setting aside the claim of Salim 
(Jahangir). 

By far the most authoritative work of the reign of Jahangir is 
the Tuzuk-i-Jahdnglrl, which is that emperor’s autobiography written 
by himself in two volumes. When the narrative of the first twelve 
years of his reign was completed, it was bound and presented to 
the emperor’s sons and nobles. Jahangir himself wrote his 
Memoirs for nearly 17 years, after which the work was entrusted 
to Mu‘tamid Khan who continued it to the beginning of the 19th 
year. It is the foremost authority on Jahangir’s personality and 
character, and the events of his reign. Jahangir is unusually 
frank in recording the incidents and happenings, but sometimes he 
suppresses inconvenient truths and glosses over certain others, such 
as his revolt against his father, the circumstances of Khusrav’s 
death, and his marriage with Nur Jahan. Nevertheless, no student 
of the history of the period can do without the Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri. 25 
Next in importance are Mu‘tamid Khan’s IqbdUndma in three parts 
and Tatimma Wdqi'dt-i-Jahdngirl 26 of Muhammad Hadi. The first part 
of the former deals with the history of the Timurid dynasty till the 
end of Humayun’s reign, the second describes the reign of Akbar, and 
the third that of Jahangir, and comes down to the accession of Shah 
Jahan. It is a most valuable work, for the author was not only a 


8 


THE SOURCES 


contemporary writer but also held the important post of Bakhsht 
in Jahangir’s reign, and was employed on several other responsible 
duties. After Jahangir’s death he showed partiality for Shah Jahan 
and displayed antipathy towards Nur Jahan. The fourth work, in 
point of importance, is the Madsir-i-Jahdngirt 21 written by Khvaja 
Kiamgar Ghairat Khan. It describes Jahangir as a prince, and its 
second part supplements the Tuzuk-i-Jahdngiri. Then we have the 
Intikhab-i-Jahangir Shah 28 by an anonymous author. The Ms. is 
preserved in the Riampur Library . 

The reign of Shah Jahan is covered by several first-rate court 
chronicles. The earliest work is the Padshdh-ndma of Muhammad 
Amin QazVini, alias Aminai Qazvinli,, written at Shah Jahan’s orders. 
It covers the first ten years of his reign and was completed in 
A.D. 1636. It is a detailed history containing a minute account 
of all events, happenings and transactions. The next work, too, is 
entitled Pddshdhmdma 29 and was written by the famous historian 
‘Abdul-Hamld Lahauri, whose reputation as a writer was next only 
to that of Abu-’l-Fazl. In his two-volume work, he describes 
Shah Jahan’s life and activities, first as a prince and then as a ruler, 
for the first twenty years of his reign. It is the primary authority 
and a most detailed work on the period with which it deals. The 
third work, also entitled Padshdh-ndma 30 is by Muhammad Waris, 
a pupil and assistant of ‘Abdul-Hamid Lahauri. When ‘Abdul- 
Hamid became weak and incapacitated by age, Waris was commis¬ 
sioned to complete his master’s magnum opus, and he wrote a com¬ 
plete history of Shah Jahan’s reign. For the first twenty years of 
the reign he followed Lahauri, but as far as the last ten years of 
the reign were concerned, Waris wrote an independent volume. It 
is as good an authority for these ten years of Shah Jahan’s reign as 
‘Abdul-Hamid’s is for the earlier twenty years. Then we have 
the Shdhjahdn-ndma 31 of ‘Inayat Khan, whose original name was 
Muhammad Tahir. It comes down to 1657-58 (1068 A.H.), 

the year of Aurangzib’s seizure of power and occupation of the 
palace-fort of Agra. The book is written in plain style and con¬ 
stitutes a valuable authority. The fifth history of the reign is en¬ 
titled ‘Amal-i-Salih 32 of which the author was Muhammad Salih 
Kambu. He describes Shah Jahan’s career from his birth to his 
death in A.D. 1666. Like the other works of the reign, the ‘Amal- 
i-Sdlih gives at the end a biographical account of the Sayyids, 
Shaikhs, learned men, physicians, poets and calligraphists of Shah 
Jahan’s time, and a list of the princes, nobles and commanders, 
arranged according to their respective ranks. The sixth chronicle 
is the Shdhjahdn-ndma 33 written by Muhammad Sadiq Khan, a 


9 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Waqdydnavls formerly attached to Shah Jahan’s establishment dur¬ 
ing his expedition against Rana Amar Simha of Me war. This work 
deals with the history of Shah Jahan from his accession to the date 
of his deposition and imprisonment, and is written in a simple style. 

Although during the twenty-first year of his reign Aurangzlb 
forbade the writing of history, yet we have several valuable 
volumes dealing with his reign. The first of these is the ‘Alamgir- 
ndma 34 written by Mlrza Muhammad Kazim. It is an official 
history of the first ten years of the reign when there was no pro¬ 
hibition against history-writing, and is based on State records and 
other documents. It is full and authentic, and is a primary autho¬ 
rity for the period with which it deals. The next work is the 
Madsir-i-Alamgirl 35 by Muhammad SaqII Musta‘id Khan. It is a 
complete history of Aurangzib’s reign and is based on State papers 
and documents. The third work is the Zajjar-ndma-i-'Alamgm 36 
also entitled the Wdqi‘dt or Hdldt-i-Alamgln, written by ‘Aqil Khan 
Razl. It comes down to the year 1663, and is reliable. Then we 
have the Aurangzlb’'ndma 31 a poem composed by a soldier whose 
pen-name was Flacfiri. It describes Aurangzib’s war of succession 
and comes down to the execution of Daria. The Muntakhab-ul- 
Lubdb 3S of Muhammad Hashim Khafi Khan is a general history 
of the Tlmurid dynasty, and gives a complete history of the reign 
of Aurangzlb. 

There are two valuable histories of Aurangzib’s reign written 
by two Hindu officers. The first is entitled Nuskha-i-Dilkdshd 39 by 
Bhlmsen, who was mostly employed in the Deccan and was an 
eye-witness of many facts and incidents recorded by him. The 
work is particularly of value for the Mughul activities in the Deccan 
from 1670 to 1707. The second is entitled Futuhdt-i-‘Alamgtri A0 
written by Ishwar Das, who was posted as a civil officer in Jodhpur. 
The work is of great value for the history of Rajasthan from 1657 
to 1698. The Fathiyya-i-abriyya * 41 of Shihab-ud-din Ahmad Talish 
is a diary of Mir Jumla’s invasion of Cooch Behar and Assam. The 
Tdrikh-i-Shah Shujd‘& 2 of Mir Muhammad Ma‘sum, too, is invaluable 
for the history of Bengal during the viceroyalty of Shuja\ It 
comes down to April, 1660. The Waqdii of Niamat Khan ‘All 43 
describes the siege of Golconda of 1687 in a highly flourishing 
style. The Ahkdm-i-Alamglfi AA by Hamld-ud-dln Khan gives 
Aurangzib’s anecdotes and orders, and throws a flood of light on his 
personality and character. There are two regional histories of 
great importance. They are Mwdt-i-Armadi A5 of ‘All Muhammad 
Khan in three volumes. It is a first-rate authority on Gujarat dur¬ 
ing the Mughul times and contains copies of many royal farmans 


10 


THE SOURCES 


and other orders. The second is Ta 7 mrikh-i-Bangdla A 6 of Salim- 
ullah. Then we have an important Dastur-ul-Amal 41 or the official 
manual containing statistics, office procedure, administrative regula¬ 
tions and other useful miscellaneous information. It is of price¬ 
less value for the administration of the empire under Aurangzib. 
There are several hundred news-letters, entitled Akbhdrdt-i-darbdr - 
i-mu c all a, 418 i.e. news-letters from the imperial court, which are pre¬ 
served in several manuscript libraries. They are the very raw 
materials of history, and no serious student of Aurangzib’s reign can 
dispense with them. Finally, we have a large number of historical 
letters, some of which have been collected and bound in book-form. 
Some of these are: Addb-i-Alamgiri, Ahkdm-i-Alamgiri (by 
Tnayat-ullah Khan), Kalimdt-i-Tayyibdt, Kalimat-i-Aurangzib, Zdhir - 
ul-Insha, Bahdr-i-Sakhun, Haft Anjuman and Ruq ( dt-i-Harmd-ud-dln 
Khdn. 49 

On the dynastic history of the provinces, we have numerous 
works which it is difficult to enumerate, far less describe, here in 
detail. Many of these relate to the provincial kingdoms of the 
Deccan. Prominent among them are the Burhdn-i}-Madsir 50 of 
Sayyid ’All Tabataba and Tdnkh-i-Muhammad Qutb Shahi, 51 written 
about 1680 by Habib-ullah. It gives an account of the king¬ 
dom of Golconda. The Tdrikh-i- All c Adil Shah Sdnl 52 is a history of 
Bijapur, written at the request of an English officer. The Muham- 
mad-ndma 53 is a valuable account of the ‘Adil Shah! kingdom of 
Bijapur, written by Zahur bin Zahurli in A.D. 1641. The Tazkirdt- 
nl-Muluk 54 of Mirza Raff was written during the reign of Jahangir. 
The first and the last of these works have been described in Vol. VI 
(p. 7) of this History Series. 

We have several works dealing with western India. Tarlkh-i- 
Sind alias Tdrikh-i-M‘asumi 55 was written during the early days 
of Jahangir’s reign. The Baglan-ndma 56 , another history of Sind, 
was written about A.D. 1624. The Tdrikh-i-Tahirl of Tahir 
Muhammad and the Tuhfat-ul-Kimm of All Sher Kani‘ are noticed in 
Vol. VI of this History Series. For Gujarat we have the Mirdt- 
i-Sikandarl of Sikandar bin Muhammad, written in 1613, and the 
celebrated Mlrdt-i-Ahmadl by 'All Muhammad Khan already referred 
to. Then there is the Tdrikh-i-Gujarat of Mir Abu Turab Vali, and 
finally the Arabic history of Gujarat, entitled Zafar-ul-Wallh bi 
Muzajfar wa Alih 51 by ‘Abdullah Muhammad bin ‘Umar al-Makki, 
written soon after A.D. 1611. As for Bengal we have Baharistan-i- 
Ghdibi written by Shitab Khan during the reign of Shah Jahan. The 
next work is the Riydz-us-Saldtm by Ghulam Husain Salim, written 
in 1787-88. Sallm-ullah’s history of Bengal entitled Tavdrikh-i-Ban- 


11 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


gala is a useful compilation. A valuable work dealing with Bengal is 
the Tdrikh-i-Shah Shujd‘ r i 1 already referred to. The T dr ikh-i-Assam 
dealing with Mir Jumla’s campaign is an important history. 

For Kashmir Mlrza Haidar Dughlat’s Tdrikh-i-Raslvidl, already 
described, is valuable. Then we have the Tdr s ikh-i-A‘zarni written 
about 1748 by Mulla Muhammad A‘zami and the Tdrikh-i-Kashmir 58 
by Haidar Malik (1578). The Lataif-ul-Akhbar 59 by Badi-uz-Zaman 
gives an account of Mughul expeditions to Qandahar. The Jinat- 
ul-Fardus written in A.D. 1714, gives the history of the different 
provincial dynasties of India. 

During the age of Akbar (1556-1627) numerous other works 
of history were produced, and, although they were not primarily 
intended as works of Mughul history, they throw considerable light 
on the period in which they were written. A very important work 
of this category is the Madsir-i-Rahiml 61 of Mulla ‘Abdul-Baql Naha- 
vandl in three volumes. Written in A.D. 1616, it is primarily an 
account of the life and activities of ‘Abdur-Rahlm Khan Khanan. 
The second volume is a history of the Tlmurid dynasty and comes 
down to the time of Jahangir. It also gives an account of the life 
of numerous poets patronised by the Khan Khanan, and extracts from 
their compositions. Some of the general histories dealing particu¬ 
larly with the two Afghan dynasties (viz., the Sur and the Lodi), 
but throwing at the same time considerable light on the history of 
the Mughuls, particularly Akbar and Jahangir, are: (i) Makhzan-i- 
Afghdnl or Tdrikhd-Khdn-Jahdrii-wa-Makhzan-i-Afghani 61 of Khvaja 
Ni‘mat-Ullah, (ii) the Tdrikh-i-Shdkl or Tdrikh-i-Saldtiin-v-Afdghina 63 
of Ahmad Yadgar, (iii) Tdrikh-i-Dd’udi 64 of ‘Abdullah and (iv) 
Tdnkh-i-Mubdrak Shdhl 65 of Yahiya bin Ahmad (which deals with 
the Sayyid dynasty). 

No serious student of Mughul history can ignore the celebrated 
work entitled Tdrikh-Khdnddn-i-Tlmurid, 66 an anonymous production 
preserved in manuscript form at the Khuda Bakhsh Library, Patna. 
It relates to the history of the Tlmurid dynasty, and comes down to 
the 22nd year of Akbar’s reign. Its distinctive feature is that it 
is profusely illustrated and gives an idea of the development of the 
Mughul School of painting in India. Muhammad Had! Kamwar 
Khan’s Tazkirat-us-saldiin-i-Chaghtaia , 67 written in A.D. 1724 is very 
important for the accurate chronology that it gives of the events of 
the early years of the 18th century. Then we have Shah Nawaz 
Khan’s Madsir-ul-Umra , 68 a dictionary of the Mughul Peerage, 
which is a mine of information about the careers of nobles and offi¬ 
cers of the Mughul period. It is a compilation based on contem- 


12 


THE SOURCES 


porary sources and was completed in A.D. 1780. The Dabistdn-i- 
Mazdhib, 69 written in 1648 by one Muhsin Flam, is the only 
comparative study of religions that flourished during the Mughul 
period. It is equally helpful for a knowledge of religious discus¬ 
sions held at Akbar’s court. There are a few other general histories, 
such as Subh-i-Sadiq 70 of Mlrza Muhammad Sadiq Isfahan!, Munta - 
khab-ut-Tawdrikh 71 of Muhammad Yusuf Ataki, Mirdt-i-Jdhdn- 
Numa 12 of Shaikh Muhammad Baqa, Mirdt-uVAlam 73 of Bakhtawar 
Khan, Lubbut-Tawdrikh 74 of Vrindavana Das, Khuldsat-ut-Tawdrlkh 15 
of Sujan Rai Khattirl, and Tdrikh-i-Alfi 76 by Jaffar Beg and Asaf 
Khan (in five volumes written at Akbar’s orders in 1588-89). 

(ii) Farmans 

There are five valuable collections of royal farmans dating from 
the time of Akbar. They are: (i) Jarlddta-i-Farmdn-i-Saldtin-i- 
Delhi (Aligarh Ms.); (ii) Imperial Farmans 71 ed. K. M. Jhaveri, 
that is, the farmans granted by Akbar and his successors to Vithal 
Nath GosvamI of Mathura and Vrindavana and his descendants; 
(iii) The Mughuls and the Jogis of Jakhbar 78 edited by B. N. Go¬ 
svami and J. S. Grewal, containing the farmans of Akbar and his 
descendants relating to free grants of land to the Nath Jogis of Jakh¬ 
bar in Punjab; (iv) The Par sees at the court of Akbar and Dastur 
Meharfi Rand (ed. J. J. Modi, Bombay, 1903), which includes copies 
of Akbar’s and Jahangir’s farmans of Madad-i-Ma c dsh grant to the 
Pars! priests of Navsarl, and (v) A Descriptive List of Farmans , Mam 
shurs and Nishans addressed by the Imperial Mughuls to the Princes 
of Rajasthan (Published by the Directorate of Archives, Govern¬ 
ment of Rajasthan, Bikaner, 1962). This gives English translations 
of ninety-three farmans from the time of Akbar to that of Shah ‘Alam 
II to the rulers of Bikaner, besides a very large descriptive list of 
documents of Jaipur, Sirohl and Jodhpur. These are of priceless 
importance for a history of the Mughul age. To these five collections 
may be added A Descriptive List of the Vakil Reports addressed to 
the Rulers of Jaipur, Vol. I (Persian) (Government Press, Bikaner, 
1987). This work is of equal value. 

(iii) Dlwdns , Mathnavis and Kulliydts 

There are numerous Dlwdns 79 Mathnavis 80 and Kulliydts 81 of 
Mughul rulers, princes, princesses, nobles, officials, scholars and 
poets. They are so large in number that for lack of space, it is 
not possible to enumerate them here. All that can be done is to 
mention the names of a few prominent works of this category. For 
example, among nearly 300 Dlwdns or collections of poems some 
are those of Babur, Humayun, Kamran, Dara Shukoh, Qutb Shah, 


13 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Shah ‘Alam, Zib-un-Nisa, etc. Among the Kulliydts, at least twenty- 
nine were written by the notables of the period. Thirty Mathnavis 
belonging to the period are preserved in various manuscript libra¬ 
ries. The works of these three categories give a clear idea of the 
literary achievement of the Mughul period. They also throw con¬ 
siderable light on social and religious conditions. 

(iv) Malfuzats 82 

There is one more class of Persian literature, entitled Malfuzdt , 
which deals with the lives and teachings of Muslim saints and sufls. 
It can only be briefly noticed: (1) Siyar-ul- Arifln or biographical 
accounts of fourteen ChishtI and SuhrawardI saints, compiled by 
Hamid bin Fazullah in 1536; (2) Akhbdv-ul-Akhyar, by Shaikh 
‘Abdul Haq Muhaddis Dehlavi, published in 1914; (3) Zad-ul-Mut- 
tdqUn or biographical accounts of Shaikh ‘All MuttaqI and Shaikh 
‘Abul-Wahhab, by the same author (Ms., Rampur); (4) Akhbdr- 
ul-Asfiya which consists of biographical notes of 250 sufis, by ‘Abdus- 
Samad in 1605-16 (Ms., Aligarh Muslim University Library); 

(5) Gulzar-i-Abrar consisting of biographical accounts of Shattarl 
Sufis, by Muhammad GhausI Shattarl, written in 1613 (Ms., Ram¬ 
pur); (6) Mandqib-ul-Akhydr, by Muhammad Qasim (Ms., Rampur), 
gives the biography of Sayyid Jamial-ud-din alias Khvaja Diwana 
Sayyid Atai; (7) Kalimdt-us-Stidiqm, by Muhammad Siadiq Kashmiri 
Hamadahi, written in 1614 (Ms., Patna), which gives biographical 
accounts of 125 saints buried at Delhi; (8) Tabaqdt-i-Shdhjahdnl, by 
Muhammad Sadiq Hamadani (Aligarh Muslim University Library 
Ms.) consists of biographical notes of 87 sufis; (9) Hazarat-ul-Quds 
by Badrud-din Sirhindi. It is a biographical dictionary of the Naqsh- 
bandl saints, which has been translated into Urdu by Khvaja Ahmad 
Husain Khan, Lahore, 1923; (10) Safinat-ul-Auliyd, by Daha Shukoh, 
completed on 21 January, 1640, consists of biographical notes 
of orthodox Caliphs, Imams, Sufis etc., Kanpur 1884; Safinat- 
ul-Auliyd, by Dam Shukoh, completed in 1642-43 (Ms., Lakhnau 
University Library)—this work gives the biographies by Mjan Mir 
and his disciples; (12) Risdlah-i-Haqnuma , by Dara Shukoh, N. K. 
Press, Lucknow; (13) Maj-Ma‘dl Bahrain (Sir J. Sarkar, Sec., Na¬ 
tional Library Cal., Ms.) by Dara Shukoh; (14) Sirr-i-Akbar (Dacca 
Ms.) by Dam Shukoh; (15) Munis-ul-Arw\dh, by Jahanara Begam, 
written in 1681 (Ms., Rampur)—it describes the life of Mu‘in-ud» 
din ChishtI and gives biographical notes of some of his disciples; 
(16) Sahibiyd, by Aparao Bholanath, written in 1641, which gives 
an account of Mullah Shah and is partly translated into Urdu, vide 
Oriental College Magazine, Lahore, August, 1937; (17) Siyar-ul- 
Aqtiab by Ilah-diyah, written in 1646-57, which gives biographical 


14 


THE SOURCES 


notes of 27 Muslim saints; (18) Mirdt-ul-Asrar, by ‘Abd-ur-Rasul 
Chishti, written in 1654, which gives biographical accounts of a large 
number of Muslim saints (Ms., Patna); (19) Mlrat-i-Madari or bio¬ 
graphy of Shah Madar of Mahanpur (Kanpur), written in 1654 by 
‘Abd-ur-Rasul Chishti (Ms., Patna); (20) Chishtiya-i-Bihishtiya of 
‘Ala-ud-din Muhammad Chishti Barnavl, written in 1655-56, which 
consists of biographies of Sufis of the Chishti Order; (21) Manaqib - 
ul-Hazardt by Muhammad Amin BadakhshI which gives biographical 
accounts and teachings of Naqshbandl Sufis (Ms., belonging to 
Dr. S. A. A. RizvII); (22) Riydz-ul-Aullyd, by Muhammad Baqa 
Saharanpurl, written in 1679-80, which gives biographical notices 
of the first four Caliphs, Imams and Sufis (Ms., Rieu, III, 975 a); 
(23) Kalid-i-Makhdzin, by Shaikh Muhammad Ghaus of Gwalior 
(Ms., Rampur), deals with the doctrines of Sufism; (24) Irshdd - 
ut-Talibln, a treatise on Tauhid-i-Wujudl, by Shaikh Jalal-ud'din 
Thanesarl (Ms.,); (25) Mabda wa Ma‘dd (N.K. Press, Lucknow) by 
Mujaddid Alf Sanffi; (26) M‘arif-i-Ladurilya, a work on Wahadt-ul- 
Wujud (Ms., Rampur); (27) Maktubdt-i-Imdm Rabbani, by Mujaddid 
Alf SanI in 3 vols. (N.K. Press, Lucknow); (28) Makalma Baba Lai 
wa Ddrd Shukoh, Dialogues of Baba Lai and Dara Shukoh, compiled 
in 1652, Delhi, 1885; (29) Malfuzdt-i-Shah Kalimulldh Akbardbddi, 
a saint of the 17th century, opposed to Mujaddid. 

B.— Sanskrit 83 

In the extant Sanskrit and Hindi sources, there is hardly any¬ 
thing contemporary with the reigns of Babur and Humayun. From 
the time of Akbar, however, Sanskrit and Hindi scholars produced 
many works of historical and literary value. For example, we have 
a Sanskrit history of Akbar’s reign, entitled Sarvadesavrittdnt 
Sangrah, called popularly Akbar-ndma, by Mahesh Thakur. Next to 
it are the Akbar Shdhl Sringdr Darpan by Padma Sunder, the 
Bhanu Chandra Charitra by Siddhi Chandra Upadhyaya and Hird 
Saubhdgyam by Deva Vimala, which describe the visits of Jain monks 
to the court of Akbar. The Karamchand Vamshatkirtanaka-Kdvyam 
w by Jayasoma Upadhyaya notices some important events of Akbar’s 
reign and his relations with certain Jain monks. The Kripdras Kos 
of Santi Chand confirms Akbar’s religious and other liberal policies 
as given by court chroniclers. The Surjan-Charitra Mahdkdvyam 
by Chandrasekhar describes the exploits of Rai Surjan of Ran- 
thambhor. The Amar Kdvya Varhsdvali by Ranchhod Bhatt gives 
the history of the Ranas of Mewar and their relations with Akbar, 
and the Vlra-bhdnudaya Kdvyam is a history of the Vaghela kings 
of Bhatt (Rewah) and their relations with the Mughuls. Krishna 
Ganaka and a few other Sanskrit writers were patronised by Jahan- 

15 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


glr. There are numerous Sanskrit works of the time of Shah 
Jahan, particularly those of Jagannatha Pandit, the Poet Laureate 
of Sanskrit, Vedangaraja and Kavlndracharya Sarasvatl. Jagan¬ 
natha Pandit wrote Jagadddharan, Asaf Vildsa and Bhamini Vildsa, 
Ras Gangadhar, Gangd Lahari and several poems on Shah Jahan and 
Asaf Khan. Shah Jahan, like his grandfather, patronised Sanskrit 
scholars and poets some of whom adorned his court. Numerous 
Sanskrit scholars from the time of Akbar to that of Shah Jahan pro¬ 
duced, with or without court patronage, a large number of works 
on religion, philosophy, poetics, astronomy and other subjects which 
no serious student of Mughul history can afford to ignore. 

C.— Hindi , Bengali, Oriyd, Gujarati and Assamese 

Among the Hindi works, Dalpat Vildsa by Prince Dalpat 
Simha of Bikaner, Jahangir Chandrikd by Keshav Das, Vira Sihiha 
Deva Charitra by the same author, Nainsi Khydt by Mohta Nainsi 
(written during the reign of Maharaja Yasovant Singh of Jodhpur), 
Amar V amshdvali and Chhatra Prakdsh by Lai Kavi are of special 
value and throw considerable light on the history of the age. 
Ardhkathd or Ardhkathanak by Banarasi Das, a Jain writer and 
poet, born in 1643 V.S. (1586 A.D.), produced his autobiography in 
verse. The author flourished in the times of Akbar, Jahangir and 
Shah Jahan and his account is important for the political, social and 
economic conditions of the age. He wrote other books, viz., Band- 
rasi Vildsa, Nam-Mald and Ndtak Sdmaya Sdr. The poetical works 
of great Hindi masters from TulsI Das and Sur Das to Bhushan, 
covering the entire Mughul age are too many to be enumerated, but 
they are of value for a cultural and literary history of the period. 
There is considerable contemporary literature on the bhakti move¬ 
ment in Hindi, Bengali, Oriya, Gujarati and Marathi, which is in¬ 
dispensable for a correct understanding of the religious condition of 
the Hindus during the Mughul period. The most important works 
of this category are the Bhaktamal, by Nabhadas, and Chaurdsi Vai- 
shnav Ki Vartd. In the Rajasthani dialect of Hindi we have several 
works, important among them being Rand Rdso and Rdj Vilds, 
besides Nainsi Khydt already referred to. There are a few well- 
known works in other modern Indian languages also. For example, 
we have in Bengali Chaitanya Mangala by Kavi Jayananda who 
flourished in the last quarter of the fifteenth century A.D. Chandi 
Kdvya by Mukundaram, popularly known as Kavi Kankan, throws 
a good deal of light on the social and cultural condition of Bengal. 
The Mangal Chandir Gita by Dvija Madhab written about 1579, 
Chaitanya Bhdgavat by Vrindavana Das Thakur, Chaitanya-Chari- 
tdmrita by Krishnadas Kaviraj GosvamI and Chaitanya-Mangala of 


16 


THE SOURCES 


Lochan Das are useful. In Oriya too there are a few contemporary 
poetical works, such as Hari-vamsa by Achuta Nand Das, Ichh- 
wati Haran by Banamali Das, Kdnchi-Kaveri by Purushottam Das 
and Sasisena by Pratapa Rai which give a graphic picture of the 
social condition of Orissa. NarsI Mehta’s and Akho’s works in Guja¬ 
rati are of some value, and so are those of Prema Nand, who was con¬ 
sidered the greatest poet of Gujarat in the 17th century. 

There are a few works of historical value in Assamese. They 
are: (1) Buranji from Khunlun and Khunlai, Eng. tr. in Ms. from 
the Ahom language, in Assam Govt. Secretariat; (2) Kamarupar 
Buranji, Ed. S. K. Bhuyan, Assamese text; and (3) Purdni ‘Asdm 
Buranji, Gauhati, 1930. 


D.— Marathi 

The Marathi sources assume importance from the time of Shah 
Jahan and are indispensable for Aurangzib’s reign. The Siva-Chha - 
trapatichen Charitra of Krishnaji Anant Sabhasad gives an account 
of the life and activity of Shivaji. Jedhayanchi Sakhavali comes next 
in importance. The 91 Qalmi Bakhar by Dattaji, a chronicler of 
Shivaji, is a work of great value, and has been ably edited by V. S. 
Wakaskar (Baroda, 1930). Sivakdlin-Patra-Sdr-Sangraha in three 
volumes contains valuable letters and other documents. The work 
gives a full chronology and an index. Siva-Charitra Sdhitya, in eight 
volumes, consists of letters and other documents for the period not 
covered by the above Sangraha. An equally important collection 
is entitled Siva-Charitrd Pradipa. It contains valuable documents 
and is ably edited by D. V. Apte and S. M. Divekar (Poona, 1925). 
There are several other works, such as Chitra Gupta Bakhar, siva- 
Digvijaya, Chitnis Bakhar, Siva Pratapa Shedgdonkar Bakhar, 
Moreyanchi Bakhar , Jedhe Karma, Powddas and Tanjavur cha 
Silalekh. These have been rejected by Sir J. N. Sarkar as un¬ 
reliable. Sri Sampradaydchi Kdgadpatre (edited by S. S. Deo, 
Dhulia, 1915), Karvir Chhatrapati Gharanydchyd Itihasdchi 
Sadhane, Vols. I, II (Ed. M. V. Gujar, Poona, 1962) and Aitihdsik 
Sankrina Sdhitya, in several volumes (Published by the Bharat 
Itihas Samshodhak Mandala, Poona, 1931-1946) are of great value 
for the period, 1680-1707 A.D. 

II. ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOURCES 

The archaeological sources for the period consist of—(1) Re¬ 
ports of the Archaeological Survey of India, Vols. I-XXXIII, ed. by 
Alexander Cunningham, Simla and Calcutta, 1865-87; (2) The 

Annual Reports of the Archaeological Survey of India, New Irn- 

17 

M.E.—2 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


perial Series from 1902-1903 to date, Ed. by Sir John Marshall and 
others; (3) The Moghul Architecture of Fatehpur Sikri, described 
and illustrated in 4 volumes, by E. W. Smith, Government Press, 
Allahabad, 1894-98; (4) Akbar’s Tomb, Sikandrah, near Agra, de¬ 
scribed and illustrated, by E. W. Smith, published by the Govern¬ 
ment Press, Allahabad, 1909; (5) History of Indian and Eastern 
Architecture, by James Fergusson, revised and edited, with addi¬ 
tions by James Burgess and Rhene Spiers, 2 Vols., published by 
John Murray, London, 1910; (6) Moghul Colour Decoration of Agra, 
described and illustrated, by E. W. Smith, Allahabad Government 
Press, 1901; (7) Indian Architecture: Its Psychology, Structure and 
History from the first Muhammadan Invasion to the present day , 
by E. B. Havell, London, 1913; (8) Handbook to Agra and the Taj 
by E. B. Havell (Longmans, 1912); (9) Mathura, a district Memoir, 
by F. S. Growse, 1883; (10) Delhi Fort, a guide to the Buildings 
and Gardens, Calcutta, 1929; (11) Mosque of Wazir Khan, Lahore, 
( J.I.H., Vol. X); (12) A History of Fine Art in India and 
Ceylon by V. A. Smith, 2nd Ed., Oxford, 1950; (13) The Archaeo¬ 
logy and Monumental Remains of Delhi, by Carr Stephen, Calcutta, 
1876; (14) Transactions of the Archaeological Society of Agra, 1874, 
Delhi; (15) Indian Architecture by Percy Brown, Vol. II (Islamic 
Period), 4th Ed., Bombay, 1964. 

The number of inscriptions of the period is not considerably 
large. The Archaeological Department of the Government of India 
has published Arabic and Persian Inscriptions in the Epigraphia 
Indo-Moslemica (1907-1938). It may be noted that all these in¬ 
scriptions, arranged chronologically with summaries, are given in 
V. S. Bandrey’s A Study of Muslim Inscriptions (Karnatak Pub¬ 
lishing House, Bombay, 1944). 

As regards Numismatic sources, we have several important 
modern publications describing the coins of the period. These are 
of great value in settling conflicting dates, and also throwing light 
on the economic condition of the age. These works are: 

1. Edward Thomas, The Chronicles of the Pathan Kings of 
Delhi, illustrated by coins, inscriptions and other antiquarian 
memoirs (London, Triibner, 1871). This work furnishes some infor¬ 
mation about the coinage and history of the Mughul age also. 

2. Lane-Poole, Stanley, The Coins of the Mogul Emperors of 
Hindustan in the British Museum, London, 1892. 

3. Wright, H. Nelson, A Catalogue of the Coins in the Indian 
Museum, Calcutta, Vol. Ill, Oxford, 1908. 


18 


THE SOURCES 


4. Whitehead, R. B., Catalogue of Coins in the Punjab Museum, 
Lahore, Vol. II, Oxford, 1914. 

5. Brown, C. J., Catalogue of Coins in the Lucknow Museum, 
2 Vols., 1920 . 

6. Hodivala, S.H., Historical Studies in Mughul Numismatics, 
Calcutta, 1923. 

7. Rodgers, C.J., Copper Coins of Akbar (JASB, Part I, 1880, 
1885). 

8. Rodgers, C.J., Mogul Copper Coins (JASB, Part I, 1895). 

9. Rodgers, C.J., Rare Copper Coins of Akbar (Indian Anti¬ 
quary, 1890). 

10. Whitehead, R.B., The Mint Towns of the Mughal Em¬ 
perors of India (J. Pro. A. S. B., 1912). 

11. White King, L., Novelties in Moghal Coins ( Num . Chron., 
1896). 

12. Dames, M.L., Some Coins of the Mughal Emperors (Num. 
C-hron., 1902). 

13. Habib, Arfan, The Mughal Currency System (Medieval 
India Quarterly, Vol. IV, pp. 1-21). 

There is considerable contemporary material on painting. Re¬ 
ference has already been made to the Tarikh-i-Khandan-i-Ttmuria, 
which is profusely illustrated and which traces the evolution of the 
art of Mughul painting in India. There are numerous other pro¬ 
fusely illustrated works on the history and literature of the times 
of Akbar, Jahangir and Shah Jahian. They are preserved at Jaipur 
and several other Ms. libraries in India, England and some other 
Western countries. There are numerous extant portraits of the 
Mughul emperors, princes, and some of the queens and princesses 
in the Indian Museum, Calcutta; Victoria Memorial, Calcutta; Kala 
Bhawan, Banaras; Jaipur; British Museum; South Kensington 
Museum; and India Office Library. The mural paintings and de¬ 
corations can be seen in the Mughul buildings of the period. Several 
modern scholars from Coomaraswamy to N. C. Mehta have made 
a special study of the Mughul art. The works of Percy Brown and 
Moti Chand are of special value in throwing light on the technique 
of Mughul painting. V. A. Smith rightly observes that there is 
enough contemporary material on Mughul art for writing more than 
one volume. 


19 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


III. ACCOUNTS OF FOREIGN VISITORS 

More European monks, travellers, merchants and adventurers 
visited India in the sixteenth, seventeenth and the early years of 
the eighteenth centuries than ever before, and quite a few have left 
valuable descriptions of their observations. These accounts cannot 
be accepted at their face-value, for some of them are mere bazar 
gossip, and certain others are vitiated on account of their racial, 
religious and national prejudices. Nevertheless, they are of value, 
for the foreigners noted what appeared to Indian historians as com¬ 
monplace things and unworthy of being recorded. To the foreign¬ 
ers, however, these were novel and interesting. Hence the value 
of the foreign accounts. But it is not possible, for lack of space, 
to notice these accounts in detail. All that can be done here is to 
give a list of these works: 

1. The Travels and Adventures of the Turkish Admiral Sadi 
‘All Ra‘Is in India, Afghanistan, Central Asia and Persia during the 
years 1553-1556, is the first in point of time. His account, trans¬ 
lated by A. Vambery (Luzac & Co., London, 1899) throws light 
on Humayun’s last days and death, and on the accession of Akbar. 

2. Mongolicae Legationis Commentarius, by F. Anthony 
Monserrate, S. J., (1580-1583); Latin Text published in Memoirs of 
the Asiatic Society of Bengal, III, No. 9, 1914; English translation 
by J. S. Hoyland, 1922. 

3. J. H. Van Linschoten, The Voyage of John Huyghen Van 
Linschoten to the East Indies, Ed. A. C. Burnell (Vol. I) and 
P. A. Tiele (Vol. II), Hakluyt Society, Vols. 70-71, London, 1885. 

4. Travels of Ralph Fitch (1583-91) and John Mildenhall 
(1599-1606) in Early Travels in India, Ed. by W. Foster, 1921. 

5. The Annual Relation of Father Fernao Guerreiro, S. J., 
(1607-8); Abstract Translation by H. Hosten, S. J., in Journal of 
the Punjab Historical Society, VII, 50. 

6. The Voyage to the East Indies, etc. of Francois Pyrard, of 
Laval (1608-9); translated into English by Albert Gray & Ball in 
two vols., Hakluyt Society, London. 

7. Early Travels in India of W. Hawkins (1608-13), W. Finch 
(1608-11), N. Withington (1612-16), T. Coryat (1612-17) E. Terry 
(1616-19), Ed. by W. Foster, 1921. 

8. A Journal of the Fourth and Sixth Voyage of Sir James 
Lancester (1610-11) in Purchas, IV, pp. 214-15. 


20 


THE SOURCES 


9. Account of the Sixth Voyage of Sir Henry Middleton (1610- 
11) in Purchas, III, pp. 115-94. 

10. The Voyage through India, Persia, etc. of Master Joseph 
Salbancke (1609-10) in Purchas, III. 

11. Description of Hindustan and Guzarate (Gujarat) by 
Eredia de Manuel Godino (1611); English translation by H. Hosten 
in J.R.A.S.B. (Letters), Vol. IV, 1938. 

12. Histoire des choses plus memorables advenues, etc. Vols. 
1-3. By F. Pierre du Jarric. Wr. 1614 A.D., Ed. and translated 
into English in 2 Volumes, by C. H. Payne under the title of Akbar 
and the Jesuits (1926), and Jahangir and the Jesuits (1930 ), London. 

13. The Voyage to East Indies, by Nicholes Dowton (1614-15), 
Ed. W. Foster, London, 1939. 

14. Richard Steel & John Crowther, ‘Journall’, 1615-16. Pur¬ 
chas His Pilgrims, IV, 266-80. 

15. The Embassy of Sir Thomas Roe to India (1615-19). Ed. 
by W. Foster, London, 1936. 

16. Jahangir’s India (The Remanstrantie of F. Pelsaert); trans¬ 
lated from the Dutch by W. H. Moreland and P. Geyl. Cam¬ 
bridge, 1925. 

17. Voyage of Peter Floris to the East Indies (1611-15). Ed. 
by W. H. Moreland, Hakluyt Society, 1934. 

18. Voyage of Thomas Best (1612-14), Ed. by W. Foster, 
Hakluyt Society, 1934. 

19. Pieter Van Den Broeke at Surat (1620-29) in J.I.H., Vol. 
X, pp. 235-50, Vol. XI, pp. 1-16, 203-18. 

20. The Travels of Pietro Della Valle in India (1623-24), 2 
Vols., Ed. Edward Grey, Hakluyt Society, London. 

21. De Laet, De Imperio Magni Moglis, sive India vera Com- 
mentarius ex variis Auctoribus Congestis, Leyden, 1631 ; translated 
into English by J. S. Hoyland, and annotated by S. N. Banerjee, 
The Empire of the Great Mogal, Bombay, 1928. 

22. The Travels of Peter Mundy, Vol. II (1630-34), Ed. by 
Richard Temple, Hakluyt Society, 1914. 

23. The Travels of Sebastian Manrique (1629-43), 2 Vols., 
Ed. by C. E. Luard and Fr. H. Hosten, Hakluyt Society, 1926 and 
1927. 


21 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


24. The Voyages and Travels, etc. of Albert Mandelslo (1638- 
39), Ed. Adam Olearius, 2nd ed., London, 1669. 

25. Travels in the Mogul Empire (1656-1688), by Francois 
Bernier, Ed. by A. Constable, Oxford University Press, 1914. 

26. Travels in India by Jean Baptist Tavernier (1640-67); 
translated and edited by V. Ball in 2 Vols. Macmillan & Co., London, 
1889. Second Ed. revised by V. Crooke, London, 1925. 

27. Storia do Mogor of Niccolao Venetian Manucci (1653-1708); 
translated into English and edited by W. Irvine, Vols. I-IV, 1907-8. 

28. Travels of M. de Thevenot (1667) in the Levant, in three 
parts, Eng. translation, 1686. 

29. John Marshall in India (1668-72), Ed. Shafaat Ahmad 
Khan, Oxford, 1927. 

30. A Geographical Account of the Countries round the Bay 
of Bengal, by Thomas Bowrey (1669-79), Ed. R. C. Temple, 
Hakluyt Society, 1905. 

31. A New Account of East Indies and Persia by John Fryer 
(1672-81), Ed. W. Crooke, 3 Vols., Hakluyt Society, 1909, 1912, 
1915. 

32. The Diary of William Hedges (1681-87), 2 Vols., Ed. Col. 
Henry Yule, London. 

33. A New Account of the East Indies by Alexander Hamilton 
(1688-1723) in 2 Vols., London, 1724. 

34. A Voyage to Surat in 1689 by Ovington, London, 1696. 
Ed. by H. G. Rawlinson, London, 1929. 

35. The Indian Travels of Thevenot and Careri (1695), Ed. 
S. N. Sen, National Archives of India, 1949. 

36. The Norris Embassy to Aurangzib (1699-1702), Harihar 
Das, Ed. S. C. Sarkar, Calcutta, 1959. 


22 


THE SOURCES 


1. A Ms. copy is preserved in Aligarh Muslim University Library. English Trans¬ 
lation by N. Elias and E. Denison Ross, 1895. 

2. Partly translated in Elliot and Dowson, Vol. V, 116-126. 

3. Persian Ms. in 4 vols., Raza Library, Rampur. See JASB., N.S. XII (1916). 

4. Turk! text translated into German by H. Vambery, 1885. 

5. Lithographed in Tehran, 1896. 

6. Persian text, edited and translated by A. S. Beveridge, 1902. 

7. Translated by C. Stewart, 1832. 

8. Persian text, edited by D. C. Phillott (Bib. Indica), Calcutta, 1912. 

9. Ms. copy available at the Allahabad University Library, Persian Text (Bib. 
Indica), 1941. 

10. Persian Ms., partlv translated in the JASB, 1898. 

11. Edited by M. Hidayat Husain and translated by Beni Prasad (Bibliotheca 
Indica), Calcutta. 

11a. Ms. copy in Raza Library, Rampur. 

12. For Abu-’l-Fazl’s life, see Ain-i-Akbari, Vol. I (Introduction) and Vol. Ill 
(Last chapter). 

13. Persian Text (Bibliotheca Indica), 3 vols., translated by H. Beveridge (Bib¬ 
liotheca Indica) in three vols. 

14. Published in 3 vols. (Bibliotheca Indica). translation. Vol. 1 bv H. Bloch- 
mann: 2nd edn. revised bv D. C. Pbillptt. 1927: Vols. IT & III bv .Tarrett* 
2nd edn. revised by Sir J. Sarkar. Published in the same series, 1949, 1948 
respectively. 

15. Lithographed by N. K. Press, Lucknow, in 1846. 

16. Lhho. N. K. Press. Lnoknow. 1875; Bib. Indica Series in 3 Vols. Calcutta, 
1940. Eng. Trans., by B.De, 1940. 

17. Text in 3 vols. (Bib. Indica). Trans, in the same series. Vol. I by Ranking; 
Vol. II, by W. H. Lowe; Vol. Ill by Haig. 

18. Ene. Trans, appended to Vol. Ill of H. Beveridge’s English Translation of 

Akbar-nama. 

19. Translation by J. Bribes, London, 1892; reprinted Calcutta, 1908. 

19a. Ms. in Record Office, Patiala. 

20. Ms. in A.S.B., Calcutta and also in Sarasvatl Bhavan Library, Udaipur, Eng. 
Trans, in E. & D„ Vol. IV. 

21. Persian Text. 

22. The Ms., of which the author was Tahir Muhammad, is in the Public Library, 
Lahore. 

23. Central Record Office, Hyderabad, Ms. 

24. Khuda Bakhsh Library, Patna, Ms. 

25. Text ed. by Sayyid Ahmad Khan; also N. K. Press, Lucknow, lithograph; 
Eng. Trans, by Rodgers and Beveridge in 2 Vols, 1909. 

26. Lithographed by N. K. Press, Lucknow (n.d.), Urdu Trans, by Ahmad ‘All 
Shauq, Lucknow, 1874. Iqbdl-nama, text (Calcutta), 1865. 

27. Rampur Ms., Eng. Trans, in E & D., Vol. VI. 

28. MS: R. iii 931a. Portions translated in E. & D., Vol. VI, 447-52. 

29. Published in Bib. Indica Series in 2 vols., Calcutta, 1866-72. 

30. Raghubir Library, Sitamau, Ms. 

31. B. M. Ms. Add. 39, 777, foil. 1-562. 

32. Sarasvatl Bhavan Library Ms., Udaipur; text (Bib. Indica) Calcutta, 1912- 
1946. 

33. Rampur Ms. 


23 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


34. Bib. Indica, Calcutta. 

35. Bib. Indica, Calcutta, 1870-73. 

36. Khuda Bakhsh Library, Patna, Ms. 

37. Hyderabad Asafiya Library Ms. 

38. Bib. Indica, Calcutta, 1869; this narrative of Aurangzlb’s reign is not original 

39. B.M. or. 23. Also National Library (Sarkar Collection), Calcutta. 

40. National Library. (Sarkar Collection), Calcutta; it is described in Sir J. 
Sarkar’s Studies in Mughal India. 

41. Khuda Bakhsh Library, Patna, Ms. 

42. Khuda Bakhsh Library, Patna, Ms. 

43. Text lithographed at Lucknow, 1259 A.H. 

44. Text edi. by Sir J. Sarkar and translated by him as Anecdotes of Aurangzih 
(2nd ed.). 

45. Text in 3 vols. published in Gaekwad Oriental Series, Baroda. 

46. Bib. Indica, Calcutta, 1918. 

47. National Library (Sarkar Collection Ms.), Calcutta. 

48. National Library (Sarkar Collection Ms.), Calcutta. 

49. National Library (Sarkar Collection Ms.), Calcutta. 

50. Hyderabad Ms. 

51. National Library (Sarkar Collection Ms.), Calcutta. 

52. National Library (Sarkar Collection Ms.), Calcutta. 

53. Kapurthala Ms. 

54. National Library (Sarkar Collection Ms.), Calcutta. 

55. Sarasvati Bhavan Library, Udaipur Ms. 

56. Khuda Bakhsh Library, Patna, Ms. 

57. Khuda Bakhsh Library, Patna, Ms. 

58. A. S. B. Calcutta Ms. 

59. National Library (Sarkar Collection Ms.), Calcutta. 

60. Khuda Bakhsh Library, Patna, Ms. 

61. Text (Bibliotheca Indica), Calcutta. 

62. Sarasvati Bhavan Library, Udaipur, Ms. 

63. Sarasvati Bhavan Library, Udaipur, Ms. 

64. Khuda Bakhsh Library, Patna, Ms. 

65. Text (Bib. Indica), Calcutta; Eng. Trans, by K. K. Basu, Baroda. 

66. This is the only copy known to' exist. 

67. A.S.B.’ Calcutta M.; and also Sarasvati Bhavan Library, Udaipur, Ms. 

68. Bib. Indica, Calcutta, Text in 3 vols., Vols. 1-2, translated by H. Beveridge 
and Beni Prasad. 

69. Text lithographed by N. K. Press, Lucknow, 1904, Eng. Trans, by 
David Shea and Anthony Troyer, Paris, 1948. 

70. Written in 1636 A.D., Habibganj Ms. 

71. Written in 1646 A.D., Khuda Bakhsh Library, Patna, Ms. 

72. Written in 1682 A.D., Rampur Ms. 

73. Written in 1667 A.D., National Library (Buhar Section), Calcutta Ms. 

74. Written in 1689 A.D., A.S.B., Calcutta Ms. 

75. Written in 1695 A.D., Khuda Bakhsh Library, Patna, Ms. 

76. A.S.B., Calcutta Ms. 

77. The farmdns, date from 1577 to 1805; published in Bombay, 1928. 

78. Indian Institute of Advanced Study, Simla, 1967. 

79. For Diwdns, see Mughals in India, Vol. I by D. N. Marshall, passim. 

80. See Mughals in India by D. N. Marshall, Vol. I, 1967, passim. 

81. See Mughals in India by D. N. Marshall, Vol. I, 1967, passim. 

82. See Mughals in India by D. M. Marshall, Vol. I, 1967, passim. 

83. For Sanskrit Works, see Akbar the Great, Vol. I (1962) by A. L. Srivastava, 
pp. 538-39. 


24 


CHAPTER II 


BABUR 

I. Early History 

The early history of Zahiir-ud-Din Muhammad Babur, which was 
a tissue of romantic successes and surprising reverses, belongs to 
Central Asia. The blood of two great conquerors flowed in his 
veins; he was fifth in descent from Timur, ‘the earth-shaker’, while 
through his mother he could trace his ancestry from Chingiz, the 
terrible. 1 His mother, Qutluq Nigar Khanum, was the daughter of 
Yunus Khan who was descended from Chaghatai Khan, the second 
son of Chingiz Khan. On the death of Sultan Abu Sa‘id Mirza, a 
great-grandson of Timur and Babur’s grandfather, his extensive domi¬ 
nions covering Khurasan and Transoxiana were divided among his 
sons (1469). The fourth son, ‘Umar Shaikh Mirza, the father of 
Babur, obtained the kingdom of Farghana. 2 Here the founder of 
the Mughul empire was born on 14 February, 1483, and inherited 
his father’s precarious throne at the tender age of eleven years 
and a few months. The petty kingdom of Farghana, that ‘weak 
child separated from the mother-empire’ of Timur, could hardly 
satisfy the ambition of the young prince whose dream was Samar- 
qand, the proud capital of his great ancestor. After a hard struggle 
of three years against his cousin Baisunqur Mirza, he was able to 
capture it in November, 1497, after a siege of seven months; but he 
could not hold it for more than a hundred days, as he had to leave 
Samarqand for Farghana to quell a rebellion led by Auzun Hasan 
and Ahmad Tambal who acted in the name of his younger brother 
Jahangir Mirza. Babur failed and now lost both. He recovered 
Farghana in June, 1498, and won Samarqand for the second time in 
November, 1500, not from a Timurid rival but from Shaibani Khan, 
the chief of the Uzbegs. Babur then made peace with Jahangir 
Mirza by ceding parts of Farghana, but the latter ultimately occu¬ 
pied the whole of it. For the next twelve years the main episode 
in Babur’s life was his struggle with the Uzbegs. In May, 1501, he 
was badly defeated by Shaibani Khan at Sar-i-pul and forced to 
surrender Samarqand and give his eldest sister Khanzada Begam in 
marriage to the enemy. He was now once more a throneless wan¬ 
derer and retired to Tashkent under the shelter of his maternal 
uncle Sultan Mahmud Khan. With his two uncles, Mahmud Khan 
and Ahmad Khan, he made several attempts on Farghana. Ahmad 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Tambal, finding himself no match for such a Timurid-Mongol coali¬ 
tion, invited Shaibani Khan who ultimately inflicted a crushing de¬ 
feat upon the two Khans (the uncles of Babur) in the battle of 
Archiyan (June, 1503). 

The battle of Archiyan moulded the future history of Babur: it 
gave a new orientation to his ambition and policy. He bade last 
farewell to the land of his birth and set out to try his fortune be¬ 
yond the Hindu Kush away from the grasp of his arch-enemy. He 
turned to Kabul which was captured in 1501 by Muqim the Arghun 
from its legal ruler ‘Abdur-Razzaq, son of Ulugh Beg, who had in¬ 
herited it from his father Sultan Abu Sa‘id. Babur’s army was now 
reinforced by the arrival of the Mongol deserters from the camp 
of Khusrav Shah who had been driven from Qunduz by Shaibani. 
Probably Babur won the Mongols over to his side, and had they 
not joined his standard, the conquest of Kabul might not have been 
possible. In October, 1504, he crossed the Hindu Kush and took 
Kabul from the Arghun usurper almost without any opposition. 3 

The bloodless conquest of Kabul was the turning-point in 
Babur’s career. He had now a place under the sun, a base from which 
he could turn his attention either west to Samarqand or east to 
Hindusthan. It was from Kabul that he first had the lure of the 
fertile plains of India, and the idea of conquering it seized his 
mind. This did not mean the abandonment of his ambitions in 
Central Asia. It was not by choice but by force of circumstances 
that the grandson of Abu Sa‘id laid the foundation of an empire in 
Hindusthan. 

It was a few months after the conquest of Kabul that Babur 
made his first invasion into the territory of Hindusthan. In 
January, 1505, he set out by the Khyber Pass for Peshawar and in¬ 
stead of crossing the Indus marched on to Kohat. From Kohat he 
marched towards Bangash and finally reached the Indus at Tarbila. 4 
The raid, which was confined to fighting against the Afghan tribes 
and ravaging the banks of the Indus, lasted four months, and in 
May, 1505, Babur returned to Kabul by way of Ghazni. 

The alarming growth of the power of Shaibani Khan, who had 
captured Khiva and was threatening Balkh, at last moved Sultan 
Husain Mlrza Baiqara, the renowned king of Herat, who called on 
the Timurid princes for a joint attack upon the Uzbeg enemy. 
Babur hastened from Kabul in response to the invitation, but on 
the way, at Kahmard, he received the report of Sultan Husain 
Mirza Baiqara’s death (5 May, 1506). Nevertheless he pushed on 
and after a march of eight hundred miles met on 26 October the 


26 


BABUR 


two sons of the late sultan on the river Murghab and accompanied 
them to Herat; but in spite of the lavish offers of hospitality the 
fashionable and cultured princes did not make proper winter 
arrangements for his army, whereupon he left on 24 December for 
Kabul, undertaking a perilous journey through the snow-clad 
passes. On his return he put down a conspiracy of the Mongol 
troops to place his cousin Wais Mirza, son of Sultan Mahmud Mirza, 
on the throne. Shaibani Khan did not miss the golden opportunity 
of attacking Khurasan and took Herat in June, 1507. 

The arch-enemy of Babur was now at the height of his power: 
he had humbled the Mongols as well as the Timurids. It was a 
critical juncture for the prince of Kabul, the only Timur id State 
that survived the fall of Herat. Babur, who was fully alive to the 
strategic importance of Qandahar, responded to the call of Shah Beg 
and Muqim Beg, the sons of Zu-’n-N'un Arghun, governor of Qanda¬ 
har under Sultan Husain Baiqara, for military aid against the 
Uzbegs. As he approached Qandahar, Babur found the Arghun 
princes hostile, but he took the city and put them to flight. He 
had soon to leave Qandahar as Shaibani Khan was hastening to¬ 
wards the city at the invitation of the fugitive Muqim. Babur 
deemed it expedient to keep himself away from the Uzbegs and 
diverted his energies to making a raid into Hindusthan. Shaibani 
came and took Qandahar, but left for the north on account of the 
rebellion of one of his chiefs. In September, 1507, Babur had set 
out for the Indus and, marching down the Kabul river, advanced 
as far as Mandrawar, 5 but returned to Kabul on account of dis¬ 
agreement among his nobles according to Abu-’l-Fazl, but more 
probably due to the retirement of Shaibani. The raid of 1507, 
though barren, was very significant; it was symptomatic of the way 
in which Babur turned from the West to the East, from the arid 
steppes of Central Asia to the fertile plains of Hindusthan. 

It was after the retirement of Shaibani from Qandahar and on 
his return to Kabul that Babur abandoned the title of Mirza 
(prince) and styled himself Padishah (emperor) and thus asserted 
the headship of the Timurids. The birth of his son Humayun gave 
the death-blow to the partisans of the house of Ulugh Mirza who 
organized a formidable rebellion in favour of ‘Abdur-Razzaq, but 
Babur gave them a severe defeat and put them to flight. The rest 
of the year 1508 and the whole of the next year he spent quietly 
in arranging the internal economy of his petty kingdom. r 

In 1510 the perpetual menace to Babur by the ever-waxing 
power of Shaibani was suddenly removed. The latter came into 


27 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


conflict with Shah Isma‘11, the Safavi ruler of Iran, and was badly 
defeated. Shaibani was killed and his army was annihilated. This 
news raised high hopes in the mind of Babur. He could now ex¬ 
pect to recover his lost territories. Leaving Nasir Mlrza in charge 
of Kabul, he reached Qunduz in January, 1511. Here he received 
an embassy from the Safavi king, Shah Isma‘11 of Iran, who offered 
his friendship and sent back his sister Khanzada Begam who had 
fallen into the hands of the Persians. Babur sent Wais Mirza to 
Iran with congratulations, thanks and presents. The Shah agreed 
to help Babur on condition that he should read the Shah’s name in 
the khutba and stamp it on his coins together with those of the 
Twelve Imams. 6 

With Persian auxiliaries Babur took Bukhara; his cousin Haidar 
Mlrza had already driven the Uzbegs out of Farghana. The road 
to Samarqand now lay open and from Bukhara Babur marched 
direct to the capital of Timur and proclaimed himself king amidst 
popular rejoicings. His popularity soon waned in Sunni Samar¬ 
qand which bitterly disliked his concessions to Shihsm in his com¬ 
pact with the Shah. The Uzbegs under ‘Ubaid-ullah Khan, nephew 
of Shaibani, taking advantage of Shah Isma‘iTs preoccupation in the 
affairs of Azarbaijian and the growing coolness between him and 
Babur due to the latter’s failure to fully satisfy the Shah’s Shi‘ite 
zeal, attacked Bukhara. Babur thereupon marched against the 
Uzbegs but was defeated at Kul-i-Malik in the vicinity of Bukhara 
(May, 1512). Babur lost not only Bukhara but also Samarqand to 
the Uzbegs, and retired to Hissar (in Badakhshan). Shah Isma‘11 
had meanwhile sent an army under Najm Beg to assist Babur 
against the Uzbegs. 6a 

The combined forces of N ! ajm Beg and Babur marched towards 
Bukhara, taking Khuzar and Qarshi on the way. The Uzbegs had 
entrenched themselves in the fort of Ghazdawan which Najm Beg 
besieged. The garrison was well-provisioned against a long siege, 
while the Persian troops badly suffered from winter and scarcity. 
Najm Beg therefore decided to raise the siege and withdraw, as 
Babur and others advised him, but next day the Uzbeg army, great¬ 
ly reinforced, surprised the Persians. The Persian army was 
thrown into confusion and badly defeated and Najm Beg was slain 
(November, 1512). Babur, who was in command of the rear-guard, 
escaped to Hissar. Persian historians accuse Babur of treachery in 
the, battle), and his son Humayun, while at the Persian court, was 
taunted by reference to his father’s treachery at Ghazdawan. It is 
quite probable that Babur remained coldly neutral as he had no 
love lost for the Persian ally who had exacted too great a price for 


28 


BABUR 


his help. From Hissar, where the Mongols had rebelled against him, 
Babur went to Qunduz, but as he had no hope of recovering Hissar, 
he crossed the Hindu Kush and returned to Kabul (1514). 

Nasir MIrza, who had been left in charge of Kabul, was now 
appointed to Ghazni, but his death shortly after occasioned a revolt 
of local chiefs and Mongol troops, which Babur quelled. For the 
next four years, 1515-1518, the history of Babur is comparatively 
uneventful. He was now merely the chief of a petty kingdom. He 
realized at last that Central Asia was a lost field to him; he was 
no match for the Uzbegs, specially after Shah Ismahl’s tragic de¬ 
feat at Tabriz in August, 1514, at the hands of the Ottoman Turks, 
as there was now no prospect of Safavld-Tlmurid alliance against 
them. But he was too optimistic to despair, and too ambitious to 
remain inactive, and turned his eyes towards the East as a probable 
compensation for the lost dominions in the North. These quiet 
years were spent in preparation for that ultimate goal, in punitive 
expeditions around Kabul, as well as in organizing his army, for 
which he utilized the services of a Turk named Ustad ‘All Qull. 
The battle of Ghazdawan therefore finally moulded Babur’s destiny. 
Since the conquest of Kabul in 1504 the idea of the conquest of 
India had been in his mind, but after Ghazdawan the thought of 
carving a kingdom in India was forced on him. If the battle of 
Archiyan turned him from Farghana to Kabul, that of Ghazdawan 
turned him from Kabul to India. But for ShaibanI Khan and the 
Uzbegs, the founder of the Mughul empire in India might have died 
as a Tlmurid ruler of Samarqand. 

II. Conquest of Hindusthdn 

Both the great ancestors of Babur, Chingiz and Timur, had in¬ 
vaded India. The raid of Chingiz had touched only the fringe of 
the country, but the invasion of Timur caused wide-spread anarchy 
in Hindusthan, as the kingdom of Delhi had already become a 
shadow of its former self. The Sayyids were hardly the persons to 
cope with the prevailing anarchy and dislocation and gave way to 
the Lodls. The kingdom of the Lodls was a loose confederacy of 
semi-independent governorships held by the amirs, the leaders of 
the Afghan tribes, and the king ‘was no more conspicuous than a 
royal oakling in a forest of oaks’. The first two Lodls managed 
the turbulent nobles: Buhlul, by respecting the sentiments of the 
Afghans, wedded to the ideal of tribal polity, and Sikandar, by a 
policy of tempered firmness. But Ibrahim, who came to the throne 
in 1517, was ambitious, tactless, arrogant and impatient; he tried 
to play the monarch, even to those who detested monarchy. He 


29 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


thus alienated the sympathy of the Afghan nobles who raised the 
standard of rebellion. The Punjab and Jaunpur openly revolted 
and the Rajputs also defeated him. 7 

While the king of Kabul was preparing for the realization of 
his long-cherished dream of the conquest of Hindusthan, the Hin¬ 
dustan of Ibrahim Lodi offered him the most favourable circum¬ 
stances. Outside the Lodi kingdom there were the Muslim king¬ 
doms of Multan, Sind, Gujarat, Malwa, Khandesh, and Bengal in 
Northern India while in the Deccan the BahmanI empire had been 
split into five States, viz., Berar, Bldar, Ahmadnagar, Bijapur and 
Golconda. The notable Hindu States were Rajasthan and Orissa in 
the north and Vijayanagara in the south. The Muslim kingdoms 
were very weak because of their internal divisions and mutual jea¬ 
lousies. The Rajput confederacy led by Rana Sangram Sirhha of 
Mewar had grown to be a great political force, almost ready to 
make a bid for the Delhi empire. The great expansion of the king¬ 
dom of Vijayanagara under Krishna Deva Raya (1509-1530), who 
had humbled the power of Orissa, caused not a little anxiety to the 
Muslim powers of the Deccan. Such was the Indian scene when 
Babur seriously turned to invade the country. 

Early in 1519 Babur made a sudden raid on Bajaur, besieged 
it, and stormed it after a spirited struggle. To strike terror into the 
heart of the Afghan tribes, he put the inhabitants to the sword, to 
which reference will be made later. At the same time, with a 
vie'w to conciliating them, he married the daughter of a Yusufzal 
chief. He crossed the Swat, and fording the Indus, made his way 
almost unopposed to the Jhelum. Most of the local chieftains and 
the fort of Bhera submitted. Babur regarded the Punjab as his 
own by hereditary right from Timur, who had conquered it, and 
instructed his troops not to do violence on the people or their flocks 
and crops. He sent an embassy to the court of Ibrahim Lodi ask¬ 
ing for the recognition of his claim to the Punjab, but his envoy 
Mulla Murshid was detained at Lahore by the governor of the 
Punjab, Daulat Khan, and the letter remained undelivered. Babur 
left Hindu Beg in charge of Bhera and came back to Kabul on 31 
March, attacking and subduing the Gakkhars on the way. The ex¬ 
pedition bore no permanent result—it was rather a reconnoitreing 
raid; and no sooner had he left than his officer Hindu Beg was ex¬ 
pelled. 

Babur himself states that from the year 925 A.H. (A.D. 1519) 
when he took Bajaur, to the year 932 A.H. (A.D. 1526), he led 
his army five times into Hindusthan. Babur thus regarded the ex- 


30 


BABUR 


pedition of early 1519 as his first Indian invasion. There is no dis¬ 
agreement about his fifth expedition which led to the battle of 
Panlpat, but we are not told which expeditions Babur regarded as 
second, third and fourth. Abu-T-Fazl regards the| raids of 1505 and 
1507 as the first, and second and that of early 1519 as the third, but 
could not be definite regarding the fourth. If we take into con¬ 
sideration the earlier raids of 1505 and 1507, we find that Babur 
made altogether seven expeditions into Indian territory. 

The same year, 1519, in September Babur crossed the Khyber 
and advanced as far as Peshawar, subduing the Yusufzai Afghans on 
the way. But he had to hasten back to Kabul on receipt of the 
report that the rujer of Kashghar was advancing on Badakhshan., 
This was Babur’s fourth raid into Hindusthan and most probably 
Babur regarded it as his second. 8 

In 1520 Babur made his fifth expedition (third according to 
Firishta and probably also to Babur) into Hindusthan. He march¬ 
ed out of Kabul through Bajaur, crossed the Indus and reached 
Bhera where he punished those who had revolted against him. 
Crossing the Jhelum he advanced on to Sialkot, which submitted, 
and then marched on Sayyidpur which offered resistance. Babur 
stormed it, put the inhabitants to the sword, and took the women 
and children into captivity. The expedition came to an abrupt end 
because Babur had to return to Kabul which was threatened by 
Shah Beg Arghun, ruler of Qandahar. 

Babur realized the necessity of having Qandahar as a base be¬ 
fore he should lead his troops into Hindusthan. It would be al¬ 
most indispensable for a ruler of Kabul and the Indian kingdom as 
the first line of defence against the growing power of Safavi Persia. 
Qandahar was held by Zu-’n-Nun Beg Arghun on behalf of Sultan 
Husain Mirza Baiqara of Herat, but after the fall of Herat and Zu- 
’n-Nun Beg’s death, his sons Muqim and Shah Beg secured indepen¬ 
dent possession of it. Already in 1517 Babur had made an unsuc¬ 
cessful attempt on it. On his return to Kabul from the Indian raid, 
he laid siege to Qandahar (1520) but could not take it. Next year 
also he made another unsuccessful siege. Shah Beg, as he failed 
to persuade Shah Isma‘Il to interfere against Babur, left Qandahar 
for Sind where he was able to carve out an independent kingdom. 
Babur accordingly marched to Qandahar, took it without any oppo¬ 
sition on 6 September, 1522, 9 and left his younger son Mirza 
Kamran in charge. Garmsir also fell into the hands of Babur. 
Badakhshan, too, had come to his hands in 1520 on the death of his 
cousin Wais Mirza, when Babur, setting aside the claim of the 


31 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


former’s son Sulaiman Mirza, had appointed his own son Humayun 
to its government. 

Babur was now free to turn his attention to Hindusthan. There 
the position of Ibrahim Lodi was growing more and more precarious 
on account of the revolt of his nobles and relations. The most 
serious enemies of the Sultan were ‘Alam Khan, his uncle, and Daulat 
Khan Lodi, viceroy of the Punjab, both of whom appealed to Babur 
for help. ‘Alam Khan, who had been living at the court of Sultan 
Muzaffar of Gujarat, went to Kabul and begged Babur to advance 
to the Punjab and place him on the throne of Delhi. Daulat Khan, 
apprehending that Sultan Ibrahim would soon deprive him of his 
position, sent messengers to Babur, offering to acknowledge him as 
his sovereign and asking his aid against Ibrahim. Babur respond¬ 
ed to Daulat Khan’s appeal and undertook his sixth invasion of 
Hindusthan (1524). 10 

Passing through the Khyber Pass and the Gakkhar country, 
Babur crossed the Indus, the Jhelum and the Chenab and advanced 
within ten miles of Lahore. There he was encountered by the Lodi 
army under Bihar Khan, Mubarak Khan and others. The Afghan 
army was defeated and Lahore fell into Babur’s hands. He then 
pushed on southwards to Dipalpur which he stormed. Here he was 
joined by Daulat Khan and his sons, Ghazi Khan and Dilawar Khan, 
who had been driven from Lahore. Babur gave Daulat Khan, Jul- 
lundur and Sultanpur as assignments. This could hardly satisfy 
Daulat Khan who wanted a free hand in the Punjab. He had 
sought an ally but found a master, and along with his son, Ghazi 
Khan, left Babur in silent indignation and began to intrigue against 
him. Dilawar Khan, who remained loyal to Babur, was now given 
Sultanpur. To the pretender ‘Alam Khan, Babur gave Dipalpur. 
Babur was proceeding eastwards towards Sirhind but, considering 
his forces inadequate, retreated to Lahore and then returned to 
Kabul. 

No sooner had Babur left than Daulat Khan came out of his re¬ 
treat, seized Sultanpur and drove ‘Alam Khan from Dipalpur. 
‘Alam Khan, who still harped on his claim to the throne of Delhi, 
escaped to Kabul and offered Babur the formal cession of Lahore 
and the territory west of it on condition that Babur would place him 
on the Delhi throne. The king of Kabul accepted the offer and sent 
instructions to his generals in the Punjab to help ‘Alam Khan in 
his attack on Delhi. Babur could not accompany ‘Alam Khan to 
Hindusthan as he had to go to Balkh to the aid of Shah Isma‘il 
against the Uzbegs who had besieged it. ‘Alam Khan, after his re- 


32 


BABUR 


turn to India, abandoned the alliance with Babur and joined hands 
with Daulat Khan who offered him his help and allegiance. With 
the assistance of Daulat Khan and his son, Ghazi Khan, ‘Alam Khan 
marched on Delhi and surprised Ibrahim Lodi’s camp at night, but 
w T as ultimately routed. With his army dispersed, ‘Alam Khan made 
good his escape. 

Babur meanwhile had driven the Uzbegs from Balkh and now 
turned his attention to Hindusthan. On 17 November, 1525, he set 
out on his last and most momentous Indian campaign. On the way 
he was joined by Humayun from Badakhshan and Khvaja Kilan 
from Ghazni. Whein he crossed the Indus on 16 December, the 
entire army amounted to twelve thousand men including non-com¬ 
batant camp followers. As Babur advanced towards Sialkot, Daulat 
Khan and Ghazi Khan, who were overrunning the Punjab, escaped 
to Milwat. Babur blockaded the strong fortress and forced Daulat 
Khan, who had girded himself with two swords as a challenge 
against the invader, to capitulate. Ghazi Khan fled, leaving his 
precious library to the enemy. Dilawar Khan proved faithless to¬ 
wards his father and again joined Babur. ‘Alam Khan Lodi also 
joined Babur in a forlorn condition and Babur considered it expe¬ 
dient to make political use of an Afghan pretender. Lahore and its 
dependent territories fell into Babur’s hands and the first stage of 
his campaign was brought to a close. 

The road to Delhi now lay open. As Babur advanced towards 
his goal by way of Sirhind and Ambala, Sultan Ibrahim also advan¬ 
ced from Delhi with a big army to meet the invader. Two advance 
parties of the Afghans fell upon the Mughul army: the first under 
Hamid Khan, which came into contact with Babur’s right wing, was 
completely routed by Humayun, then only eighteen years old, in 
his ‘maiden battle’; the second under Daud Khan and Hatim Khan 
was similarly routed. Babur, having crossed the Sutlej near Hupar, 
proceeded to Ambala and from there two marches along the Yamuna 
brought him to the historic city of Panipat where he came within 
the sight of the enemy. Here Babur encamped and prepared him- 
self for the battle. 

Babur stationed the army in such a way that the town of PanL 
pat sheltered his extreme right while his left was protected by a 
ditch and an abatis. His centre was strengthened by a line of some 
seven hundred movable carts, tied together by ropes of raw hide, 
and between eviery two carts there were five or six breastworks 
for the protection of the match-lock-men and artillery-men. The 

33 

M.E.—3 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


line was not continuous but passages were provided wide enough 
for a hundred and fifty horsemen to march out abreast. 10a 

For eight days from 12 April to 19 April the two armies stood 
face to face. With a view to drawing the enemy into battle, Babur 
sent out four or five thousand men on 20 April to attempt a night 
surprise, and though it failed on account of the negligence of the 
troops, it had the desired effect of making the enemy move. On 21 
April at dawn the Afghans were on the move in battle array. As 
Babur noticed it, he bade his men take their station and drew them 
up according to the traditional formation of the Turks and the Mon¬ 
gols. 

Babur took his position in the centre. The right centre was led by 
Chan Timur Sultan and the left centre by the Chief Minister Mir 'Alt 
Khalifa. Humayuin, assisted by Khvaja Kilan, commanded the right 
wing and in charge of the left wing were Muhammad Sultan MIrza 
and Mahdl Khvaja. On the right and left extremities of the entire 
line there were two flying columns to wheel round on the enemy 
and take them in the flank and rear. The van was commanded by 
Khusrav Kukultash and Muhammad ‘All Jang, and the reserve by 
‘Abd-ul-'AzIz, the Master of the Horse. Along the front of the entire 
line, protected by the palisade of carts and breastworks, were placed 
the artillery under Ustad ‘All on the right side and the musketeers 
under Mustafa on the left. From his key position in the; centre 
Babur could have a view of the activities of the entire army. 

Ibrahim Lodi had with him a force of 100,000 men and 1,000 ele^ 
phants while Babur’s army was 24,000 strong. 11 The Afghan army 
came straight on at a rapid march, and as they came near his de¬ 
fences, they hesitated and halted, but the ranks behind still pressed 
forward and caused great confusion among the whole force. Babur 
seized the opportunity and sent out his flanking columns to wheel 
round the Afghans and deliver a violent attack on their rear, while 
his right and left wings charged straight on. Babur sent timely re¬ 
inforcement to the left wing under Mahdl Khvaja which was hard 
pressed, as well as to the right wing which felt the brunt of the 
Afghan attack. From the centre Ustad ‘All with his artillery and 
Mustafa with his match-locks began their action. Ibrahim’s centre 
gave way and the Afghans, beset on all sides by arrows and fire and 
crowded into a narrow space with no room to use their arms, could 
neither advance nor retreat. The battle ended at noon when the 
Afghans were completely routed and took to flight, leaving some 
twenty thousand dead, including Sultan Ibrahim Lodi. The supe¬ 
rior generalship and strategy of Babur, the higher discipline and 


34 


BABUR 


morale of his troops, and the discontent rampant among the Afghan 
troops were the secrets of his easy victory. The efficacy of Babur’s 
artillery at Rarilpat has been over-estimated; it seems Babur had only 
two guns and, even if he had more, it appears from his own descrip- 
tion that he won at Panlpat a bow-man’s victory. 12 The importance 
of the battle, great as it was, has also been exaggerated. It sealed 
the fate of the Lodi dynasty and marks the completion of the second 
stage of Babur’s conquest of India. It did nothing more; it could 
not finally decide the fate of Hindusthan. 

From the field of Panlpat Babur marched to Delhi. On 27 
April, 1526, the khutba was read in his name in the Jami‘ 
Mosque and the king of Kabul was hailed as the Emperor of 
Hindusthan. 13 From Delhi Babur proceeded to Agra which Prince 
Humayun had already captured. Agra became Babur’s new Samar- 
qand. Here Humayun presented him a big and precious diamond 
which he had received from the family of the late Raja Vikramajit 
of Gwalior as a mark of gratitude for his chivalrous treatment. 
This has been identified with the world-famous Koh-i-Nur- u Babur, 
however, affectionately returned it to his son as a gift. 

Babur had won the throne of Delhi but not yet the empire 
of Hindusthan. The various Afghan leaders rose against the Mughul 
usurper from different centres: Sambhal, Bayana, Mewat, Dholpur, 
Gwalior, Raprl, Etawa 15 and Kalpi. They found a pretender in 
Ibrahim Lodi’s brother, Mahmud Lodi. Nasir Khan Lohanll and 
Ma‘ruf Farmull still held Kanauj and the country beyond the Gahga 
(Ganges), and the Afghans in Bihar had set up Bihar Khan, son of 
Darya Khan, as their king. Besides, Babur experienced much diffi¬ 
culty in procuring provisions for his army on account of the hostility 
of the people, and his officers, weary of the oppressive summer of 
Hindusthan, murmured for the cool air of Kabul. Babur discouraged 
their timid conservatism and his eloquence hushed all dissentients; 
Khvaja Kilan, the only notable exception, was sent to Ghazni as its 
governor. 

The Afghan chiefs now realized that, unlike Timur, Babur had 
come to conquer and not merely to raid, and many laid down their 
arms; among them were such notable; Afghan leaders as Shaikh Baya- 
zld and Mahmud Khan Loharil. Babur had now two major enemies to 
face: the Afghans of the East who had set up Bihar Khan as their 
king, and the Rajputs in the south-west under Rana Sahgram Simha 
of Mewar. The Afghan menace seemed more imminent and Huma¬ 
yun was sent with an expeditionary force against them. In a bril¬ 
liant campaign Humayun took Jaunpur, Ghazlpur and Kalpi; and 


35 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


line was not continuous but passages were provided wide enough 
for a hundred and fifty horsemen to march out abreast. 10a 

For eight days from 12 April to 19 April the two armies stood 
face to face. With a view to drawing the enemy into battle, Babur 
sent out four or five thousand men on 20 April to attempt a night 
surprise, and though it failed on account of the negligence of the 
troops, it had the desired effect of making the enemy move. On 21 
April at dawn the Afghans were on the move in battle array. As 
Babur noticed it, he bade his men take their station and drew them 
up according to the traditional formation of the Turks and the Mon¬ 
gols. 

Babur took his position in the centre. The right centre was le;d by 
Chim Timur Sultan and the left centre by the Chief Minister Mir ‘All 
Khalifa. Humayuin, assisted by Khvaja Kilan, commanded the right 
wing and in charge of the left wing were Muhammad Sultan Mirza 
and Mahdi Khvaja. On the right and left extremities of the entire 
line there were two flying columns to wheel round on the enemy 
and take them in the flank and rear. The van was commanded by 
Khusrav Kukultash and Muhammad ‘All Jang, and the reserve by 
‘Abd-ul-'Aziz, the Master of the Horse. Along the front of the entire 
line, protected by the palisade of carts and breastworks, were placed 
the artillery under Ustad ‘All on the right side and the musketeers 
under Mustafa on the left. From his key position in thei centre 
Babur could have a view of the activities of the entire army. 

Ibrahim Lodi had with him a force of 100,000 men and 1,000 ele' 
phants while Babur’s army was 24,000 strong. 11 The Afghan army 
came straight on at a rapid march, and as they came near his de¬ 
fences, they hesitated and halted, but the ranks behind still pressed 
forward and caused great confusion among the whole force. Babur 
seized the opportunity and sent out his flanking columns to wheel 
round the Afghans and deliver a violent attack on their rear, while 
his right and left wings charged straight on. Babur sent timely re¬ 
inforcement to the left wing under Mahdi Khvaja which was hard 
pressed, as well as to the right wing which felt the brunt of the 
Afghan attack. From the centre Ustad ‘All with his artillery and 
Mustafa with his match-locks began their action. Ibrahim’s centre 
gave way and the Afghans, beset on all sides by arrows and fire and 
crowded into a narrow space with no room to use their arms, could 
neither advance nor retreat. The battle ended at noon when the 
Afghans were completely routed and took to flight, leaving some 
twenty thousand dead, including Sultan Ibrahim Lodi. The supe¬ 
rior generalship and strategy of Babur, the higher discipline and 


34 


BABUR 


morale of his troops, and the discontent rampant among the Afghan 
troops were the secrets of his easy victory. The efficacy of Babur’s 
artillery at Panlpat has been over-estimated; it seems Babur had only 
two guns and, even if he had more, it appears from his own descrip- 
tion that he won at Panlpat a bow-man’s victory. 12 The importance 
of the battle, great as it was, has also been exaggerated. It sealed 
the fate of the Lodi dynasty and marks the completion of the second 
stage of Babur’s conquest of India. It did nothing more; it could 
not finally decide the fate of Hindusthan. 

From the field of Panlpat Babur marched to Delhi. On 27 
April, 1526, the khutba was read in his name in the Jami‘ 
Mosque and the king of Kabul was hailed as the Emperor of 
Hindusthan. 13 From Delhi Babur proceeded to Agra which Prince 
Humayun had already captured. Agra became Babur’s new Samar- 
qand. Here Humayun presented him a big and precious diamond 
which he had rejceived from the family of the late Raja Vikramajit 
of Gwalior as a mark of gratitude for his chivalrous treatment. 
This has been identified with the world-famous Koh-i-Nur . 14 Babur, 
however, affectionately returned it to his son as a gift. 

Babur had won the throne of Delhi but not yet the empire 
of Hindusthan. The various Afghan leaders rose against the Mughul 
usurper from different centres: Sambhal, Bayana, Mewat, Dholpur, 
Gwalior, RaprI, Etiawa 15 and Kalpi. They found a pretender in 
Ibrahim Lodi’s brother, Mahmud Lodi. Nasir Khan LohanJI and 
Ma‘ruf Farmull still held Kanauj and the country beyond the Ganga 
(Ganges), and the Afghans in Bihar had set up Bihar Khan, son of 
Darya Khan, as their king. Besides, Babur experienced much diffi¬ 
culty in procuring provisions for his army on account of the hostility 
of the people, and his officers, weary of the oppressive summer of 
Hindusthan, murmured for the cool air of Kabul. Babur discouraged 
their timid conservatism and his eloquence hushed all dissentients; 
Khvaja Kilan, the only notable exception, was sent to Ghazni as its 
governor. 

The Afghan chiefs now realized that, unlike Timur, Babur had 
come to conquer and not merely to raid, and many laid down their 
arms; among them were such notable; Afghan leaders as Shaikh Bay^a- 
zld and Mahmud Khan Loharil. Babur had now two major enemies to 
face: the Afghans of the East who had set up Bihar Khan as their 
king, and the Rajputs in the south-west under Rana Sangram Simha 
of Mewar. The Afghan menace seemed more imminent and Huma¬ 
yun was sent with an expeditionary force against them. In a bril¬ 
liant campaign Humayun took Jaunpur, Ghazlpur and Kalpi; and 


35 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Gwalior was obtained by treachery. About this time (December, 
1526) Babur narrowly escaped death from poison mixed with his 
food by Sultan Ibrahim’s mother through royal servants. 

Babur now turned his attention to the arch-enemy, Rana San¬ 
gram Simha. This undisputed leader of the Rajput confederacy was 
an indefatigable fighter, with one arm and one eye lost and eighty 
scars in his body. He had sent a friendly embassy to Babur at Kabul 
and offered his help against Ibrahim, but the situation had now 
changed and Sangram Simha lost no time in declaring war against 
his rival for the mastery of Hindusthan. Babur declared his first 
jihad (holy war) against the ‘infidels’ and sent reinforcement to 
Bayana which had been besieged by the united forces of Hasan 
Khan of Mewat and Rana Sangram Simha. On 11 February, 1527, 
Babur himself marched against the enemy and encamped at Slkrl 
where he was joined by the garrison from Bayana. In some skir¬ 
mishes which followed, the Rajputs inflicted defeat upon his advance- 
guard. RaprI and Chandwar 16 fell into the hands of the Afghans; 
Sambhal and Kanauj were abandoned; Gwalior was besieged by the 
Hindus; and the Indians who had joined his ranks began to desert. 
It was at this critical juncture that Babur made the memorable 
renunciation of his besetting sin, wine, and restored the morale of 
his troops by a stirring oration. 17 He then pushed on and met the 
enemy near Khanua, a village some thirty-seven miles west of Agra. 

Here on 17 March, 1527, the battle took place. 18 Babur em¬ 
ployed the sarnie tactics that he had employed at Panlpat. Along 
the front of the line were placed groups of carts, connected together 
by chains of iron and breastworks of wheeled woodien tripods fast¬ 
ened by ropes of hide, and behind them were the artillery and the 
match-locks. As at Panlpat, Babur himself commandied the centre. 
On the right of the centre was Chin Timur Sultan and the right wing 
was led by Humayun. The left wing was under the general com¬ 
mand of Khalifa who was assisted by Mahdl Khvaja and Muhammad 
Sultan Mlrza. Mustafa with his match-locks was posted in front 
of the right wing while Ustad ‘All with his ordnance stood in front 
of the centre. On the two extremities were the flanking columns 
( Tulghama). Of the numerical strength of Babur’s army there is 
no (estimate, and though the Mughul estimate of the Rajput army 
numbering 200,000 was exaggerated, there can be no doubt about 
their preponderating numerical superiority. According to Tod, the 
Rana could place himself at the head of seven Rajas, nine Raos’ one 
hundred and four chieftains, eighty thousand horsemen and five 
hundred war-elephants. 19 Its accuracy may, however, be doubted. 


36 


BABUR 


The battle began about half-past nine in the morning with a 
magnificent charge by the Rajput left wing upon the Mughul right. 
The timely reinforcement under Chin Timur Sultan saved the hard- 
pressed right of Babur. Mustafa brought forward his tripods and 
culverins and opened fire upon the assailants. With fresh reinforce¬ 
ments from the centre and Mustafa’s fire, the Mughul right repulsed 
the increasing attacks of the enemy and inflicted heavy losses upon 
them. The Rajputs now fiercely charged the Mughul left wing, 
but it stood fast while the flanking column wheeled round and fell 
upon the rear of the enemy. The Mughul artillery (match-locks and 
stone missiles discharged by ‘All Quit) began to rain death, but the 
Rajputs by the sheer weight of superior numbers maintained un¬ 
ceasing pressure. Babur had to send his reserve and then led his 
centre forward. The Rajputs then made the last desperate charge 
upon the Mughul right and left wings. In the evening, after ten 
hours’ hard contest, the Rajputs were completely routed, and the 
Rana, badly wounded, took to flight. The battle of Khanua is pro¬ 
bably even more important than the battle of Panipat; the one broke 
the unstable power of an Afghan dynasty, while the other shattered 
‘India’s most splendid chivalry’, the powerful Rajput confederacy, 
which was making a bid for the mastery of Hindusthan. The battle 
of Khanua decided the issue in favour of Babur and marked the most 
important stage in his conquest of Hindusthan. Agra and not Kabul 
became henceforward the centre of his power. 

Babur now assumed the title of ‘Ghazi’ and, with a view to 
reducing Mewat, marched into its capital, Alwar (7 April, 1527). 
Humayun was despatched to Badakhshan with a large force to keep 
his trans-Indian territory secure. Towards the end of the year 
Babur led his troops against Medini Rai, a Rajput chief of influence 
and king-maker in Malwa, who held the great fortress of Chanderi 
on the north-east of Malwa. He encamped before Chanderi on 21 
January, 1528, and, after a week of fruitless negotiation for peace, 
besieged it on the 28th. After a desperate fight Babur took it next 
morning in spite of the heroic sacrifice of the garrison, which was 
almost tantamount to suicide. 

On 2 February, 1528, Babur set out on an eastern campaign 
against the Afghans under Biban who had routed the Mughul army 
in Ajodhya and seized Lakhnau. Arriving at Kanauj, he crossed 
the Ganga (Ganges) in the middle of March by constructing a pon¬ 
toon bridge, defeated the Afghans, and hotly pursued them as far as 
Ajodhya. Biban escaped to Bengal, and Bayazid as well as Ma‘ruf 
also took to heels. But in the beginning of the next year Babur 
had to set out on his second great eastern campaign against a formid- 


37 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


able coalition of the Afghan chiefs who had all rallied under Sultan 
Mahmud Lodi, the brother of Ibrahim Lodi, in Bihar, and gathered 
an army of 100,000 men. It was the last great stand of the Afghans 
against the Mughul usurper. In three months the Mughul army 
arrived at Chunar (April, 1529), when Mahmud, who was besieging 
it, took to flight. Sher Khan abandoned Banaras, several Afghan 
leaders surrendered to Babur, and Mahmud Lodi, finding himself 
deserted, sought refuge with the Bengal army which was massed on 
the frontier. Sultan Nusrat Shah of Bengal had only recently sent 
an envoy to Babur at Agra offering his submission, and Babur had 
no intention of invading his territory. Babur, however, was bent on 
chastising the Afghan rebels, and as he moved eastward, he found the 
Bengal troops standing in his way at the confluence of the Gahga 
(Ganges) and the Gogra. On 6 May, 1529, was fought the battle 
of Gogra, Babur’s third great battle in Hindusthan. He brilliantly 
forced the passage of the Gogra under heavy fire from the Bengal 
artillery, while ‘Askari, crossing at a different place, attacked the 
flank of the Bengal army. After a fierce struggle the enemy, at¬ 
tacked in front, rear and flank, broke and fled. The battle of Gogra 
is the supplement to the battles of Panlpat and Khanua; these three 
battles made Babur master of Northern India. The battle of Gogra 
frustrated the last stand of the Afghans. Ma‘ruf and several other 
Afghan chiefs joined him, while Biban, Bayazid and Mahmud Lodi 
retired. Jalal Khan, the late boy-king of Bihar, acknowledged Babur 
as overlord and a treaty of peace was concluded with Nusrat Shah, 
by which Babur’s sovereignty in Bihar was recognized. All seemed 
quiet in the eastern front. This was the last exploit of Babur’s 
stormy career. 

Babur seemed to have never lost his trans-Indian ambition, the 
dream of Samarqand. The report of the battle of Jam (26 Sep¬ 
tember, 1528) in which Shah Tahmasp had inflicted a crushing defeat 
upon the Uzbegs revived it, and in his letter to Humayun, dated 
13 November, 1528, Babur enjoined his son to undertake an ex¬ 
pedition against the Uzbegs in Hissar, Samarqand or Marv as might 
seem advisable. Humayun marched upon Samarqand and occupied 
Hissar, but he ultimately failed, when Shah Tahmasp left for the west 
against the Turks. Babur was highly displeased at the failure of 
his son. Probably with a view to remaining near his father whose 
health was failing, Humayun suddenly left Badakhshan and arrived 
at Agra on 27 June (1529). Sa‘id Khan, the ruler of Kashghar, 
marched on Badakhshan and besieged Qil‘a Zafar. Babur was highly 
displeased at his son’s conduct and sent Mirza Sulaiman to his father’s 


38 


BABUR 


kingdom and compelled Sa‘Id Khan to recognize him as the prince ol 
Badakhshan. 

Humayun retired to his Jaglr at Sambhal, but after six months 
fell seriously ill and was brought to Agra. The skill of the best 
physicians failed to cure him and Babur, in accordance with the 
suggestion of the saint Mir Abu Baqa to sacrifice the most precious 
thing in his possession, offered to sacrifice his life. He walked three 
times round his sick son and exclaimed that he had borne away the 
disease. 20 Shortly after, Humayun recovered and Babur, whose health 
had already been failing, was taken ill, and this illness continued 
for two or three months. Mir Khalifa, who had a poor opinion of 
Humayun, made an attempt to place Mahdl Khvaja, Babur’s brother- 
in-law, on the throne, but he revised his opinion on account of the 
arrogance of his nominee. 21 Babur nominated Humayun as his suc¬ 
cessor, and a few days later, passed away on 30 December, 1530. 

III. Personality of Babur 

Inheriting, as a boy of eleven, but the shadow of a petty king¬ 
dom in Central Asia, Babur died at the age of forty-eight, master 
of extensive dominions, stretching from the Oxus in the West to 
Bihar in the east and the foot of the Himalayas in the north 
to Malwa and Rajasthan in the south. He could now compare him 
self with the Sultan of Turkey and the Shah of Persia. His perma* 
nent place in history rests no doubt upon his conquests in Hindus- 
than which paved the way for the foundation of an empire that 
excelled, in glory and greatness, the ephemeral structure of Chingiz 
as well as the ill-cemented empire of Timur whom he emulated. It 
is, however, in the military sense that Babur can be regarded as the 
founder of the Mughul empire in India. The monarchy of Babur’s 
ideal was ‘a divine inheritance’—the sacrosanct monarchy of Timur; 
the monarchy that he established in reality was a ‘human compro 
mise’. He had neither the time to organize nor the genius for re¬ 
construction; he failed in the task of the re-creation of a new theory 
of kingship and the foundation of a stable, centralized polity for his 
far-flung empire. As in Kabul, so in India, the government that he 
set up was saifl (by the sword) and not qalarni (by the pen). A 
considerable part of the empire, about one-fifth, was held by old 
‘zamlndars and rdis 9 in full internal sovereignty. The territory 
directly under his authority he assigned to his great amirs who were 
responsible for the administration of the area under their control; 
the monarch had only nominal authority over local administration. 
In fact, Babur adopted the old obsolete administrative machinery of 
the Lodls. He was an organizer of victory but not an organizer of 
polity, great conqueror but no ‘architect of empire’. If he is ‘the 


39 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


link between Tamerlane and Akbar’, Babur in this respect seems 
rather nearer his famous ancestor than his truly great grandson. 

Babur is one of the most fascinating characters of history. With 
iron nerves and robust optimism he combined the virtues of industry, 
daring and vigour. Love of action was the dominant note of his cha¬ 
racter: from the age of eleven he never observed the Ramzan twice 
in the same place. Intrepid as a soldier, a great strategist as a 
general, prompt to take advantage of the enemy’s weakness as a 
commander, he became an organizer of victory. He had little re¬ 
gard for the sanctity of human life: the massacre of Bajaur, the 
cold-blooded murder of prisoners, and the inhuman punishments 
which are referred to in his Memoirs only prove that he inherited 
the Mongol ferocity and Turkish savagery of his ancestors. Yet he 
was capable of generosity and chivalry on occasions. He posses¬ 
sed a joyous nature, strong affections, faculty of judging men and 
events, and a charming personality. He was fond of gardening and 
architecture, and proficient in music. He was an orthodox Sunni, 
though for political reasons he had to conform to some Shi‘ite rites. 
To compare Babur’s ‘moral courage’ in this respect with Akbar’s 
religious eclecticism is as inaccurate as it is unjust. Though not a 
zealous bigot like the Safavl Shahs of Persia, he could never dream 
of the sulh-i-kull (universal toleration) cult of his grandson. True 
to his age, he rejoiced in the glory of Jihad (holy war against in¬ 
fidels) and the majesty of the title of Ghcizi. To him Sunnism was 
the ‘pure faith’, Shiism ‘heresy’, and a Shiah was ‘a rank heretic’. With 
righteous satisfaction he justifies and records the cruel massacre of 
Bajaur because the victims were infidels. 22 An incorrigible but re¬ 
pentant drunkard, he was keenly sensitive to the beauties of nature. 
His description of the flora and fauna of Hindusthan reveals his 
quickness of observation and his marvellous interest in natural his¬ 
tory. The sweeping condemnation of Hindusthan—its people as well 
as its culture—betrays as much his superficial acquaintance with, 
as his supreme contempt for, the land he conquered to stay in. His 
mind was as active as his body. In him were combined the vigour 
and stubbornness of the Mongol, the hardihood and capability of 
the Turk, and the culture and suavity of the Persian. He was a 
master of TurkI, his mother tongue, as well as Persian, the language 
of culture, the ‘French’ of Muslim Asia. His autobiography in TurkI 
is a permanent contribution to literature. He was a poet of no mean 
order in both the languages. He wrote a Diwdn in Turk! and a col¬ 
lection of Masnavis called the Mubayyin which is a treatise on Muslim 
law. He was the author of a TurkI treatise on prosody which was 
discovered in 1923 in a manuscript found in Paris. 


40 



BABUR 


Though he conquered Iiindusthan and laid the first stone of 
the splendid fabric of the Mughul empire, he had no love lost for the 
country. He sighed for the hills of Farghana, the blue domes and 
glittering minars of Samarqand, and the verdure and flowers of 
Kabul, where, by his own choice, he lies buried. 23 The first Mughul 
emperor of India died, as he had lived, as a Central Asian. 


APPENDIX 

(Note hy the Editor on Foot-note 12 and the passage in p. 35 to which 

it relates) 

The author of this chapter has challenged the generally accepted 
view about the size and nature of Babur’s artillery and the very 
important role it played in his victories at Panipat and Khanua. 
As this is a very important question, a more detailed discussion is 
necessary. So far as the general view is concerned, it would suffice 
to refer to Rushbrook Williams and Denison Ross, two of the latest 
writers on the subject, who had before them the English translation 
of the Bdburmama by A. S. Beveridge whom the author cites as his 
authority. The following sentences from the description of the bat¬ 
tle of Panipat in An Empire Builder of the 16th Century by L . F. 
Rushbrook Williams leave no doubt about his view that the artillery 
played a very great role—greater than bow and arrow—in Babur‘s 
victory at Panipat: 

“The ordnance and match-locks poured in a withering fire from 
the centre” (p. 136). “Ustad ‘All and Mustafa (in charge of Babur’s 
artillery) rained death upon the crowded ranks, and the unfortunate 
Afghans fell by thousands beneath the swords and arrows of the 

Mughals....For some hours the slaughter continued”.“a 

total death-roll of some twenty thousand.a terrible testimony 

alike to the skill of the leader and to the deadliness of his scientific 
combination of cavalry and artillery” (p. 137). 

As regards ‘Khanua’, Rushbrook Williams writes: 

“Along the front of the line were the artillery-men and the 
musketeers, secure in the shelter of the chained wagons and of the 
tripod-like breastworks. Mustafa, with the match-locks and cul- 
verins, was posted in advance of the right wing, while Ustad ‘All, 
with the heavy ordnance, held the ground in front of the centre.” 
(p. 149). “Mustafa, the artillery-man, trundled his culverins and 
his tripods into the open field, and from this position of advantage 
commenced a destructive fire with small-calibre ordnance and match¬ 
locks. Sc great was the effect that the morale of the discomfited 
Mughals was restored” (p. 153). “Thus supported, and aided in 
addition by Mustafa’s deadly firearms, the Mughal right beat off all 
attacks and inflicted severe losses upon the enemy.” (p. 154). “On 
the one hand the Mughal artillery caused fearful carnage in the 
crowded Rajput ranks, and on the other, the unceasing pressure of 
superior numbers reduced Babur’s men almost to their last gasp”. 


41 





THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


(p. 154). (There was) “a clear passage; down the middle for Ustad 
‘All’s ‘great balls’. Simultaneously, it would appear, a strong body 
of match-lock men was brought from the right wing, whose fire sup¬ 
plemented the efforts of Ustad ‘AIL This clever manoeuvre was crown¬ 
ed with success. The charge of the household troops forced back 
the Rajput centre, and the; firearms blasted a lane of death into the 
thick of the foe. The match-lock-men then advanced from behind 
the artillery, trundling their tripods in front of them, and the ground 
was quickly occupied by the Mughal infantry. The Padshah in 
person now ordered a general advance in the centre. The guns 
were moved forward, and Ustad‘AlI redoubled his activities. . . .On 
the; left, where the pressure was greatest, the Rajputs came within 
an ace of breaking through. But the advantage gained by their anta¬ 
gonists was too marked, and the toll taken by the artillery was too 
severe. Sullenly the Rajput chivalry ebbed back”, (pp. 154-5). 

Denison Ross writes in the Cambridge History of India, Vol. IV. 

1. Re. Pdnipat 

“Between eve^y pair of guns there were six or seven movable 
breastworks ( tura ) for the protection of the matchlock men” (CHI. 
IV. 12). “At this juncture Babur ordered his gunners to open fire, 
and then the main attacking force of the Afghans found themselves 
exposed to arrows on either flank and to shot or bullets in front”, 
(p. 13). 

2. Re. Khdnua 

“The artillery line was commanded by. . . .Mustafa Rumi, the 

Turkish gunner, who brought forward the carts and guns.and 

broke the enemy’s ranks”. 24 (CHI. 17). 

These descriptions are based on Babur’s own account in his auto¬ 
biography, which is, of course, the most important and, in this case, 
the sole authority available to us. Unfortunately, a few crucial 
words in Turkish (the language in which the book is written) are 
obscure and have been differently interpreted by different scholars. 
Mrs. Beveridge, in her translation of the book, refers to the match¬ 
lock men and guns at PanJIpat, but in a foot-note states that Babur 
could not possibly have a large number of guns with him, and adds, 
“he can be read as indicating that he had two guns only” (pp. 468-9, 
f.n. 3). But her translation contains the following: “Ustad ‘Al'I- 
quli made good discharge of firing! shots”, “Mustafa made excellent 
discharge of Zarb-zan shots.” In a foot-note she observes: 

“The size of these artillery at this time is very uncertain. The 
word firing! is now (1826 A.D.) used in the Deccan for a swivel. 
At the present day, zarb-zan in common usage is a small species of 
swivel. Both words in Babur’s time appear to have been used 
for field cannon”, (pp. 473-4, f.n. 3). 

As regards Khanua also we read in the translation of Beveridge: 

“This Mustafa of Rumi had the carts brought forward and broke 
the ranks of pagans with match-lock and culverin”. Again in ornate 


42 



BABUR 


language we are told that “the match-lock men poured a ruddy 

crepuscle of the blood of those ill-fated pagans.UstacTAlI-qulI 

did deeds of valour, discharging stones of such size. ..and, were 
such stones discharged against a hill, broad of base and high of sum¬ 
mit, it would become like carded wool. Such stones Ustad £ Ali-quli 
discharged at the iron-clad fortress of the pagan ranks and by this 
discharge of stones, and abundance of culverins and match-locks (?) 
destroyed many of builded bodies of the pagans. The match-lock 
men of the royal centre, in obedience to orders, going from behind 
the carts into the midst of the battle; each one of them made many 
a pagan taste of the poison of death.” (pp. 570-71). 

So it would appear that even according to this translation— 
which broadly justifies the accounts of Rushbrook Williams and 
Denison Ross—the role played by artillery, both match-lock and 
guns, was a very important one. Besides, the description is hardly 
compatible with the view that Babur had only two guns. 

As regards the importance of the battle of Bampat, also, the view 
taken in this chapter differs from those of many, including Rush- 
brook Williams, who observes about the battle of Panflpat that “from 
the political point of view it was eminently decisive.” (p. 137). 


1. Babur never boasts of his Mongol ancestry; he invariably refers to the Mongols 
with supreme contempt, though he owed a great deal to them. 

2. We accept the version of Babur. Khvand Amir, Bk III, Ch. iii, p. 192 and 
Firishta, Vol. I, p. 191 say that he was the sixth son of Abu Sa‘Id MIrza. 

3. Muqlm Arghun married a daughter of Ulugh Beg. 

4. In the sarkdr of Bhakkar under the suba of Multan, Jarrett, Aln-i-Akbarl, 
ii, p. 334. 

5. On the Alingar river in Lamghan, Cf. Raverty, Notes on Afghanistan, p. 103. 

6. Hablb-us-Siyar, Bk.,III, Ch. iv, p. 66; Tarlkh-i-‘Alamdrai ‘Abbasl, p. 30; 
Ahsan-ut-Tawdrlkh, p. 127. R.S. Poole, British Museum Catalogue of Coins 
of Persian Shahs, 1887, pp. XXIV et. seq. 

6a. Some historians hold the view that Najm Beg was sent by the Shah to 
punish Babur for his failure to propagate Shiism in his territories (Mrs. 
Beveridge, Memoirs of Babur II. Transl. p. 359; Rushbrook Williams, Babur, 
pp. 1061—7), but this does not seem probable. In that case, the Persians would 
not have so strongly complained of Babur’s treachery in the battle of Ghazdawan. 
Out of political expediency the Shah could not have alienated Babur in the 
face of the grave Uzbeg menace. 

7. Tod, Annals, Ed. by Crooke, Vol. I, p. 349. For details of Ibrahim’s reign, 
vide Chapter IX of Vol. VI of this series. 

8. Firishta regards the two invasions of 925 A.H. (A.D. 1519) as the first and 
the second (Brigg’s Firishta, Vol. II, pp. 35-6). 

9. Darmesteter—La grande inscription de Qandahar, Journal Asiatique, 1890, 

p. 210. 

10. Fourth according to Firishta (Vol. II, pp. 37-8) and probably Babur as well. 

Abu-’l-Fazl also suggests that this was the fourth; he does not recognize 

43 




THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


the invasion of September, 1519, and that of 1520. A. N.: Eng. Trans., Vol. 1, 
pp. 234-40. 

10a. Rushbrook Williams, p. 129. 

11. Ahmad Yadgar puts the Afghan force at 50,000 cavalry and 2,000 elephants 
and the Mughul army at 24,000; A.S.B. text, p. 95. Babur, in his autobiography, 
estimates Ibrahim's army at 1 lakh horsemen and 1,000 elephants and his own 
army at 12,000 only, including non-combatants. It is not possible properly to 
ascertain the size of Babur’s artillery. 

12. The wrong translation of the word araba as gun-carriages (but which really 
means baggage carts) has been responsible for the impression that Panlpat 
was a triumph of artillery. Vide A.S. Beveridge, Babur-ndma f.n. 3 pp. 
468-9; Pdnipat by C. Collin Davies in Encyclopaedia of Islam, Vol. Ill, pp. 1025- 
26. (Cf. Appendix by the Editor). 

13. A. S. Beveridge, Babur-ndma, Vol. II, p. 476. 

14. See Nature, 1890, 1891; The Imperial and Asiatic Quarterly Review, April, 
1899, pp. 370-389. 

15. 26° 58' N., 78° 36' E., 44 miles south-west of Mainpuri town. 

16. Chandwar is an ancient place of considerable historical importance, standing 
on the left bank of the Yamuna at a distance of three miles south-west from 
Firuzabad (Agra Dt. Gazetteer, Allahabad, 1905). 

17. While the naivete of his vow should not be doubted, it must be confessed 
that he broke it; vide Tarikh-i-Shdhi, p. 128. The statement of S. Lane- 
Poole that ‘he never took wine again’ ( Babur, p. 153) seems incorrect. 

18. A. S. Beveridge, Babur-ndma, III, pp. 558, 563. 

19. See Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan, Ed. Crooke, Vol. 1, pp. 348-57 for 
the battle according to the Rajput version. (It is, however, interesting to 
record in this connection that the army of the Rana included twelve thousand 
horse led by Hasan Khan Mewatl and ten thousand horse led by Mahmud 
Khan, son of Sikandar Lodi, and the former died fighting (Babur, Memoirs, 
pp. 562, 573). This is, perhaps, the only instance known in Indian history of 
Muslim nobles fighting with an army under a Hindu king against the Muslims.) 
[Editor, whose attention was drawn to this passage by Dr. A. K. Majumdar]. 

20. Babur believed he had done so; it was generally believed at the time. A 
picture illustrating the incident occurs in Tarikh-i-Khdnddn-i-Timuriya, re¬ 
produced by A. S. Beveridge in the Humdyun-nama, p. 104. 

21. Tabaqdt-t-Akbari, Eng. Trans. II, pp. 41-44. 

22. The Bhopal document in which Babur prescribes for his son Humayun a 
policy of perfect toleration towards the Hindus and the Shiahs and even ad¬ 
vises him to refrain from cow slaughter seems to be spurious. For con¬ 
trary view see Dr. Syed Mahmud, The Indian Review, August, 1923, pp. 498-99. 

23. He was buried at Agra where he died. Several years later his body was re¬ 
moved to its present grave at Kabul. 

24. Sir Jadunath Sarkar also holds similar views. Cf. Military History of India, 
Calcutta, 1969; pp. 50-52. 


44 


CHAPTER III 


HUMAYUN 

Four days after the death of Babur on 30 December, 1530, 
Humayun ascended the throne at the age of twenty-three. 1 The 
history of Humayun, except towards the end, offers a record of un¬ 
successful struggle for dominion—a tragedy of errors and failures. 
Humayun’s personal character and the circumstances in which he was 
placed equally contributed to this. From the very beginning, Humayun 
was beset with troubles. As there was no fixed law of succession 
among the Timurids, not only Humayun’s brothers but every prince 
of royal blood aspired to the throne or sovereign power: the arch¬ 
enemy Kamran and his understudy ‘Askari, the vacillating Hindal, 
and the two grandsons of the grand monarch of Herat—that arch- 
rebel Muhammad Zaman Mlrza, Humayun’s brother-in-law, and his 
political disciple, Muhammad Sultan Mlrza, Humayun’s cousin. Ba¬ 
bur’s occupation of India was ‘unrooted, military and the sport of war’. 
The army was a heterogeneous body of adventurers—Chaghatai, 
Uzbeg, Mughul, Persian, Afghan and Hindusthanl. The nobles 
(amirs) were too conscious of their own importance and authority, 
while the more prominent of them did not consider the throne be¬ 
yond the range of their ambition. On the borders of the infant 
Mughul kingdom were two powers to reckon with: the kingdom 
of Gujarat which was fast growing into a menacing factor under Ba¬ 
hadur Shah and the Afghans who had rallied in Bihar and consi¬ 
dered Humayun as but a usurper’s son. In Sher Khan Sur they 
produced a truly great leader who might have proved a serious 
rival to Babur. His indolent son was hardly the pilot to steer the 
ship of State on such a stormy voyage. 

The history of Humayun is a drama in four acts. The first act 
offers the story of the hectic ten years from 1530 to 1540 during 
which he struggled for defending his dominion; the second unfolds 
the tragedy of exile from 1540 to 1545 when he had no place under 
the sun and sought his fortune in Sind, Rajasthan and in Persia; 
the third tells the story of the period from 1545 to 1554, when from 
his bases at Qandahar and at Kabul, he made preparations for the 
recovery of his dominion; and the fourth deals with the restoration 
during 1555-1556 when he recovered the throne of Delhi and a 
fragment of his kingdom. 



THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


I. STRUGGLE (1530-1540) 

In accordance with Babur’s dying advice to be generous towards 
his brothers, Humayun allowed Mlrza Kamran to govern the terri¬ 
tories of Kabul and Qandahar, as well as the western Punjab, while 
he assigned Sambhal to his third brother ‘Askarl, and Alwar to the 
youngest, Hindal. The position of Humayun was full of peril; he 
had to face the combined opposition of the Afghans, nominally under 
the leadership of Sultan Mahmud Lodi, the brother of the late Sultan 
Ibrahim Lodi, but under the actual command of Biban Khan Jalwani 
and Shaikh Bayazld Qarmali, 'heroes of a hundred battles’. From 
Bihar, now their vantage ground, they had marched triumphantly 
towards Lakhnau and forced Sultan Junaid Barlas, the Mughul 
governor of Jaunpur, to retire. Due to indiscipline, disunion and 
treachery among the Afghans, Humayun easily won a victory at the 
battle of Dadrah (1532), 2 and the main force of the Afghans was 
routed and dispersed. There was, however, She,r Khan, who had 
deserted them and thus served Mughul interest at the battle, 23 but 
was in possession of the strategic fort of Chunar on the Gahga 
(Ganges), south-west of Banaras. Humayun marched to Chunar and 
laid siege to it. The siege lasted for four months when Humayun, 
anxious to return to Agra on account of the aggressive movements 
of Bahadur Shah of Gujarat, accepted the terms of Sher Khan who 
agreed to hold Chunar as a vassal of the Mughul emperor (Decem¬ 
ber, 1531). 

After returning to Agra, Humayun, generous brother as he was, 
not only acquiesced in Mlrza Kamran’s occupation of Lahore during 
his absence but added Multan and Hissar (Flruza) to his territory. 
In August, 1533, he laid the foundation of a new city in Delhi named 
Dlnpanah (believed by some to be the site of old Indraprastha) 
which was completed in nine months. This brief respite was soon 
disturbed in July, 1534, when Muhammad Zaman Mlrza and Mu¬ 
hammad Sultan Mlrza, who had rebelled soon after Humayun’s ac¬ 
cession but had been kindly pardoned and reinstated in their ydglrs, 
again raised the standard of rebellion in Bihar. They were defeat¬ 
ed and imprisoned; Sultan Mlrza was blinded but Zaman Mlrza es¬ 
caped to the court of Sultan Bahadur in Gujarat. Humayun now 
turned his attention again towards Sher Khan and marched up to 
Kanar in KalpI district, but had to hasten back to Agra on account 
of the alarming successes of Bahadur Shah who had entered into 
a pact with Sher Khan that each would open a second front for his 
ally when attacked by the Mughuls. 


46 


HUMAYUN 


Bahadur Shah, who had annexed Malwa to his kingdom (1531) 
and had next year taken from the Rajput chief Silhadi his territory 
of Raisen, Chanderi and Bhilsa, captured Ranthambhor and in 
January, 1533, laid siege to the fort of Chitor. Humayun, who had 
received an appeal for help from the Rajputs, was not prepared to 
meet Bahadur but made a diplomatic move to Gwalior which pos¬ 
sibly prompted the Gujarat king to make peace with the Rana who 
offered it as he failed to receive active help of the Mughul emperor 
(March, 1533). Bahadur, however, took Ajmer and Nagaur and in 
November, 1534, broke the treaty by an unprovoked siege of Chitor. 
Bahadur’s conquest in Rajasthan thus became a direct menace to 
the Mughul territory. Bahadur also gave great offence to Huma¬ 
yun by harbouring notable Afghan leaders like ‘Alam Khan ‘Ala- 
ud-dln Lodi, a son of Sultan Buhlul Lodi, who had once contested 
the throne of Delhi, and his ambitious son Tatar Khan who still 
harped on his father’s claims. Bahadur even sent or rather subsi¬ 
dized a three-pronged campaign led by them, directed against, Ka- 
linjar, Delhi and Agra, and, though Tatar Khan was able to take 
Bayana and his advance columns raided the gates of Agra, the entire 
project ended in a fiasco at Mandrel where he was badly defeated 
by ‘Askarl and slain (November, 1534). Last but not the least, 
Bahadur warmly received the disaffected Mughuls led by that faith¬ 
less arch-rebel Muhammad Zaman Mirza, and added insult to injury 
by sending a most insolent reply to Humayun’s demand for his ex¬ 
tradition. 3 There was now no other way for even slow-moving 
Humayun but to move. 

In November, 1534, Humayun moved from Agra to Gwalior 
where he halted for two months expecting that this would induce 
Bahadur to raise the siege of Chitor. When this proved fruitless, 
Humayun, as expected by Bahadur Shah, allowed him to conquer 
Chitor, the capital city of an infidel ruler, but took advantage of 
Bahadur’s pre-occupation by invading his dominion and proceeding to 
Sarangpur and then to Ujjain in the very heart of Malwa. After 
the fall of Chitor (8 March, 1535) Humayun moved northward 
towards Mandasor where Bahadur came down to meet him. The 
Gujarat sultan, relying upon the advice of his mastergunner Rumi 
Khan, now a traitor conspiring with the enemy, remained on the 
defensive and entrenched himself behind a bulwark of baggage carts 
instead of giving battle in the open field as his nobles suggested. 
Besieged by the Mughul troops, their supplies cut off, the Gujarat 
troops found themselves in a prison of their own making and one 
night Bahadur fled towards Mandu (25 April, 1535). 4 Not until 
the next morning was the real situation revealed to the victorious 


47 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Mughuls who, after plundering his camp, pursued him to Mandu. 
Humayun laid siege to Mandu but realizing the difficulties of be¬ 
sieging such a gigantic fortress, twenty-three miles in circumference 
and defended by a large garrison, he opened negotiation for peace 
on condition that Bahadur should retain Gujarat and surrender the 
resf of his territories to the Mughul emperor. 5 Negotiations were 
going on and there was prospect of peace when the Mughuls, taking 
advantage of the consequent relaxation in the Gujarat garrison, made 
way into the fort through one of its unguarded parts and threw the 
enemy into confusion. Bahadur, roused from sleep, offered some 
resistance but, considering discretion as the better part of valour, 
slipped away to Champaner. Humayun meted out a most severe 
treatment to the people of Mandu: the lanes and bazars of Mandu 
ran red with blood. The reduction of Mandu put Humayun in pos¬ 
session of the whole of Malwa. Emboldened by these successes; 
Humayun invaded Gujarat with a force of thirty thousand horse¬ 
men. As soon as he reached the environs of Champaner, Bahadur 
left the fort in charge of Ikhtiyar Khan and, adopting the scorched- 
earth policy, set fire to the town and fled north to Cambay. Huma¬ 
yun pursued Bahadur as far as Cambay, but missed the enemy 
narrowly as Bahadur had left for Diu a few hours earlier. In re¬ 
venge for a night attack on the Mughul camp by the Kolis, Huma¬ 
yun sacked the town of Cambay for three days. Considering him 
as a spent force, Humayun now left Bahadur to his own fate and 
returned to Champaner t,o undertake the siege of the fort which 
his officers had begun on his first arrival there on 13 June, 1535. 

The celebrated fortress of Champaner towers over the level 
plains of the eastern portion of Gujarat. With some of its sides form¬ 
ed of nearly perpendicular and precipitous rocks and the deep and 
almost impenetrable jungle covering its foot, the fort was consi¬ 
dered impregnable in medieval warfare. The provisions of the 
fort, we are told by the chroniclers, were sufficient against a siege 
of ten years. The Mughuls, who were not well-equipped for siege 
operations, realized that the fort would not surrender in spite of 
their best efforts. Accidentally some villagers, who used to supply 
food secretly to the garrison, fell into the hands of the Mughuls 
while they were reconnoitring their position and were forced to re¬ 
veal the way to a vulnerable point of the fort. Here, at the advice 
of Bairam Beg, Humayun arranged for escalade by driving iron 
spikes into the mortar between the stones; and onq night, as the 
garrison were not so vigilant to guard this side, three hundred Mu¬ 
ghuls scaled the walls of the fort, Humayun being the forty-first. 6 
At dawn, attack was made on the fort in all directions and the 


48 


HUMAYUN 


coup de main so terrified the defenders that three hundred Mughuls 
seized the gate. Many of the garrison were killed, their provisions 
fell into the hands of the Mughuls and munitions ran short, and 
Ikhtiyar Khan, who had taken refuge in the upper citadel, surren¬ 
dered the fort (August, 1535). All the treasures of Gujarat sultans, 
accumulated in the fort by generations, fell into the hands of the 
victorious troops. 

After the conquest of Champaner, Humayun became master of 
all Gujarat as far as the Mahl, but he was so busy in enjoying the 
booty that he did not take steps to consolidate his rule, not even to 
collect revenue. The chiefs and people of Gujarat offered to pay 
revenue even to their exiled king at Diu. Bahadur availed of this 
sentiment and deputed Tmad-ul-Mulk with this duty as well 
as with the task of organizing an army of opposition. As he was 
marching to Ahmadabad, he found himself at the head of a consi¬ 
derable army of fifty thousand horsemen. Humayun now left 
Champaner to meet the enemy. His advance guard under MIrza 
‘Askar! was defeated by Tmad-ul-Mulk, but in the battle that ensued 
at a place between Nadlad and Mahmudabad the latter was routed 
by the main body of the Mughul army. Humayun marched triumph¬ 
antly to Ahmadabad and this marks the climax of his successful career 
in Malwa and Gujarat. 

Humayun now took some steps to settle the government of 
the newly acquired province. He appointed MIrza ‘Askar! viceroy 
of Gujarat with his headquarters at Ahmadabad, and the veteran 
Hindu Beg as his adviser. Officers were posted at strategic places: 
Champaner, Patan, Cambay, Baroda, Broach and Surat. Rejecting 
the sound advice of his counsellors to restore Gujarat to Bahadur 
in view of the alarming situation in Bihar and Bengal, Humayun 
marched on towards Diu in pursuit of Bahadur, but the rebellion of 
local chieftains in Malwa forced him to proceed to Mandu. His ar¬ 
rival at Mandu restored Mughul authority without serious oppo¬ 
sition, but after these great successes he relapsed into his chronic 
lethargy and opiated idleness at the attractive and luxurious capital 
of Malwa. Taking advantage of this inactivity of his enemy, Baha¬ 
dur issued out of his retreat. Humayun’s conquest of Gujarat was 
hardly more than a military occupation and immediately after he 
left for Malwa, a counter revolution began in favour of Bahadur 
Shah who was supported by the local chiefs and the people and 
joined by his scattered troops. The country was in revolt against 
the invader. The Mughul officers were driven from N'avsarl, Broach, 
Surat, Cambay and Patan (December, 1535). MIrza ‘Askari, the 

49 

M. E—4 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


viceroy of Gujarat, was only imitating his master in the neglect of 
his duties and himself aspired to sovereign power, while his foster- 
brother Ghaznafar deserted after an angry quarrel to Bahadur and 
revealed to him the precarious position of the Mughuls. In res¬ 
ponse to appeals of his followers to recover his territory, Bahadur 
marched towards Ahmadabad and at Sarkhej, opposite the capital, 
he fought an indecisive battle with ‘Askarl who was bent on re¬ 
treating rather than maintaining his position at the capital. After 
a skirmish near Mahmudabad 7 between Bahadur’s vanguard and his 
rear, ‘Askarl crossed the river Mahl and after severe loss reached 
Champaner where he expected reinforcement in men and money. 
Its loyal governor Tardi Beg Khan answered ‘Askarl with a gallant 
refusal and the pretender took the road to Agra with a view to esta¬ 
blishing his authority there. Bahadur now advanced towards 
Champaner and Tardi Beg, unable to resist or acting on instruction 
from Humayun, retreated to Mandu taking with him as much of the 
treasure as he could (25 May, 1536). At long last, Humayun left 
Mandu in haste for Agra, and at Chitor overtook his delinquent 
brother whom he pardoned and carried to the capital. With Tardi 
Beg’s retreat from Champaner ended Mughul domination in Gujarat, 
and after Humayun’s departure from Mandu, Malwa fell into the 
hands of Mallu Khan, a nobleman of the late sultans of Malwa and 
Bahadur’s governor. Gujarat and Malwa were as easily and rapidly 
lost as they had been conquered. 

On his return to Agra in August, 1536, Humayun found the 
situation embarrassing. That stormy petrel, Muhammad Zaman 
Mlrza, was still at large, though after his return from Bahadur’s 
camp at Mandasor, his attempt at the capture of Lahore had proved 
futile and Hindal had just subdued Sultan Mlrza and his sons. Sul¬ 
tan Mlrza had escaped from prison and established himself at Bil- 
gram near Kanauj while his eldest son occupied territory in the east 
as far as Jaunpur, and his second son extended his authority in the 
south-east as far as Kara-Manikpur. Hindal, who had been left in 
charge at Agra, marched against the rebels, met them piecemeal, be¬ 
fore they could unite their forces, at Bilgram and then at Awadh, 
and pushed on to Jaunpur, while Sultan Mlrza with his sons retired 
to Bihar among the Afghans. 

The danger-spot of Humayun’s empire was Bihar, the vantage- 
ground of the Afghans who, after the battle of Dadrah and the re¬ 
tirement of the old leaders, found a great leader in Sher Khan, 
that grandson of a petty and unsuccessful horse-dealer of Roh, who 
hardly deserves the contemptuous remark of the Mughul historio- 


50 


HUMAYtJN 


grapher. 8 During the four years (1533-1536) while Humayun was 
mainly engaged in Gujarat and Malwa affairs, Sher Khan not only 
consolidated his position in Bihar, of which he became the king in 
all but name, but extended his power at the expense of the effete 
monarchy of Bengal. He had inflicted several crushing defeats upon 
the Bengal army, notably at Surajgarh (1534), as a result of which he 
became master of the territory from Chuniar to Surajgarh. In 1536 he 
made a surprise attack on Bengal’s capital through Jharkhand route 
and forced Sultan Mahmud to conclude peace on payment of huge in¬ 
demnity. 

Humayun, after his return from M t andu, wasted one full year, 
partly because of his chronic indolence and partly because he still 
harped on the idea of recovering his lost kingdom in Gujarat and 
Malwa in which he was offered the alliance of Burhan Nizam Shah 
of Ahmadnagar. He, therefore, remained satisfied with the report 
of Hindu Beg, whom he had despatched to Jaunpur for this pur¬ 
pose, that all was quiet on the eastern front. Legally, the only 
offence that Sher had given to the Mughul emperor was the depar¬ 
ture of Qutb Khan, his son and hostage with the Mughuls (according 
to the Treaty of Chunar, of December, 1531), during Humayun’s Guja¬ 
rat campaign, but this was not deemed sufficient by Humayun to 
serve as the casus belli . Like Bahadur, Sher Khan availed himself 
of the inactivity of the Mughul emperor and, tearing that ‘scrap of 
paper’ he had signed, made a second invasion of Bengal with a view 
to crushing Sultan Mahmud before the latter could secure the pro¬ 
mised Portuguese help. It was this invasion of Bengal which made 
Humayun realize at the eleventh hour the gravity of the situation 
and decide to lead an expedition against his astute adversary. 

Accompanied by Mirza ‘Askaiii, Mlrza Hindal and the promi¬ 
nent nobles, and with a big army, Humayun marched from Agra 
in July, 1537. 9 On the way he received the submission of the in¬ 
corrigible rebel Muhammad Zaman Mlrza who, after his failure to 
seize the throne of Gujarat on Bahadur’s death, joined the Mughul 
camp. The army proceeded partly by land and partly by water 
along the Yamuna (Jumna) and the Gahga (Ganges) and reached 
the environs of Chunar. With the help of Rumi Khan, the cele¬ 
brated military engineer of Bahadur Shah, now in his service, Hu¬ 
mayun laid siege; to the fort which was gallantly defended by Jalal 
Khan for about three months until it fell, thanks to a stratagem of 
the Turkish gunner. Rumi Khan flogged a slave and sent him to 
the fort where he was able to convince the garrison that he had 
fled because of the cruelty of his master and, after studying the 


51 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


vulnerable points of the fort, escaped to the Mughul camp. Rum! 
Khan then moved a floating battery close to that portion of the 
fort, where a breach was made, and by a severe bombardment 
forced the garrison to surrender. 

The capture of Chunar was an admirable military triumph but 
a tremendous strategical blunder. A prompt direct march to Gaur 
might have prevented the fall of the Bengal monarchy and the con¬ 
sequent growth of Sher Khan’s power. During the period Huma¬ 
yun wasted at Chunar he allowed his enemy to work according to his 
plans. Sher Khan besieged Gaur| but, leaving Khavass Khan in 
charge of the operations, proceeded to Bihar in order to keep watch 
over the Mughuls. Iiumayun marched from Chunar to Banaras and 
encamped in its neighbourhood. He now decided to follow a more 
vigorous plan of operations and march towards Bengal with a view 
to checking Sher Khan. Yet he attempted compromise with his 
adversary by offering him Chunar, Jaunpur and any other place 
except Bengal and Rohtas on condition of payment of tribute. At 
Muner, on the confluence of the Son and the Ganga, he was met by 
Sultan Mahmud, the fugitive king of Bengal, who further incited him 
to march without delay before Sher could become absolute master 
of Bengal. Sher Khan also became indifferent to the offer of peace 
as he received the report of the fall of Gaur (6 April, 1538) and 
he now transferred all his wealth to the fort of Rohtas which he 
had obtained by a stratagem to redress the loss of Chunar. Conse^ 
quently, the negotiation fell through. At Patna, Humayun was 
advised by his nobles to postpone the Bengal campaign until the 
rains were over, but urged by Mahmud he proceeded further. Sher 
Khan, who was very near the Mughul army, was pursued, but he 
made good his escape and reached Gaur. On his arrival at Bhagalpur, 
Humayun despatched a force of about 5000 or 6000 men to clear the 
road at the pass of TeliyagarhT, but the Mughuls found it already oc¬ 
cupied by Jalal Khan, son of Sher, and being routed by a surprise 
attack were driven back on the main army at Kahalgaon (Colgong). 
Sultan Mahmud died here but Humayun pushed on, and as he arrived 
at the pass, he found it abandoned by Jalal Khan on instruction from 
his father who had meanwhile arrived safely in South Bihar. Hu¬ 
mayun therefore could, without opposition, march through Teliya¬ 
garhi to the capital of Bengal—a capital, devastated, ruined and 
strewn with corpses (15 August 1538). 9a 

Humayun’s conquest of Bengal proved his undoing. He re¬ 
named the city of Gaur as Jannatabad and parcelled out the kingdom 
among his nobles. But as at Mandu after the successful Gujarat and 


52 


HUMAYUN 


Malwa campaigns, so at Gaur, his Jannatabad (abode of paradise), 
he fell a victim to his chronic lethargy and dreamed at opium-eater’s 
paradise while his enemy was working his ruin. Indeed, Humayun’s 
entry into Bengal’s capital was no triumph but a strategical defeat, 
and Gaur proved the grave of his empire—a grave which his astute 
adversary had dug for him. From his safe Jharkhand base, Sher 
Khan now cut off the communications of Humayun with Delhi and 
the desertion of his post by Mirza Hindal at Tirhoot in North Bihar 
and that at Kanauj by Mirza Nur-ud-din completely blockaded the 
Mughul emperor at Bengal’s capital. Sher Khan, taking advantage 
of the situation of which he was mainly the author, took Banaras, 
sent his son Jalal Khan to besiege Jaunpur, and invested Chunar, 
while his generals ravaged the whole country as far as Kanauj. Even 
Jaunpur fell after stubborn resistance and, as ‘Abbas Sarwani says, 
the whole country as far as Kanauj and Sambhal fell into the hands 
of the Afghans. 10 Humayun could expect help from no quarter. 
The loyal governors of Delhi and Agra, Mir Faqr ‘All and Mir 
Muhammad Bakshi, persuaded Hindal and Yadgar Nlasir Mirza 
at KalpI to move towards the east in aid of the emperor. But their 
efforts were foiled by the arrival of the Mughul nobles under Zahid 
Beg who had indignantly refused Humayun’s offer of the govern¬ 
ment of Bengal and had abandoned him, and now, in collaboration 
with Mirza Nur-ud-din, incited Hindal to assume royal power. 
Under their influence Hindal executed the venerable) Shaikh Buh- 
lul whom Humayun had sent from Gaur to reconcile his rebel bro¬ 
ther. Hindal now advanced to seize Delhi but was prevented by 
the arrival of Mirza Kamran who pursued him to Agra, drove him 
to his jagir at Alwar and forced him to offer submission. If any 
one could save Humayun at this critical juncture, it was Mirza Kam¬ 
ran who had at his disposal the resources of Kabul, Qandahar’ and 
the Punjab intact, but he remained coldly neutral. The brothers 
indeed led a campaign as if to help Humayun, but after a few 
marches returned to Agra. Mirza Kamran was selfish and hostile, 
Hindal a rebel, and Yadgar Nasir Mirza was both incapable and 
lukewarm. The voice of the loyal governors of Delhi and Agra 
proved but a cry in the wilderness. All these circumstances 
awakened Humayun from his torpor and forced him to leave ‘the 
abode of paradise’ in Bengal. 10a 

Probably towards the end of March, 1539, 11 Humayun set out 
from Bengal for the capital, leaving Jahangir Quli Beg at Gaur 
with a force of five thousand men. ‘His troops were demoralized 
by dissipation, disheartened by inaction, and reduced by sickness’. 
As he marched along the left bank of the Ganga, he received the 


53 



THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


disheartening report of the defeat and capture of his vanguard under 
Dilavar Khan Lodi at Mungir. Humayun then sent Mirza ‘Askar! 
in advance and joined him at Mungir where, against the counsel 
of experienced officers, he crossed the river over to the southern 
bank which was entirely under the Afghan control. Sher Khan 
and the Afghans were in close pursuit but there was no regular 
engagement and the Mughul army was able to reach Chausa in 
Shahabad district with but little opposition from the enemy. Here 
again Humayun committed a blunder by not attacking the Afghans 
immediately before they could be ready, and played into the hands 
of his adversary who was waiting for the rains. The two armies 
lay encamped for about three months. Humayun’s position became 
extremely critical; the rains were coming and there was no hope 
of succour from any quarter, and he therefore opened negotiations for 
peace. The terms are variously stated in different chronicles. It ap¬ 
pears that Humayun allowed Sher Khan to retain Bengal and his 
old jagir in Bihar as well, on condition of Sher’s acknowledgement 
of the Mughul suzerainty by striking coins and reading the khutba 
in his name. Negotiations for peace were in progress and there 
was consequent relaxation in the Mughul camp, when suddenly at 
break of dawn Sher Khan, after a feigned night attack on Maha- 
ratha Chero, attacked the Mughul army and completely surprised 
it (26 June, 1539). 12 Many were killed asleep, many who at¬ 
tempted to escape were drowned in the swollen waters of the Ganga, 
and Humayun who owed his life to his personal valour and to the 
generosity of a water-carrier, somehow reached Agra with Mirza 
‘Askari. The army was completely annihilated; it was a disastrous 
and absolute defeat. 

After this easy victory Sher Khan hastened to Bengal and des¬ 
troyed the Mughul army and its leader left by Humayun at Gaur. 
He again assumed the royal title, struck coins and read the khutba 
in his own name. 13 At Agra, Humayun excused the veiled hosti¬ 
lity of Kamrian and the open rebellion of Hindal and tried his best 
to combine his brothers in a joint attack against Sher Shah, but 
they simply deliberated and did not act. Mirza Kamrian would not 
lend his troops but under his own command and retreated to Lahore 
on the pretext of illness. ‘Seven months were wasted in weary in¬ 
decision, until the opportunity was lost, and Sher Shiah was on the 
Ganga (Ganges), ready for war’. 13a Sher Shah had meanwhile con¬ 
solidated his position in Bengal and then marched again along the 
bank of the Ganga. Humayun hastily collected a big army mostly 
consisting of rabble and, encouraged by the defeat of Sher’s advance 
guard under his son Qutb Khan at Kalpi which was still held by 


54 


HUMAYUN 


Yadgar Nasir Mirza, marched towards Kanauj to meet his adversary. 
The two armies remained for about a month facing each other with 
the Ganga between them, until Humayun crossed it to give battle, 
as there were already considerable desertions from the Mughul 
camp. Various estimates are given in different chronicles as to 
the strength of the belligerents, but there is no doubt that the Af¬ 
ghan army was much smaller, about half in number. 14 As the 
Mughul camp in the lowland near the river was flooded owing to 
rains which came rather early that year, at the suggestion of Haidar 
Mirza, Babur’s cousin who had recently joined Humayun and was 
now his virtual commander, the Mughul army decided to move to 
a higher ground. It was during this manoeuvre on May 17, 1540, 
when the artillery and a portion of the army were being transferred, 
that Sher fell upon the Mughuls and put them to confusion. Dis¬ 
affection and indiscipline among the soldiers as well as half¬ 
heartedness of the nobles, combined with bad management, added 
to the confusion in the Mughul army. Except the initial success 
obtained by Hindal Mirza, who was placed in the left, against Jalal 
Khan, everywhere the Mughuls were defeated: Mirza ‘Askar! at 
the vanguard and Yadgar Nasir Mirza in the right were forced to 
fall back upon the centre, while Jalal Khan, strengthened by re¬ 
inforcements, pushed Hindal back and the numerous non-comba¬ 
tants at the rear forced by the Afghan attack pressed on the centre 
and broke the chains fastening the guns and wagons. Meanwhile 
an Afghan division turned round the Mughul army and reached its 
rear, thus encompassing the entire army of the enemy. The con¬ 
fusion became so terrible that any action became impossible: the 
battle became a rout. The artillery became thoroughly inactive, 
not a gun could be fired as Mirza Haidar regrets. Though we can¬ 
not too literally accept his statement that the enemy did not dis¬ 
charge an arrow, it has to be confessed that it was rather an one¬ 
sided game. The Mughuls fled to the Ganga; many were killed by 
the Afghan army in pursuit and many who escaped the sword of 
the enemy were drowned in the river. 

Humayun crossed the Ganga on an elephant and with a small 
number of his followers returned to Agra. The rude behaviour 
that he received on the way from the people of Bhongaon 15 and 
afterwards from the villagers near Rohtak 16 testified to the declin¬ 
ing prestige of the house of Timur in Hindusthan. In the Punjab 
everything was in disorder. Humayun had nothing to expect 
from the hostile' Kamran, the untrustworthy ‘Askari and the half¬ 
hearted Hindal. ‘The nobles were discontented; the peasantry, a 
prey to misrule and anarchy; the Afghans hard in pursuit’. From 


55 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Agra, he went to Delhi and, after a very short stay, left for Lahore 
via Sirhind with the hope of persuading Kamran to make a com¬ 
bined effort against Sher Shah. The brothers met and deliberated, 
but could not combine. It was a mighty gathering of the Mughuls 
but five months were wasted in uncertain planning and barren talk. 
Humayun’s plan of going to Badakhshan, via Kabul, fell through on 
account of the opposition of Kamran. Haidar Mirza made the sug¬ 
gestion to take shelter in the Punjab hills and try fortune in 
Kashmir, while Hindal Mirza proposed to march to Sind and 
Gujarat and from that base to make a renewed bid for the throne 
of Delhi. Humayun was rather inclined towards Haidar Mlrza’s 
view. During these heated debates Mirza Kamran was secretly 
making terms for himself with Sher Shah and openly received his 
envoy, 16a but Sher Shah would not give the Punjab to a Mughul, even 
though it was Kamran. Humayun also made negotiation for peace 
with Sher Shah who had now taken Agra and Delhi, on condition 
that he should retain the Punjab, which Sher contemptuously dis¬ 
missed with the remark that he should go to Kabul. Meanwhile 
the Afghan leader had reached Sultanpur and, as the Afghans cross¬ 
ed the Beas, Humayun with his panic-stricken followers, to whom 
it was like the Day of Resurrection as Gulbadan describes it, left 
Lahore (end of October, 1540). Even now Humayun thought of 
moving to Kashmir but on account of lack of support from his 
officers as well as Kamran’s hostility the idea was abandoned in 
favour of Hindal’s proposal to go to Sind. 17 Even at this juncture 
Humayun rejected the counsel of his followers to finish his arch- 
enemy Mirza Kamran who parted with him near Khushab after an 
angry quarrel over the precedence in entering a defile and left for 
Kabul. Hindal and Yadgar Nasir Mirza also followed suit and went 
south for Multan but, harassed by the Baluchis, they joined Huma¬ 
yun near Uchh. Sher’s general Khavass Khan was hard in pursuit 
of the Mughuls to drive them out of the Punjab. After a weary 
journey down the Indus, Humayun reached Bhakkar which was in 
the dominion of Shah Husain Arghun, the ruler of Sind, and en¬ 
camped at Rohr! opposite Bhakkar (26 January, 1541). The 
second period of his history began—the period of exile. 

II. EXILE (1540-1545) 

Humayun called upon the governor of Bhakkar to deliver the 
fortress. As the governor replied that he was a mere subordinate 
to Shah Husain, ruler of Sind, Humayun sent envoys to Shah 
Husain at Tatta to persuade the latter to join him in an invasion 
of Gujarat. After considerable and calculated delay Shah Husain 


56 


HUMAYUN 


replied through his messenger that Humayffn should go to Hajkan 18 
where provisions would be available and he would present himself 
before Humayun at the earliest convenience. The nobles of Huma¬ 
yun suspected this proposal as a stratagem of Shah Husain to drive 
him out of his territory as Hajkan had never been properly sub¬ 
jugated by the Sind ruler. Accordingly Humayun laid siege to the 
fort of Bhakkar and sent Mirza Hindal to attack Sehwan. After the 
siege had continued for five or six months without any effect, 
Humayun, suspicious about Hindal’s movements and also because of 
famine raging in the arqa, marched to join his brother. He met 
Hindal at Patar 19 where, in spite of his brother’s bitter protest, he 
married Hamida Banu, the daughter of Hindal’s tutor and spiritual 
guide. Mirza Hindal, in disgust and on invitation from the governor 
of Qandahar, deserted Humayffn and took the road to Qandahar. 
Humayffn was therefore obliged to return to Rohr! and it was with 
difficulty that Yadgar Nasir Mirza was prevented from joining 
Hindal. Leaving the affairs of Bhakkar in charge of Yadgar Nasir, 
Humayffn now turned his direction to Sehwan, which he reached 
on 6 November, 1541. Shah Husain had adopted the same plan as 
he had done in Bhakkar; he had laid waste the surrounding coun¬ 
try and cut off all supplies and he himself encamped in the vicinity 
of Sehwan. Humayffn besieged the fort for several months against 
heavy odds. His army suffered much on account of the scarcity 
of provisions and desertion began in his camp. Yadgar Nasir 
Mirza, whom he had left in charge of the siege of Bhakkar, had been 
won over by Shah Husain on promise of his daughter’s hand and 
his kingdom. All these compelled Humayffn to raise the siege of 
Sehwan (4 March, 1542 ) 19a and make a hasty retreat to Bhakkar 
where he found no better prospect. Yadgar Nasir threatened to 
attack him openly, and scarcity of provisions made the situation 
hopeless. There was little to hope for in Sind and much to fear 
from Shah Husain who could have no love lost for Babur’s son 20 
and risk an Afghan invasion into his territory by a barren Mughul 
alliance. 

In this miserable plight Humayffn threw himself on the pro¬ 
tection of Raja Maldev of Mar war who had invited him to Jodhpur 
and promised him assistance. Proceeding by Uchh and the fort of 
Dilawar, 21 Humayffn reached the vicinity of Bikaner on 31 July, 
1542, after a horrid journey in which many died and all suffered 
exceedingly, as Jauhar says. To his great surprise Humayffn found 
the Raja hostile. Probably the threat of an Afghan attack forced 
him to revise his policy. Maldev had offered his invitation and 
help at a time when Slier Shah was preoccupied elsewhere. Huma- 


57 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


yun responded to it too late, after one year, when Sher Shah had 
settled his affairs in the Punjab, Malwa and Bengal, while the 
Mughul resources had become weaker. Sher Shah sent an envoy 
to Maldev asking him to capture Humayun, and self-interest, sea¬ 
soned with Rajput chivalry, induced Maldev to stage a march of 
Rajput troops against the Mughuls. 21a Humayun was accordingly 
forced to leave Maldev’s territory and turn towards Jaisalmer 
whose Raja also proved hostile. Pursued by Maldev’s troops, 
fatigued with thirst and hunger, the Mughuls arrived at ‘Umarkot 
where the Rana received them with hospitality and agreed to help 
Humayun to conquer Bhakkar and Tatta. After a stay of about 
a month and a half, Humayun started on an expedition to Sind at 
the head of the Mughul and Rajput troops. A few days later, on 
the way, he received the report that on 15 October, 1542, Hamlda 
Begam had given birth to a son at ‘Umarkot, the celebrated Akbar 
of history. 22 

Humayun took the pleasant city of Jun and remained there 
for nearly nine months. Shah Husain opposed him with a formid¬ 
able army. Though no major battle but only skirmishes took place, 
the situation of the Mughuls became precarious. The arrogant be¬ 
haviour of some Mughul nobles alienated the Rajputs who left 
Humayun. One of his prominent noblemen, Mun‘im Beg, deserted 
him, and desertion to the enemy became frequent and contagious. 
It was at this critical juncture that Humayun was joined by his 
valued servant Bairam Beg who had separated from him after the 
disastrous battle of Kanauj and made an adventurous escape from 
the clutches of Sher Shah. From this time onwards Bairam Beg 
becomes Humayun’s chief counsellor and guide. On his advice 
Humayun concluded a treaty with Shah Husain who agreed to 
allow Humayun passage through his territory to Qandahar and 
supply him with money and other requisites for the journey. 

On 11 July, 1543, Humayun left Jun for Sehwan and from 
there via Gandava and Sibi advanced as far as Shal (Quetta). He 
could not proceed to Qandahar in view of the hostile attitude of 
Mirza Kamran but retreated southwards to Mastung. Mirza Kam- 
ran had ousted Hindal from the government of Qandahar and car¬ 
ried him as well as Yadgar N!asir Mirza, who had arrived from Sind, 
to Kabul. He then sought the alliance of Shah Husain Arghun by 
proposing to marry his daughter and instructed Mirza ‘Askari, 
whom he had appointed governor of Qandahar, to oppose Humayun. 
The idea of going to Qandahar was given up and, on the advice of 
Bairam Beg, who was a Shiah and whose ancestors were related to, 
and in alliance with, the former rulers of Iran, he decided to go to 


58 


HUMAYUN 


Persia. In extreme haste Humayun departed from Mastung, leav¬ 
ing the child Akbar to the tender mercy of his uncles. From Garm- 
sir he wrote a letter to Shah Tahmasp of Persia asking permis¬ 
sion to visit him but, pursued by Mirza ‘Askan’s men, he entered 
the Shah’s territory before he received his reply (January, 1544). 

It was not until August, 1544, that Humayun could meet the 
Shah at his summer capital between Abhar and Sultariiya. Along 
the entire route wherever he had halted he had been given regal 
reception and a grand reception was held at the court to welcome 
him, but they were rather studied displays of the Shah’s magni¬ 
ficence than expressions of honour to his dethroned guest. Huma¬ 
yun remained at the Shah’s court for a few months during which 
he had to suffer humiliation and insult, and was forced by threat 
of violence to make a confession of the Shiah faith and agree to 
spread Shiahism in India. In lieu of this sacrifice, the zealous Per¬ 
sian monarch agreed to render him military help for the recovery 
of his territory in Afghanistan on condition that Qandahar should 
be restored to Persia. The Shah’s treatment of Humayun was 
marked by a curious compound of courtesy and insult, hospitality 
and hostility, generosity and meanness. 

Reinforced with 14,000 Persian troops Humayun arrived at the 
vicinity of Qandahar on 21 March, 1545, 122a and laid siege to it. 
As the siege went on, he sent Bairam Khan 23 on a diplomatic mis¬ 
sion to Kabul with a view to winning the Timurid princes and 
nobles over to his side. Mirza ‘Askari surrendered the fort on 3 
September, 1545, and Qandahar was made over to the Persians as 
stipulated. But the Persian troops declined to render any further 
help to Humayun, who was now being joined by his followers but 
had no shelter. Pressed by sheer necessity, he made a sudden 
attack on Qandahar one month later, expelled the Persian garrison, 
and took it in violation of his agreement with Shah Tahmasp. The 
occupation of Qandahar was the turning point in the history of 
Humayun. He had now a place under the sun and a base for fur¬ 
ther operations. Thus ended the second period of his history, the 
period of exile. He could now think of recovering his kingdom in 
Afghanistan and ultimately his dominions in India. The signifi¬ 
cance of Humayun’s Persian exile is indeed very great. Without 
it the restoration of the Mughul power in India would not have 
been possible. Not .only was diplomatic relation established bet¬ 
ween the Safavi and Mughul courts, but it led to closer contacts 
between Iran and India whose full significance was realized in the 
reign of Akbar. 


59 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


III. RETURN 

Humayun appointed Bairam Khan to the government of Qan- 
dahar and set out for Kabul. On the way Mirza Hindal joined 
him and, as he advanced, desertion in his camp forced Mirza Kam- 
ran to escape to Sind by way of Ghazni, and Humayun entered 
Kabul without any opposition (18 November, 1545) and met his 
son Akbar after an interval of about two years. The occupation 
of Qandahar and Kabul made Humayun master of southern Afgha¬ 
nistan. 

In March, 1546, Humayun set out on a campaign in Badakh¬ 
shan (Northern Afghanistan) whose ruler Mirza Sulaimian had re¬ 
cently been set free from Kamran’s bondage at Kabul. Humayun 
took ‘Askari with him and ordered execution of Yadgar Nasir Mirza 
who had rejoined his service but had shown signs of disaffection. 
Humayun’s campaign met with success; at Tirgiran he defeated 
Sulaiman and forced him to escape to Kulab. Humayun then ad¬ 
vanced to Kishm and from there to Qil‘a Zafar, but on the way fell 
dangerously ill which caused disaffection in the army and en¬ 
couraged Karnran to move out of Sind. Reinforced by his father- 
in-lav/, Shah Husain, Mirza Karnran returned to Afghanistan, took 
Ghazni, whose governor Zahid Beg he put to death, and marched 
upon Kabul. Kabul also fell into his hands and Mirza Karnran 
began a reign of terror, brutally killing and executing many of the 
followers of Humayun. Winter was at its worst, but Humayun had 
to hurry back towards Kabul. He besieged the city and the siege 
continued for several months. The contest was bitter, so much so 
that Karnran placed Akbar on the battlements, exposed to his 
father’s gun and musket shots. Realizing, however, that it was im¬ 
possible to hold the city, he fled through a hole made in the fort 
wall (27 April, 1547), narrowly escaping capture by Haji Muham¬ 
mad or, according to Jauhar, Mirza Hindal who pursued him. He 
first went to Mirza Sulaiman but, failing to win him over to his 
side, approached the Uzbeg chief Fir Muhammad Khan of Balkh, 
and with his help captured much of the territory of Badakhshan. 
Humayun accordingly set out on a second campaign against Badakh¬ 
shan (June, 1548). By way of Andarab, where he was joined by 
Mirza Hindal who arrived from Qunduz, he proceeded to Taliqan and 
besieged it. Mirza Karnran, failing to secure further help from the 
Uzbegs, surrendered the fort after some resistance (17 August, 
1548) and rendered homage to Humayun who pardoned him and 
granted him Kulab, north of the Oxus, as his jdgir, which, how¬ 
ever, was considered as an insult by the ex-king of Kabul and 
Badakhshan. In October Humayun returned to Kabul. 


60 


HUMAYUN 


In February, 1549, Humayun led a campaign against Balkh and 
the Uzbegs, his hereditary enemies. Though he was joined by 
Mirza Hindal and Mirza Sulaiman on the way, Mirza Kamran re¬ 
fused to come to his aid. Humayun, after gaining some successes 
against the army of Pir Muhammad Khan, was able to reach Balkh 
and was on the point of taking the city when the bogey of Kam- 
ran’s attack on Kabul told upon the morale of the Mughul officers 
and, as they retreated, they were hard-pressed by the enemy from 
behind and many were killed. The retreat became a rout and the 
campaign ended in a trjagic fiasco. MIrzia Kamran now marched 
against Mirza Sulaiman, took Taliqan and Qil‘a Zafar, and attacked 
Mirza Hindal, but was afterwards forced to withdraw into the Hazara 
country on account of the combined opposition of Hindal and 
Sulaiman. 

In the middle of 1550 Humayun marched from Kabul towards 
Ghurband to chastise his incorrigible brother. He was surprised 
by Mirza Kamran in the Qibchaq defile 24 and in the battle that 
followed Humayun lost many of his soldiers and was himself wound¬ 
ed. Kamran made a hurried march to Kabul, took it and held it 
for three months. Kabul believed Humayun dead, while he was 
waiting in Andarab. With the help of reinforcements sent by Mirza 
Sulaiman’s wife, Humayun marched against Kamran who rejected 
his terms, fought the battle for Kabul and won it. Mirza Kamran 
fled and Mirza ‘Askari, who had joined Kamran, was captured and 
banished. 25 

The battle for Kabul had been won but the problem of Kamran 
remained. He was now joined by one of Humayun’s most promi¬ 
nent officers, Haji Muhammad Khan. To meet this dangerous 
situation Humayun recalled from Qandahar Bairam Khan who was 
able to conciliate Haji Muhammad and bring him to his master. 
Humayun, who had on account of adversity and misfortune become 
wiser and sterner and put Yadgar Nasir to death and banished 
‘Askarii, now executed Haji Muhammad. Mirza Kamran gathered 
the Afghans under him and stirred up strife in the territory be¬ 
tween Kabul and the Indus. During one of these engagements on 
20 November, 1551, Mirza Kamran surprised his brother at night 
at Jiryar in Nangnahar! and, though he was defeated, 253 Mirza Hindal 
was killed in action. Humayun pursued him but he fled to the 
Punjab and sought shelter with Islam Shah who treated him with 
cold neglect. Ultimately he took refuge with Sultan Adam, the 
Gakkhar, who after some hesitation surrendered him to Humayun 
who had reached the Indus on receiving report from the Gakkhar 


61 


THE MUGHUIi EMPIRE 


chief. 26 On the advice of his nobles Humayun had Kamran blinded 
and gave him leave to proceed to Mecca (1553). 27 ‘The great mate¬ 
rial of sedition and strife’, as the Mughul imperial historian calls 
him, Mirza Kamran has been more sinned against than sinning, and 
so far as Kabul was concerned he was rather ‘the defender of rights 
than their assailant’. 273 Humayun now planned to lead an expedi¬ 
tion into Kashmir where the short-lived Mughul rule under Haidar 
Mirza had beejn overthrown two years ago, but on account of the 
opposition of his nobles he returned to Kabul by way of Peshawar 
(December, 1553). 

During Humayun’s stay in Afghanistan he was greatly helped 
by Bairam Khan in the consolidation of Mughul power. While all 
around there was frequent commotion and strife, Qandahar was 
ably maintained by its governor as the undisputed base of Mughul 
operations. In 1554 Bairam left Qandahar for Kabul to join 
Humayun in his Indian campaign for which he had been making 
preparations. He was now master of Qandahar, Kabul and Ghazni. 
His brothers were no longer on the scene and ‘there was now no 
rival to the throne and no noble behind and above the throne.’ 
When he received the report of Islam Shah’s death and the anar¬ 
chical condition of Hindusthan on account of the accession of the 
boy king Firuz and the outbreak of civil war among the Afghans, 28 
he realized that the time had come for making a renewed bid for 
the throne of Delhi. The third chapter of his life ends here. 

IV. RESTORATION 

With an army of about 3,000 men, Humayun set out and reach¬ 
ed Peshawar on 25 December, 1554. He was soon joined by 
Bairam Khan, but Sultan Adam, the Gakkhar, refused to attend on 
the ground that he had already concluded a treaty with Sikandar 
Shah Sur, who now held the Punjab after the murder of Firuz, and 
had surrendered his son as a hostage. Tatar Khan Kashi, who held 
the fort of Rohtas for Sikandar Shah, abandoned it on hearing of 
the advance of the Mughul army. Humayun marched on to Lahore 
and the Afghans of the city took to flight. The Mughul force under 
Shah Abu-’l-Ma ali defeated the Afghans at Dipalpur, while the main 
army under Bairam Khan had driven the Afghans at Hariana 29 
and as he proceeded to Jullundur, the enemy retreated. Sirhind 
also fell into the hands of the Mughuls. Alarmed at the rapid pro¬ 
gress of the Mughuls, Sikandar Shah now despatched an army of 
30,000 horse towards Sirhind. Bairam Khan, not unnerved by the 
enemy’s superiority, hastened from Jullundur to give battle and 


62 


HUMAYUN 


crossed the Sutlej before the arrival of the enemy. Towards sun¬ 
set, the two armies met at Machiwara in Ludhiana district, and the 
battle began. As it grew dark at night, it became impossible for 
soldiers on either side to fight. Accidentally, fire broke out in the 
village in which the Afghan army had drawn up. 30 It enabled the 
Mughuls to see clearly every motion of the Afghans and discharge 
arrows at them, whereas the Afghans, who had no view of the 
enemy, shot at random, and ultimately failed to maintain their 
ground and took to flight (May, 1555). 

Bairam Khan marched at the head of the victorious Mughuls 
to Sirhind and took it. The battle of Machiwara was but a big 
round in the struggle between the Mughuls and the Afghans; the 
battle for Delhi was yet to be fought. On learning of the defeat 
of the Afghans, Sikandar Shah marched from Delhi with an army 
of 80,000 horse and a big train of artillery and war elephants, and 
encamped at Sirhind. Bairam Khan, whose forces amounted to 
seven or eight hundred horse, 31 appealed to Humayun at Lahore to 
come to his aid but, on account of illness, Humayun could not arrive 
at Sirhind before 27 May, 1555. The two armies remained en¬ 
camped opposite each other for twenty-five days during which occa¬ 
sional skirmishes took place. On 22 June, Khvaja Mu‘azzam, 
Atga Khan and others advanced and fell in with Kala Pahar, the 
brother of Sikandar Shah, and the battle began. The Afghans con¬ 
centrated their main attack on the division of Bairam Khan who 
stood on the defensive, while the two Mughul divisions under Shah 
Abu-’l-Ma^alJ and Tardl Beg Khan wheeled round the enemy, and 
in a short time the Afghan army became a mass of confusion and 
took to flight. The Mughul troops, who were vastly inferior in 
number, 32 pursued the defeated Afghans to a long distance and kill¬ 
ed many of them, and a pyramid was made of the heads of the 
slain. Sikandar fled to the Siwalik hills. Machiwara and Sirhind 
undid the work of Chausa and Kanauj which had put an end to the 
empire of Babur; they sealed the fate of the Afghan empire of Sher 
Shah. 

From Sirhind Humayun proceeded towards Delhi. When he 
reached Samana, he appointed Shah Abu-T-Ma‘all, governor of the 
Punjab, and despatched him to Lahore. Meanwhile Sikandar Khan, 
the Uzbeg, had occupied Delhi. Humayun accordingly left Samana 
and on 23 July, 1555, re-entered the city of Delhi. He now dis¬ 
tributed offices and commands to his faithful servants. Atga Khan 
took Hissar which surrendered after a siege of twenty-three days, 
while ‘All Quli Khan suppressed Qambar ‘All, an unknown Mughul 


63 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


adventurer, who headed a rebellion at Badaun, and put him to 
death, though he had appealed to Humayun for pardon which th^ 
king was willing to grant. Haidar Muhammad Akhta Begl took 
Bayana after treacherously putting to death its Afghan governor 
Ghazi Khan, the father of Ibrahim Khan Sur, though he surrender¬ 
ed after he had received promise of pardon. The conduct of ‘Ali- 
Quli Khan and Haidar Muhammad offers but typical examples of the 
weakness of the royal power and the overpowering influence of an 
irresponsible and lawless aristocracy. 

On account of Abu-’1-Ma‘ali’s misbehaviour, Humayun placed 
the government of the Punjab in the nominal charge of prince Akbar 
but under the real control of his guardian Bairam Khan. On learn¬ 
ing of the advance of Bairam Khan and Akbar, Sikandar, who had 
meanwhile come out of the hills, retired to the fortress of Mankot. 
When they arrived at Hariana, they received the report of Huma- 
yun’s accident. 323 On 24 January, 1556, in pious response to the 
sacred call of the mu'azzin for evening prayer, Humayun, while 
hurriedly coming down from his library, stumbled out of the stairs 
and, two days later, in the picturesque words of Lane-Poole, he 
tumbled out of life as he had tumbled through it. 

The brilliant conquests of his father and the unique genius of 
his son have eclipsed the manifold good qualities of Humayun, but 
there is no doubt that his many virtues could not compensate for his 
serious defects. Generous and kindly in disposition, affable and 
urban in manners, possessing social bonhomie and ready wit, brave 
and chivalrous in temperament, cultured and fond of learning and 
the arts, 33 as became the son of Babur, Humayun was the very 
flower of humanity and the model of a gentleman, the knight-errant 
of the Mughul dynasty. The very virtues of his character bred 
some of his defects; his charity bordered on prodigality, his affec¬ 
tion, on weakness. He lacked resolution and sustained energy; his 
lethargy was chronic and contagious and he had no steady sense of 
duty and self-respect: ‘he revelled at the table when he ought to 
have been in the saddle’. Daring as a soldier, he did not possess 
the superior talents of a general. He was equally deficient in the 
gifts of diplomacy and statesmanship. Mandu and Gaur revealed 
the obverse of the medal. A distinct improvement in his character 
is discernible after the period of his exile when some of his fatal 
defects which cost him his throne seemed to have been toned down. 
The author of the Tlmurid restoration of 1555 was different from 
the gay prisoner of the harem who lost Gujarat, Malwa and Bengal; 
Kabul did not prove a second Mandu, He was a pious Muslim' 

64 


HUMAYuN 


rigid in the observance of rituals and regular in his devotions, with 
a mixture of mysticism and superstition in him—a liberal Sunni 
with predilection for the Shlahite faith. 34 In some traits Humayun, 
who loved opium probably more than the throne, resembles his 
bohemian grandson who practically abdicated in his loyalty to the 
wine cup. With all his weaknesses and failings, Humayun has a 
significant place in Indian history which is not, perhaps, always 
duly appreciated. The well-timed restoration of the Mughul power 
was a real achievement which paved the way for the splendid im¬ 
perialism of Akbar, while the Indo-Persian contact, which he rein¬ 
forced and stimulated, was a factor of far-reaching consequence in 
the history of Indian civilization. 


1. Dr.'S. K. Banerji ascribes this delay of four days in Humayun’s accession to 
Mir Khalifa’s plot to place Mahdi Khvaja on the throne, but from Nizam-ud- 
Din Ahmad, who is our authority for the incident, it appears the Khalifa’s 
attempt was made while Babur was still alive ( Tabaqat-i-Akbari, Eng. Trans. 
Vol. II, p. 43). 

2. Dadrah on the Gumti in the Musafirkhana talnsil of the Sultanpur district 
and not the Dadrah in the Nawabganj tahsil of the Bara-Banki district, as 

S. K. Banerji suggests ( Humayun Badshah, Vol. 1, p. 42, f .n. 2) . According 
to Dr. Qanungo ( Sher Shah, p. 72) the battle took place at Dauroh, and according 
to the Cambridge History of India, Vol. IV, pp. 21, 49, at Daunrua on the 
river Sai, 15 miles east of Jaunpur. Hodivala, Studies in Indo-Muslim History, 
Vol I, p. 450, suggests Deunruh. Ishwari Prasad, p. 50, f.n. 1, has Daurah. 
The MSS. of Jauhar (Sarkar; British Museum; India Office; Bylands Library, 
Manchester) give the word in such a way that it can be read both as Daurah 
and Dadrah, but Faizi Sirhindi’s recension of Jauhar (India Office MS.) has 
clear Dadrah; and Dadrah on the Gumti fits in with the description of Jauhar. 
Details are given in the writer’s Bairam Khan, pp. 48-49 (In the press). 

The date 1532 is given in the Akbar-nama I, p. 289, and Tdrikh-i-Alfl, 
I.O.MS., fol. 406b: 939 A.H., August, 1532-July, 1533. The year 1531 is based 
on the statement of Gulbadan Begam. 

2a. According to some chronicles he remained aloof. 

3. Mirat-i-Sikandari, pp. 239-241; Abu Turab, Tdrikh-i-Gujarat, pp. 9-11. 

4. Akbar-ndma, Eng. trans. I, p. 303, but Mirat-i-Sikandari, p. 246, gives the date 
20 Ramazan, 941/25 March, 1535. The Cambridge History of India, Vol. IV, 
p. 22, seems to accept this date. 

5 .Abu Turab, Tdrikh-i.Gujardt, p. 16. 

6. Fortieth according to some chronicles. There is a picture depicting the siege 
of Champaner in the Tarikh-i-Khanddn-i-Timuriya at the Oriental Public 
Library, Patna. 

7. 22° 50' N., 72° 48' E. 

8. For the early history of Sher Shah, see the next chapter. 

9. There is a discrepancy among the chroniclers about the date of this cam¬ 
paign. The correct date seems to be that given by Firishta (Vol. I, p. 216): 
18 Safar, 944/27 July, 1537, and confirmed by the Riyaz-us-Salatin (p. 141). 
The Dacca University History of Bengal, Vol. II, edited by Sir Jadunath 
Sarkar, p. 166, has curiously the incorrect date, July, 1538 (945 A.H.), and 
wrongly states in f.n. 2 that the Riyaz-us-Salatin gives 945 A.H., on p. 143. 
What the chronicle states there is that Humayun left Bihar for Gaur in the 
beginning of 945 A.H. and he had already undertaken in 944 A.H. the siege of 
Chunar which surrendered after six months. See p. 141. Cf. Chapter IV, 
p. 74 and f.n. 20. 


M. E.—5 


65 



THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


9a. According to Firishta I, p. 216, Humayun, after he was met by Sultan 
Mahmud, marched towards Bengal in the beginning of 945 A.H. As 945 A.H. 
commences on May 30, 1538, we may fix June, 1538, as the date of the battle 
of Teliyagarhi. After the battle the Mughul army returned to Kahalgaon. 
Sultan Mahmud died here. We are told by Jauhar (British Museum MS. ff. 
16a-17a) that Haji Muhammad was sent from Kahalgram to reconnoitre the 
position of the enemy at the pass. Haji Muhammad found the pass under the 
occupation of Jalal Khan; and it was only after the departure of Jalal Khan 
that Humayun started from Kahalgram and reached Gaur in a few days. 
From the above description of Jauhar it appears that Humayun probably 
reached Gaur early in July, 1538. The Afghan chronicles suggest a later date 
According to the Makhzan-i-Afghani (Dorn 1, 115) and ‘Abbas (E. & D. IV. 
367) Humayun was detained after the battle of Teliyagarhi for one month and 
then he left for Gaur. 

So, from the above, July, 1538, appears to be the correct date. Dr. S. K. 
Banerji ( Humayun 1, 213, f.n.) gives definite date Rabi‘ 1, 20, 945/15 August, 
1538, but I have not been able to find out his authority, nor does he men¬ 
tion it. Ishwari Prasad gives the date as June, 1538. 

10. Tarikh-i-Sher Shdhi (Sir J. N. Sarkar’s transcript), p. 152. 

10a. Akbar-ndma I, pp. 339-40. 

11. The chronology of Humayun’s expedition to Bengal, as given in the chro¬ 
nicles, is confusing. As already stated above, Humayun reached Gaur pro¬ 
bably early in July, 1538, and both Jauhar and Gulbadan state that he stayed 
there for 9 months. Calculating 9 lunar months, we find Humayun set out 
from Bengal at the end of March, 1539. 

12. The treachery of Sher Khan is related not only by a neutral historian like 

Firishta (Vol. I, p. 217), but by the Afghan chroniclers as well: Tdrikh-i- 
Sher Shdhi, pp. 158-162, Tarikh-i-Ddudi pp. 184-5; (MS. Sarkar); 

Makhzan-i-Afghani (A.S.B. MS.) f. 98a. Tdrikh-i-Saldtin-i-Afdghina, pp. 153, 
197, 199. (Somewhat different account is given in Ch. IV. [Ed.]). 

13. Tdrikh-i-Sher Shahi , p. 172. Tarikh-i-Ddudi, pp. 185-86. Coins struck in 
945 A.H. (May, 1538-May, 1539) exist, from which it seems that he had as 
sumed royal title earlier. See Islamic Culture, 1936, pp. 127-30. 

13a. Tdrikh-i-Rashidi, Elias and Ross, pp. 471-72. 

14. Tdrikh-i-Rashidi, Elias and Ross, pp. 476-77. Tabaqdt-i-Akbari, Vol. II, p. 45; 
Firishta, Vol. I, p. 218; Ahmad Yadgar, pp. 155-56, 203-4. 

15. In the Mainpuri district, 27° 15' N, 79° 14' E. 

16. 28° 54' N, 76° 38' E. 

16a. Akbar-ndma, I, 358-59. 

17 .\ Haidar MTrza was able to carve out an independent kingdom in Kashmir, 
though short-lived (1541-1551). 

18. Ain-i-Akbari, Jarrett, Vol. II, new ed., p. 341. 

19. About 100 miles (fifty kos ) south of Rohri. 

19a. Akbar-ndma I, p. 369. 

20. Shah Husain’s father, MIrza Shah Beg Arghun, had been deprived of Qan- 
dahar by Babur. See the last chapter. 

21. In Bahawalpur State, Punjab, 28° 44' N, 71° 14' E. 

21a. Cf. Abu-’l-Fazl A.N. I. 37. Other reasons have been suggested for change 
of Maldev’s policy. For example, Syamaldas states in the Virvinod (II, 809) 
that Humayun’s party slaughtered cows, on which Maldev asked them to get 
out of his territory. 

22. We accept the date of Akbar’s birth as given by Gulbadan Begam, Abu-’l- 
Fazl and ‘Arif Qandaharl, p. 16. For the other view see Journal of the Asiatic 
Society of Bengal, 1886, pp. 80-85 and Indian Antiquary, November 1915 
pp. 233-44. 

22a. Akbar-ndma, I, p. 459. 

23. The Shah of Persia had conferred on him the title of Khan. 


66 


HUMAYUN 


24. Near Ghurband. 

25. In 1551 ‘Askarl went to Mecca and remained in exile till his death in 1558. 

25a. Akbar-nama, I, p. 582, Nizam-ud-din, II, p. 127. 

26. The Gakkhars ruled in the territory between the Indus and the upper courses 
of the Jhelum. 

27. He went to Mecca by way of Sind and died there on 5 October, 1557. 

27a. This view is not likely to be accepted by all; cf. e. y g. Ishwari Prasad, op. cit., 
p. 319. S. K. Banerji, who at first accepted the view, seems to have changed 
his mind (Vol. II, pp. 281-82). But in judging Kamran we should remember 
that we know Kamran only from the writings of the Mughul historians of 
Akbar’s court who could not but be somewhat biassed against the arch-enemy 
of their patron’s father. BadaunI takes a different view (1.585). [Ed.] 

28. For details, vide the next chapter. 

29. 31° 38' N and 72° 52' E, in Hoshiarpur district. 

30. Bayazid, pp. 191-92. Some chronicles suggest that the Afghans kindled fire 
with a view to obtaining a view of the enemy which does not seem probable. 

31. Jauhar, India Office MS. f. 52a. 

32. According to Jauhar, Aligarh MS. (Sir J. N. Sarkar’s transcript), p. 224, 
the number was 5,000. The highest estimate puts it at 10,000. 

32a. Akbar-nama, I, 662. 

33. He took interest in astrology, mathematics and literature and wrote good 
verses. The Dlwdn-i-Humayun in MS. was exhibited by Professor Sayyid 
Hasan Askari at the Indian History Congress, Calcutta, 1939. See Proceed¬ 
ings, pp. 1674-75. 

34. Khvand Amir, Humdyun-nama (Qanun-i-Humdyunl), pp. 31-44; Gulbadan 
Begam, Humdyun-nama, English Translation, pp. 118-26; Muntakhab-ut-Tawa- 
rlkh (Eng. trans.) Vol. I, pp. 467-68 and Vol. Ill, pp. 6-10; Firishta (Lucknow 
text), Vol. I, p. 243. 


♦ 


67 


CHAPTER IV 


SHER SHAH AND HIS SUCCESSORS 

I. SHER SHAH (1538-1545) 

Sher Shah is one of the most striking and redoubtable figures 
in medieval Indian history. From an humble beginning in life he 
eventually revived the Afghan power in Northern India by de¬ 
feating and ousting the Mughul emperor Humayun, and gave his 
newly established empire a well-organized administration, hitherto 
rare in medieval Indian history. 

Faiild, as was his original name, was the grandson of Ibrahim 
Sur, an obscure Afghan of Roh in the Sulaiman Range. According 
to Abu-’l-Fazl, Ibrahim was a horse-dealer, 1 but as he could not pros¬ 
per in his business there, he, along with his son Hasan, migrated to 
India during the later part of the reign of Sultan Buhlul Lodi with 
a view to improving his fortune in Hindusthan. 

But, as ill-luck would have it, he did not thrive here also; he 
could not rise to any higher position than that of a Commander of 
forty horsemen only, with assignments of some villages in the 
barren pargand of Narnaul under Jamal Khan SarangkhanI of Hissar 
Flruza. On his decease, his son Hasan succeeded to his jdglr. 

Farid was born of the first wife of Hasan, The date of his 
birth is usually given as about 1486; but the modern histo¬ 
rians hold' different views on the subject. No medieval histo¬ 
rian, on whom the modern scholars 'depend for reconstruction of 
the history of Farid, mentioned the exact date of his birth. Among 
the modern historians Dr. F. Saran, without any indication of evi¬ 
dence from earlier sources and depending mainly on two late works 
of the nineteenth century— Jdm-i-Jam written in 1839 and 
Asdr-us-Sanadid (1846) of Sir Sayyid Ahmad of Aligarh—holds 
that he was born in A.D. 1472; 2 but as these are very late works, it 
is neither reasonable nor safe to depend upon them in the absence 
of any such information from the earlier historians. Writing during 
the reign of Akbar, ‘Abbas SarwanI stated that Farid was “born 
during the time of Buhlul” (1451-1489) , 3 but this statement is too 
vague to arrive at an exact conclusion. From the meagre materials 
available about Ibrahim it is reasonable to hold that he migrated to 
India in his old age almost at the fag-end of the reign of Buhlul 
when it was not possible for him to reap the advantage given to 
Afghan recruits during the early part of the reign of this monarch, 


SHER SHAH AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


and hence he could not rise to any higher position than that of the 
Commander of forty horsemen with a small jdgir in the pargana of 
Narnaul. Having due consideration to these facts it is not unreason¬ 
able to fix Farid’s birth about A.D. I486. 4 

About his place of birth, also, the modern scholars are not in 
agreement. Dr. P. Saran is of opinion that he was born at Bajwara, 
whereas Dr. Ishwari Prasad and Dr. K. R. Qanungo hold that his 
birth took place in the pargana of Narnaul. 5 According to the 
Makhzan, his birth-place is Hissiar, 6 but no earlier historian like 
‘Abbas Sarwanl or Abu-’l-Fazl mentioned the place of his birth. It 
is quite in keeping with the implication of Abu-’l-Fazl’s writing 7 to 
say that Farid was born in the pargana of Narnaul where his father 
and grandfather lived and which he appears to have remembered 
so much in his later years as to establish in it a fortified district 
headquarters and build a mausoleum over the grave of his grand¬ 
father. On the other hand, no evidence is forthcoming to show his 
interest for Hissar. 

Hasan’s abilities attracted the attention of Jamal Khan, who 
after his transfer to Jaunpur as governor, conferred the parganas 
of Sasaram and Khavasspur Tanda (in the modern Shahabad dis¬ 
trict of Bihar) upon him as a jdgir for the maintenance of five hun¬ 
dred troopers. 

By his four marriages Hasan had eight sons, of whom Farid and 
Nizam were born of his first wife, an Afghan lady, and Suleiman 
and Ahmad were the sons of his youngest wife, originally a slave- 
girl. The boyhood of Farid was far from happy and peaceful. His 
father had great attachment for his youngest wife, to the neglect of 
his first wife. The indifference and unkindness of the father and 
too much jealousy of the step-mother appeared so unbearable to 
Farid that he left Sasaram and went to Jaunpur which was, in 
those days, an important centre of Muslim learning and culture, and 
where its madrasas gave free board and lodging to the Muslim stu¬ 
dents. There he studied both Arabic and Persian languages, includ¬ 
ing the well-known Persian works, the Gulistan, the Bustdn and the 
Sikandarndma. It is likely that he learnt there Hindi and arith¬ 
metic as well. 

His efficient administration of his father’s j dgir on the very 
first occasion leads one to the natural assumption that he might have 
had opportunities of acquiring experience of civil administration also 
during his long period of absence from Sasaram. 

He had come to Jaunpur about 1501, and on having a reconcilia¬ 
tion with his father through the mediation of his well-wishers, he 


69 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


left for Sasaram probably in January, 1518. Dr. Qanungo holds 
that “the key to the situation that compelled Mian Hasan and Sulai- 
mlan’s mother to agree to a reconciliation with Farid and also induced 
them to appoint him temporarily to the charge of the parganas , lay 
in the political crisis of the Lodi Sultanate after the death of Sultan 
Sikandar in November, 1517.” 8 

On his return, Farid acted as his father’s deputy in the parganas 
of Sasaram and Khavasspur Tanda, and during this period (c. 
1518-1522) he administered justice to all, punishing the unruly 
Zarmnddrs and the unscrupulous and oppressive officials, and pro¬ 
tecting the ryots from all kinds of oppression and tyranny, as he 
realized “that the stability of every administration depended on jus¬ 
tice, and that it should be his greatest care not to violate it, either 
by oppressing the weak or by permitting the strong to infringe the 
laws with impunity.” 9 Fully awgre that agriculture was the prin¬ 
cipal source of wealth, he encouraged cultivation in all possible 
ways and took steps to protect the cultivators from oppression. He 
said, “if the ruler cannot protect the ryots from oppressors, it is 
sheer injustice and shame to rece/ive rents from them.” 10 His per¬ 
sonal care for the peasants and far-sighted revenue reforms increased 
cultivation and satisfied them. By his indefatigable industry he 
established peace, prosperity and happiness in his father’s jdgir. 
Little did he know then that he was thus serving a period of appren¬ 
ticeship for the role of a monarch in the future. 

The successful administration and growing fame of Farid roused 
the jealousy of Sulaiman’s mother all the more, and, despite his 
brilliant achievements, his father, who was under her spell, was 
alienated from him. Finding the position intolerable Farid resigned 
his post and proceeded towards Agra, the then capital of the Lodi 
Sultanate. 

He succeeded there in obtaining a patron in Daulat Khan, an 
influential amir, through whom his case was put before Sultan 
Ibrahim for taking possession of his father’s jdgir. But the Sultan 
turned down this request, saying, “he must be a bad man indeed 
who should complain against his own father”. 11 However, it so 
happened that Hasan died soon after, and Daulat Khan was able to 
procure a royal farman in favour of Farid on the strength of which 
the latter got possession of his father’s jdgir. 

On his arrival at Sasaram, Sulaiman, his step-brother, fled to 
Muhammad Khan, the jagirdar of Chaund, 12 and sought his assist¬ 
ance. To counteract this, Farid entered the service of Bihar Khan 


70 


SHER SHAH AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


Lohanl, who, after the battle of Panlpat in A.D. 1526, declared his 
independence in South Bihar and took the title of Sultan Muhammad. 

Farid worked very hard in the service of his master and won 
his favour. We learn from Firishta and ‘Abbas Sarwani that Sultan 
Muhammad bestowed the title of Sher Khan on him for killing a 
tiger single-handed in a hunting excursion. 13 He also discharged 
his duties efficiently as the deputy-governor (vakil) of South Bihar 
and tutor ( ataliq ) of Jalal Khian, minor son of Sultan Muhammad, 
in which capacities he had been appointed. 

The rapid rise of Farid was lookejd upon askance by some and 
specially by Sulaiman, his mother, and Muhammad Khan of Chaund 
through whose machination he was deprived of his jagir and com¬ 
pelled to leave Sasaram. He went to the Mughul camp (A. D. 
1527), and, rendering useful service to Babur during his eastern 
campaigns, he got back his jagir through his assistance (A.D. 1528). 
In the following year circumstances compelled him to join the 
Afghan rebels led by Mahmud Lodi, the son of Sultan Sikandar 
Lodi, against Babur, but he offered his submission again, as did 
many of the Afghan leaders, after their attempts had ended in a 
fiasco. 

On the death of Sultan Muhammad in A.D. 1528, his minor son 
Jalal was installed in his father’s place with his mother Dudu as 
the regent. But his capital was seized by Mahmud Lodi in the same 
year. He was, however, restored in his position as a vassal of the 
Mughul emperor by Babur after the submission of the Afghans as 
mentioned above. 

As it was not possible for Dudu to manage the multifarious 
duties of the State, Sher Khan, who had already proved his adminis¬ 
trative ability, was appointed as the Deputy (rbdib) in A.D. 1529. 
Dudu having died in the beginning of 1530, all the duties of State 
devolved on him, and although he performed them efficiently, he 
aimed at centralization of all powers in his own hands. 

He created a strong party of his own and won the support of 
the greater part of the army to his cause. His position was further 
strengthened by the acquisition of the important fortress of Chunar, 
situated on the bank of, the Ganga (Ganges) south-west of Banaras, 
by his marriage with Lad Malka, the childless widow of Taj Khan, 
the commandant of the fort (A.D. 1530). After this, he took pos¬ 
session of the pargand of Chunar. In the same year, as a result of 
another marriage with Gauhar Gossain, the childless widow of Nlasir 
Khan Lohanl of Ghazlpur, he got an enormous wealth of three hun- 


71 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


dred mans of gold. 14 Thus, by the end of 1530, he became a power¬ 
ful factor to be reckoned with. 

On the personal request of Sultan Mahmud Lodi, Sher joined 
him against the Mughuls, as resistance was not feasible, but, at the 
same time he secured a farmdn from him for the kingdom of Bihar, 
thus acting against the interest of Jalal. In the ensuing battle 
between Sultan Mahmud and Humayun, fought at Dadrah 15 on the 
bank of the Gomati (c. September, 1531), he treacherously desert¬ 
ed the Sultan. This battle “marks a turning point in the career of 
Sher Khan and his relations with the Mughuls .... The almost 
total destruction of the Afghan army in this battle doomed the Lodi 
cause for ever, and Sher emerged as the forlorn hope of the Af¬ 
ghans, whose hatred of the Mughuls was diverted to a new channel 
by him.” 16 

After thus crushing the power of the Afghans, Humayun was 

not inclined to leave the strategic fortress of Chunar to an Afghan, 
although the latter had served the interest of the Mughuls on the 
day of the above-mentioned battle. Humayun opened negotiations 
with Sher for its surrender, but, on finding the latter unwilling 
to comply with this, it was besieged. When the siege was in pro¬ 
gress, Humayun was perturbed at the news of the hostile activities 
of Bahadur Shah of Gujarat, and, accepting the nominal submission 
of Sher, he raised the siege and left the place (December, 1531). 
It was a great triumph for Sher, as he not only remained in posses¬ 
sion of the fortress but got sufficient time to strengthen his position 
further to enable him to give his opponent a crushing defeat which 
eventually cost the latter his throne. 

The Lohani Chiefs, who were extremely jealous of the growing 
power of Sher, became restive and wanted to get rid of him by any 
means. His alliance with Makhdum ‘Alam, the rebel Bengal gover¬ 
nor of Hajlpur, brought about an invasion of South Bihar by Sultan 
Mahmud Shah of Bengal, particularly with the intention of punish¬ 
ing Sher, and this “had the secret support of the Lohanls.” 17 But 
the deputy-governor of South Bihar succeeded in winning a decisive 
victory over the army of Mahmud, and took possession of the terri¬ 
tory of Bengal up to the neighbourhood of Surajgarh. He had also 
received immense accumulated treasure which Makhdum had de¬ 
posited with him for safe custody before his defeat and death. 

The defeat of the Bengal army was a blow to the Lohanls whose 
chance of deliverance from the control of the deputy-governor va¬ 
nished with it. Jalal, also, was impatient of his tutelage and dic¬ 
tatorship. The Lohani chiefs conspired to assassinate him, but the 


72 


SHER SHAH AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


latter was too careful and cautious to be thrown off his guard. 
Accompanied by Jalal, they then left South Bihar and went to Sul¬ 
tan Mahmud of Bengal who had been burning with rage to take 
revenge for the discomfiture of his army at the hands of Sher. 

The Sultan of Bengal made a huge preparation to crush him. 
The expeditionary force was placed under the command of Ibrahim 
Khan, an eminent commander, and, accompanied by Jalal, it moved 
cut of Mungir which had become the base of operations for this 
campaign. A decisive battle w^as fought between Sher and the 
Bengal army on the strategic plain of Surajgarh, a few miles east 
of Barh and about eighteen miles west of Mungir. It ended in a 
complete victory of Sher; Ibrahim fell fighting and Jalal fled to Sultan 
Mahmud (A.D. 1534). 

The victory was undoubtedly a great feat on the part of Sher, 
and, besides his military success in routing the Bengal army for the 
second time, it had far-reaching political consequences. It humbled 
the power and prestige of Mahmud to a great extent and Sher came 
to possess a wide territory on the southern bank of the Ganga 
(Ganges) from Surajgarh to Chunar. After this, his ambition soar¬ 
ed higher up. Dr. Qanungo has rightly said: “But for the victory 
of Surajgarh, the son of a nondescript jagtrdar of Sasaram would 
perhaps never have emerged from his obscurity in quest of a 
crown.” 18 

Apprehending no sudden attack from the west, as Humayun 
w r as busy in his Gujarat campaign against Bahadur Shah, Sher moved 
against Mahmud Shah before the rainy season of 1535 and con¬ 
quered the territory as far as Bhagalpur. 

In the following year he again opened his campaign against 
Mahmud and proceeded towards Gaur, the capital of Bengal. At 
Teliyagarhl, he had to meet with a strong opposition of the Bengal 
army and their Portuguese allies. Leaving a detachment there 
under his son Jalal Khan, he advanced through the unfrequented 
Jharkhand route and surprised the Sultan of Bengal by suddenly ap¬ 
pearing before his capital city. If Mahmud would have taken cour¬ 
age to withstand his adversary, it would have been very difficult 
for Sher to capture Gaur with its impregnable fortifications, but 
Mahmud was frightened beyond measure and acted with cowardice 
by offering terms of peace to the invader. By the terms of the 
treaty, Sher received thirteen lakhs of gold pieces and a wide terri¬ 
tory from Kiul to Sakrigali, ninety miles in length with a breadth 
of thirty miles at various places. 


73 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


These achievements enhanced considerably his power and pre¬ 
stige, and on the fall of Bahadur Shah of Gujarat, some of the Af¬ 
ghan chiefs, who looked upon him as their future hope, also joined 
him. The weakness of Mahmud having been completely revealed, 
Sher was bent upon another invasion of Bengal and this he under¬ 
took on the pretext of the Bengal Sultlan’s non-payment of the annual 
tribute (1537). 19 He proceeded to Gaur and laid siege to it. After 
leaving Jalal Khan and Khavass Khan in charge of the siege opera¬ 
tions, he went to Chunar, and, strengthening its defences, removed 
his family and treasures to the hill fort of Bharkunda, fifty miles 
south of Chunar. 

Humayun’s anxiety knew no bounds when the alarming news 
of Sher Khan’s activities in the east reached him. Although slow 
to act, he, after necessary preparations, left Agra and proceeded 
against Sher. But instead of marching straight to Bengal, he made 
the fatal mistake of first besieging the fort of Chunar. Had he gone 
direct to Gaur and rendered assistance to Mahmud, as requested, 
he might have saved the Bengal monarchy and utilized its services 
in future to his advantage. 

The siege of Chunar dragged on, despite heavy bombardment 
of Rum! Khan, and, in the meantime, Sher pushed on with his work 
in Bengal according to his plan. 

After heroic defence for about three months, the fort of Chunar 
fell in March, 1538. 20 But Sher soon compensated this loss by the 
capture of the impregnable fort of Rohtas in Bihar by a stratagem. 
Instead of sending Afghan families and his treasure for safe custody 
in this fort, as had been arranged with its Raja, he sent armed men 
in dolis into it and they, by a sudden sally, overpowered the garrison 
and occupied it. 21 His men obtained success in Bengal also, and 
he received the happy tidings of the capture of Gaur and flight of 
Sultan Mahmud. 

After the capture of Chunar, Humayun opened negotiations 
with his adversary for a compromise and end of hostility, but it 
eventually fell through, and he marched towards Bengal. At Muner 
(on the Son), Sultan Mahmud, the fugitive king of Bengal, met 
him and he was assured of every possible assistance. 

As soon as Sher received information of Humayun’s movements, 
he started towards Gaur, narrowly by-passed the emperor near 
Patna, and sailed swiftly from Mungir to Gaur, reaching there much 
earlier than the arrival of the Mughul army at Colgong (Kahalgam), 
twenty-three miles west of TeliyagarhI. He despatched his own son 


74 


SHER SHAH AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


Jalal Khan with some other officers immediately to defend the pass 
of Teliyagarhi, where, on their arrival, the Mughul advance party 
suffered a defeat and fell back on the main army of Colgong. 

Not unnerved by the fear of Mughul arms, Sher celebrated his 
coronation at Gaur (1538) and assumed the title of Farid-ud-duniya 
Wa-din Abu-’l Muzaffar Sher Shah, as Sultan. 212 After this, on com¬ 
pletion of his arrangements, he evacuated Gaur and went to Rohtas 
by the Jharkhand route. Jalal Khan, too, had been advised to leave 
Teliyagarhi at a particular time according to his plan. 

Humayun occupied Garhl without any opposition and thence he 
arrived triumphantly at Gaur (June, 1558). 22a 

Sher did not waste his time at Rohtas but made extensive pre¬ 
parations for an offensive against the Mughuls. His plans exhibited 
wonderful dexterity and foresight. He despatched Khavass Khan to 
recover the lost places of Bihar and watch the movements of Huma¬ 
yun, while he himself proceeded westward from Bihar. He laid 
siege to Banaras and captured it. Jaunpur and Chunar were also 
besieged but they held on, and were closely blockaded. One de¬ 
tachment under experienced and capable officers was despatched 
against Bahraich and they expelled the Mughuls from that part of 
the country. Sher’s activities did not stop there; he ravaged and 
conquered the whole country as far as Kanauj, and, according to 
‘Abbas, Sambhal also was occupied by his invading forces 23 

Humayun wasted precious time (about nine months) in Ben¬ 
gal, and such thoughtlessness and want of foresight on his part at 
a time when his powerful adversary was utilizing all his resources 
to topple him down proved most disastrous to him. At last, the 
alarming news of his opponent’s activities and the rebellion of his 
brother Mlrza Hindal roused him from torpor, and, leaving Jahangir 
Quli Beg with an army of five thousand, he left Gaur (1539). Reach¬ 
ing Mungir, he crossed the Gangai (Ganges) against the advice of 
his veteran officers and marched by the southern bank of the river 
which was under the control of the Afghans. He marched up to 
Muner without any hindrance, but during his westward march 
from that place he suffered from their attacks on his flank. At 
last, he reached Chausa, situated close to the east bank of the Kar- 
manasa and ten miles south-west of Buxar. 24 

Sher pitched his camp on the western side of this river close 
to its junction with the Ganga (Ganges). With what skill and fore¬ 
sight he made his plans and acted up to them can be understood from 
his actions. He had harassed the Mughuls from behind on their 


75 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


march from Muner and then crossed the Karmanasa ahead of them 
to occupy a position from which he could keep an eye on the possible 
Mughul aid coming from the west, crossing the Ganga (Ganges) 
there, and, at the same time, prevent the crossing of the Karmanasa 
by Humayun till rains worsen his position, of which he (Sher) w T ould 
take the fullest advantage. Skirmishes went on between the hostile 
armies from day to day for a pretty long time. Humayun’s posi¬ 
tion grew worse; “disease, hardship, and fear of the enemy prompt¬ 
ed many of his soldiers to desert for their homes.” 25 The anxiety 
of approaching monsoon perplexed him further, and, news from 
Delhi and Agra being unfavourable, there was no hope of relief from 
those quarters. So, he commenced negotiations for peace with his 
foe, which, according to Jauhar, finally broke off due to the em¬ 
peror’s refusal to give up Chunar 26 

Sher did not sit idle indefinitely but hit upon a plan of surpris¬ 
ing the Mughuls. He gave out that he was proceeding against 
Maharatha Chero, the leader of an aboriginal tribe in modern Sha- 
habad district, who had been defying him, and, after marching a 
few miles in that direction at night, crossed the Karmanasa about 
five miles below Humayun’s position, unnoticed by the Mughuls, 
and, in the early dawn of June 26, 1539, fell upon the Mughuls 
from three sides. The surprise was complete; many were killed 
in their bed asleep, and many of those who took to flight were 
drowned in the Gahga, (Ganges). Humayun was able to gather 
about three hundred men, with whose assistance he fought gallantly, 
but was wounded in the left arm, and carried towards the Gahga 
(Ganges), where Nizam, a water-carrier, saved him from drowning 
with the help of his masak or inflated leather bag. Such was the 
sad plight of the emperor who reached Agra with difficulty, via 
Allahabad and Kalpl. 

The loss of the Mughuls, both in men and war-materials, was 
heavy. Eight thousand men were killed, the Mughul army being 
“practically destroyed”, 27 and the whole camp equipage, stores and 
artillery fell into the hands of the enemy. Sher’s treatment to¬ 
wards the captive beg am of Humayun and other Mughul women 
was full of sympathy and respect. 

The Afghan victory at Chausa was decisive and had far-reach¬ 
ing consequences. Dr. Qanungo says: “The horizon of Sher Khan’s 
ambition widened immensely; twelve months before he would have 
been glad to hold Bengal as the vassal of the Emperor. Now he 
won by this single stroke the whole territory of the Sharqi kingdom 
of Jaunpur in addition to the kingdoms of Bengal and Bihar in in- 


76 


SHER SHAH AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


dependent sovereignty, and could legitimately claim equality with 
the Emperor. So Delhi was no longer such a far cry for the victor.” 28 

Sher then proceeded to recover Bengal. Jahangir Qull, the Mu- 
ghul governor there, had taken his post at Garhi which was besieged. 
It was soon occupied and Jahangir Qull was treacherously slain along 
with his followers. 29 Gaur was next captured, and, although Sher 
could not spend time to establish his authority over the whole 
of Bengal, it appears that his rule extended ‘‘over the country com¬ 
prising Gaur and Sharifabiad, Satgaon and Chittagong.” 30 It appears 
that during his stay in Bengal, his second coronation took place 
at Gaur with pomp and grandeur (1539). 31 

After appointing Khizr Khan as governor of Bengal, he left this 
province and proceeded with his further plan of action. He marched 
towards Kanauj, and on his way, sent a detachment under his son 
Qutb Khan to harass the Mughul forces from behind, if the empe¬ 
ror happened to move towards Jaunpur or Kanauj by way of KalpI 
and Etawa. But Qutb was attacked and slain by the Mughuls near 
KalpI. 

On his return to Agra, Humayun endeavoured his utmost to 
unite his brothers to fight against the mighty Afghan foe, but Kare¬ 
ran did not render any assistance. Despite diverse difficulties, the 
emperor gathered together a large army and a park of artillery and 
marched towards Kanauj where the enemies had been active. 

At the Bhojpur ferry, thirty-one miles north-west of Kanauj, 
Sher foiled the attempt of the Mughuls to cross the Ganga (Ganges) 
by means of a bridge of boats. Humayun then changed his plan 
and, proceeding towards Kanauj by marching along the western 
bank of the river, he encamped at the vicinity of Kanauj. For about 
a month the two hostile parties remained encamped on the two 
sides of the Ganga, (Ganges) confronting each other—the Mughuls 
on the western bank and the Afghans on the eastern bank. As 
there was a large number of desertions from the Mughul camp, Hu¬ 
mayun considered it better to face the enemies in an open fight 
before his fighting strength dwindled abnormally low. He there¬ 
fore crossed the river and encamped on a low-lying ground which 
was unluckily flooded by unusually early rains, necessitating the re¬ 
moval of the camp to an elevated ground in front. When on May 
17, 1540, the Mughul army moved according to plan, Sher advanced 
to attack them. According to Mlrza Haidar, who commanded one 
division of the Mughul army in this encounter, known as the battle 
of Bilgram or the battle of the Ganga, 32 the Mughul force numbered 
about 40,000 and the Afghan army was less than 15,000. 33 


77 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


The Afghan assault was started by Jalal Khan from the right 
wing but he was worsted by Hindal Mirza and some other Mughul 
commanders. Sher sent sufficient reinforcements there immediately, 
and this wing, thus strengthened, made a vehement attack on the 
enemies who were forced to fall back on their centre. Barmazld 
Gaur and others commanding the left wing of the Afghan force push¬ 
ed the Mughul right wing into the rear, driving the innumerable 
camp-followers into the centre which was still firm behind the artil¬ 
lery-carriages. But the pressure of the huge number of camp-follow¬ 
ers from the right, left and rear was too much for the centre to bear 
and in the midst of disorder and confusion, the artillery became inope¬ 
rative. By a rear assault, the Afghans made the position of the Mughul 
army more untenable and compelled them to take to flight; many 
were slain on the way by the pursuing Afghan army and many 
were drowned in the Ganga (Ganges). Sir Jadunath Sarkar has 
justly observed: ‘Tt was not a battle at all but a helpless panic 
flight, which covered the Mughals with unspeakable disgrace.’’ 34 

They had left behind in the battlefield immense war-materials 
including artillery which fell into the hands of the victors. 

After leaving the battlefield, Humayun crossed the river on 
an elephant with difficulty and fled in panic to Agra. Then he went 
to Lahore, pursued by the Afghans. Even at such a critical mo¬ 
ment, his earnest attempt to unite his brothers did not bear fruit 
and Kamran did not cease from his unbrotherly actions. Humayun 
next proceeded to Sind. Thus continued his life 1 of wanderings 
from place to place, and being disappointed everywhere, he, at last, 
left India and took shelter with Shah Tahmasp of Persia. 

Sher had despatched Barmazld Gaur in pursuit of Humayun, and 
on completion of necessary works at Kanauj, he himself marched 
towards Agra. Barmazld Gaur had taken possession of the latter 
city before his chief’s arrival there and slew a number of non-com¬ 
batant Mughuls. On reaching there, Sher reprimanded his general 
for his cruelty, and sent him and Khavass Khan to continue the 
pursuit of Humayun. A detachment under Shuja‘at Khan was also 
sent to besiege Gwalior. Next he went to Delhi which had been 
occupied by Naslr Khan, another commander, and during his stay 
there, he commenced the work of its resuscitation by embellishing 
it with new structures. 

From Delhi he marched to Lahore in quest of Humayun. He 
had already received information of the inability of the ex-emperor 
to unite his brothers and their retreat in different directions, viz, 
Humayun towards Sind, Hindal towards Multan by a different routed 


78 


SHER SHAH AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


and Kamran towards Kabul. He did not stay at Lahore long but 
moved westward quickly, driving away the Mughuls. From the 
bank of the Chenab he sent a detachment to pursue Hindal, then 
he went to Bhera and thence to Khushab where he halted. Khavass 
Khan went against Humayun but he was advised not to engage him 
in battle, but only to drive him out of his dominion. Qutb Khan, 
another general, was sent against Kamran with similar instructions. 
Khavass Khan pursued Humayun as far as Mithankot, situated on 
the confluence of the Sutlej with four other rivers of the Punjab, and 
then returned to rejoin Sher Shiah at Khushab. Here the Baluch 
chiefs Fath Khan, Isma‘il Khan and GhazI Khan offered their sub¬ 
mission to the Afghan sovereign. 

Sher Shah next launched a campaign against the Gakkhars, in¬ 
habiting a mountainous region between the upper courses of the 
Jhelum and the Indus. They were inimical to the Afghans and 
their country occupied a strategic position through which an in¬ 
vader from the north-west might suddenly enter the Punjab which 
was then in Sher’s possession. So, for security and safety of his 
dominion, an offensive had to be undertaken, and the Gakkhar coun¬ 
try was invaded and ravaged. A proper site was then found out 
for the construction of a fortress with a view to guarding the nor¬ 
thern frontier and keeping the Gakkhars under control. A gigantic 
and impregnable fort was built ten miles north-west of the town of 
Jhelum and named Rohtas, after his famous strong fortress in Bihar. 
It was completed by his son Islam Shah. 

On receipt of information of the rebellious attitude of Khizr 
Khan, governor of Bengal, and his marriage with a daughter of 
the deceased Sultan Mahmud, Sher started at once for Gaur. Khizr 
Khan was completely surprised, put in chains and imprisoned 
(A.D. 1541). A man of keen insight as Sher was, he remodelled 
the administration there in such a way that rebellion might not 
recur in future. 

The province was divided into several sarkdrs and over each 
of them, he appointed a Chief Shiqddr {Shiqddr-i-Shiqddrdn) , a Chief 
Munsif (Munsij-i-Munsifdn ), and a Qazi. The Chief Shiqddr was 
primarily in charge of law and order within his jurisdiction, except 
the big towns where Kotwals performed these duties. The former 
also tried criminal cases and had under him an army to be utilized, 
if necessary, for enforcement of law and order. The duty of the Chief 
Mwnsif was to try civil cases specially with regard to revenue mat¬ 
ters. He also supervised the work of the pargand^dmins. Each 
Sarkdr was subdivided into several parganas, over each of which 


79 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


there were one Shiqddr, one Amin, one treasurer and two clerks for 
maintaining accounts. Over the whole province Sher appointed 
Qazi Fazilat as Amln-i-Bdngala “who was not a Sipah-Salar but a 
Qazl writ large....to maintain the unity and smooth working of 
the provincial administration as an arbitrator”, 35 for settlement of 
disputes among the Chief Shiqddrs. His “hold on the administration 
of Bengal was further clinched by the establishment of thanas or 
military outposts of imperial troops changed yearly by him.” 

Haibat Khan NiyazI, governor of the Punjab, suppressed the 
rebel leader Fath Khan Jat who had been in possession of the strong 
fort of Kot-Kabula in the Lakshmi Jungle (modern Montgomery 
district) and had been carrying on depredations on the! roads be¬ 
tween Delhi and Lahore. Fath Khan was defeated, imprisoned and 
put to death. Haibat Khan also conquered Multan with its depen¬ 
dencies and expelled the Baluchis. His achievements so pleased his 
master that he was conferred the title of A‘zam Humayun, with a 
command of 30,000 horse. Upper Sind with its strong fortresses 
of Bhakkar and Sehwan also fell into the hands of Sher’s victorious 
army (A.D. 1543). 

In 1542 Sher Shah had invaded Malwa whose possession he 
coveted. The cause of this invasion is not far to seek. It was his 
expansionist policy that was mainly responsible for this attack on 
the neighbour, whose independence had always been looked upqn 
askance by all the rulers of Delhi and, as it controlled the road 
from the south to the north, its possession was all the more neces¬ 
sary for them. Sher therefore marched towards Malwa by way of 
Gwalior, the fort of which had been besieged by his army a year 
ago. Its Mughul commandant now surrendered after long resist¬ 
ance for want of provisions. Sher then proceeded to Sarangpur 
where Qadir Shah, the king of Malwa, offered his submission to him. 
Thence he proceeded to Ujjain in company with Qadir, took posses¬ 
sion of this city and offered him the governorship of Lakhnawati. 36 
But the ex-king of Malwa, being apprehensive of Sher’s intention, 
fled to Mahmud III of Gujarat. From Ujjain, Sher proceeded to 
Mandu and Dhar which he occupied easily. The subsequent at¬ 
tempt of Qadir for the recovery of his dominion ended in fiasco. 

On his way back to Agra by way of Ranthambhor, Sher took 
possession of this well-known fortress from its commandant by 
peaceful means. 37 

The brunt of his next attack fell on Furana Malla of Raisen, a 
mighty fortress, twenty-seven miles east of the modern town'of 
Bhopal. This fertile principality had grown into importance by the 


80 


SHER SHAH AND HIS SUCCESSORS 

acquisition of Chanderi. There is no doubt that it fell within the 
ambit of Sher’s policy of aggrandizement and hence political fac¬ 
tors were mainly responsible for his invasion. There was also an 
alleged accusation against Purana Malla of enslaving Muslim women 
and keeping them in his harem. 

The campaign was started by the siege of Chanderi in January, 
1543. Despite gallant resistance of the Rajputs, Chanderi was cap¬ 
tured by Jalal Khan, who, overcoming the stiff opposition, also oc¬ 
cupied thei territory between Chanderi and Bhilsa. Sher himself 
proceeded to Raisen and laid siege to the fortress. Though sub¬ 
jected to heavy bombardment, the garrison defended it with all their 
might, and the siege was protracted. At last, on an assurance from 
him that Purana Malla and his followers with their property would 
be allowed to move away in safety on their surrendering the fort, 
they came out of it but were treacherously attacked by the Afghans, 
and for this act of perfidy, Sher Shah must share the responsibility. 
In order to save the honour of their women, thei Rajputs had re¬ 
course to the ghastly step of killing them by their own hands and 
then they gave up their lives, fighting gallantly against the enemies 
(June, 1543). 

On the fall of Raisen, Sher made up his mind to invade Marwar, 
then the most powerful kingdom in Rajasthan, whose boundary 
at Jhajhar was only about thirty miles from Delhi. Its king, Mal- 
dev Rathor, a capable general and an energetic ruler, extended 
his kingdom by the annexation of various places like Merta, Jaita- 
ran, Siwana, Jalor, Tonk, Nagaur and Ajmer, the last two of which 
had formerly belonged to the Delhi empire. The existence of such 
a powerful kingdom on the border of the Delhi empire was consi¬ 
dered as a serious menace to its safety. Moreover, some of the dis¬ 
affected Rajput chiefs, who had suffered defeat and loss of their 
territories at the hands of Maldev, incited the Afghan ruler to in¬ 
vade Marwar. The latter was not also well-disposed towards the 
ruler of Marwar, as he had not acted up to his desire by capturing 
Humayun and handing him over to the Sultan. 

Fully aware of the strength of his opponent, Sher made mili¬ 
tary preparations on an extensive scale, and, in the autumn of 1543, 
set out against Marwar with a huge force of 80,000 horse, unpre¬ 
cedented in any of his campaigns. Maldev went forth to oppose 
his enemy with an army of 50,000 horse, and, according as the 
exigencies of the moment demanded, he concentrated them in 
the pargand of Jaitaran, about fifty-six miles east of Jodhpur, the 
capital of Marwar. So, instead of marching to the enemy’s capital, 

81 

M. E.—6 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


as had been his previous plan, Sher halted in the village of Samel, 
in the above-mentioned par gaud, facing the army of Maldev. For 
a month the two parties lay opposite to each other, and, in the 
meantime, the position of Sher became critical owing to difficulties 
of food supplies for his huge army. The ruler of Mar war was in 
an advantageous position and the initiative of action lay with him. 
To get rid of this uncomfortable situation, Sher took recourse to a 
stratagem. He caused letters to be addressed to himself, as if writ¬ 
ten by Maldev’s generals, promising him their assistance, and 
had them dropped near the camp of the Rathor King in a silken 
bag. Becoming aware of the contents of the letters, suspicion about 
the fidelity of the generals upset the king, who, with the greater 
part of his troops, fell back towards Jodhpur. But, realizing the 
deceit played upon them by the enemy, the gallant Rajput generals 
like Jaita and Kupa resolved to fight with their valiant followers 
against Sher and die an honourable death. In the sanguinary 
battle which ensued, the laurels of victory rested with the Afghan 
Sultan, but at a great cost, with a heavy toll of lives. Jaita and 
Kupa with their brave warriors fell fighting desperately; the Rathor 
King realized the artifice of his adversary only too late. 

After this victory, Khavass Khan took possession of Jodhpur 
and Maldev was pursued from place to place, but he succeeded in 
evading capture. The Afghan army occupied the territory of Mar- 
war from Ajmer to Mount Abu. Leaving Khavass Khan in supreme 
command of his forces in Marwar and making necessary arrange¬ 
ments for the administration of the newly conquered territories, 
Sher marched towards Mewar (1544). He occupied, without any 
resistance, the fort of Chitor, the keys of which were delivered to 
him by the commandant on behalf of Mahamna Uday Singh. For 
the sake of proper administration, Chitor and its dependencies 
were formed into a separate Sarkdr. 

Sher’s next military expedition was directed against Kalinjar in 
Bundelkhand. The motive behind this expedition has been differ¬ 
ently stated by the medieval historians. Firishta says that the 
Rdjd of Kalinjar, who had witnessed the treachery of Sher against 
Purana Malla, did not submit and assumed a hostile attitude. 38 
‘Abbas says that as Kirat Simha, the Rdjd of Kalinjar, did not 
come out to meet him, “he ordered the fort to be invested.” 39 Ac¬ 
cording to Ahmad Yladgar, the author of Tdrikh-i-Saldtm-i-Ajdghina, 
the reason for Sher’s attack on Kalinjar was the refusal of its Rdjd, 
to give up Blr Simha Deva Bundela who had taken shelter with 
him. 40 But the fugitive referred to was probably Raja BTr Bhan 
of Arail 41 who had been friendly to Humayun; and with this correc- 


82 


SHER SHAH AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


tion, the reason adduced by Ahmad Yadgar appears to be quite 
satisfactory. 

Sher marched on Kalinjar and invested the fort in November, 
1544. Despite great efforts, it could not be captured, and the siege 
lasted for months together. On the day of the final assault the 
besiegers were engaged in throwing hand-grenades inside the fort. 
One of the grenades, after striking the fort wall, exploded, and, 
rebounding, fell into a heap of ammunition near the place where 
Sher was standing. There was an explosion and Sher was most se¬ 
verely burnt and carried to his camp. Even when he was thus 
hovering between life and death, he did not forget to give instruc¬ 
tion to his officers to continue the assault and capture the fort. It 
fell about the same evening and he was highly elated to hear this 
news. But the icy hand of death snatched him away the same night 
in the midst of his career of triumphant marches (May 22, 1545). 

His body was temporarily interred near Kalinjar and afterwards 
carried to Sasaram to be laid in the permanent resting place, al¬ 
ready constructed by the emperor himself. 

At the time of his death, he left an empire comprising almost 
the whole of northern India, save Kashmir, Gujarat and Assam. It 
was roughly bounded by the Indus on the west, the Gakkhar country 
on the north-west, the Himalayas on the north, Assam on the east 
and the Vindhyas on the south. 

Not only did he thus establish an empire by dint of his great 
military skill, wonderful courage, ability and resourcefulness, but, 
with his usual skill and promptitude, he made necessary arrange¬ 
ments for its smooth and efficient administration. At the helm of 
affairs was the Sultan himself, and although, like his predeces¬ 
sors, he was a despot and centralized all power in his own hands, 
he was a benevolent despot whose primary aim was to do good to 
his subjects, irrespective of caste or religion. As it is not humanly 
possible to conduct all affairs of the empire single-handed, he ap¬ 
pointed several ministers to assist him in his multifarious duties. In 
fact, these ministers occupied the position of secretaries rather than 
ministers, as they had no power of initiative or final determination 
of any policy or transacting matters of importance without Sultan’s 
orders. Among the ministers, mention may be made of DiwdnA- 
Wizdrat, Dlwdn-i L Risdlat 9 Diwdn-i-Arz and Diwdn-i-Inshd. The Dlwdn - 
i-Wizarat was in charge of the Wazir and primarily dealt with finance. 
The Diwdn-i-Risdlat “dealt with religious matters, pious foundations, 
stipends to deserving scholars and men of piety. This office was 
presided over by the Sadr-us-Sudur, who generally was also the 


83 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Qazi-i-murwdlik; in the latter capacity he controlled the department 
of justice.” 42 The Diwdn-i- c Arz was under the l Ariz-i-mumdlik 
who was in charge of recruitment and organization of the army as 
well as their payment. The Diwdn-i-Insha, dealing with government 
correspondence, was in charge of Dabir-i-Kbds. Mention may also 
be made of the Barid-i-mumalik who was the head of the intelli¬ 
gence department. 

In spite of the paucity of materials regarding the highest ad¬ 
ministrative unit in the empire of Sher Shah, we find that there 
were military governorships in cases of Ajmer, Malwa and the 
Punjab. Bengal was at first administered likewise, but the lesson 
of a bitter experience in this distant province taught him to adopt 
a more prudent measure and he abolished the post of the military 
governor, as stated before, dividing the whole province into several 
Sarkars with Amm-i-Bdngald (civilian Viceroy) at thb top for 
smooth running of the administration. The provinces were divid¬ 
ed into Sarkars, each of which was sub-divided into parganas. 
Over each Sarkar there were one Chief Shiqdar, one Chief M'unsif, 
and a Qdzi. The Chief Shiqdar (Shiqddr-i-Shiqddrdn) was in charge 
of law and order in the Sarkar and had a body of troops to assist 
him in his work, when necessary. He also tried criminal cases re¬ 
garding infringement of law and order and supervised the work of 
the Shiqddrs in his jurisdiction. The Chief Munsif ( Munsij-i-Mun - 
sifdn) tried civil cases, specially arising out of revenue matters and 
supervised the work of the pargand^amins. 

Over each par gawd, there were one Shiqdar, one drain, one 
fotadar (treasurer) and two clerks. The Shiqdar was entrusted with 
the duty of maintaining law and order in the pargana and assisting 
the i amin with his army, if necessary, to enforce collection of re¬ 
venue. The duty of the dniin was to conduct survey of lands, 
their assessment and collection of revenue. He was to discharge 
his function as “an impartial umpire between the State demanding 
revenue and the individual ryots paying it”. 43 Of the two Kdrkuns 
or clerks, one was to write accounts in Hindi and the other in 
Persian. 

The Sultan introduced the system of transferring the officers of 
the Sarkars and par gauds every two or three years. 

The land revenue system of Sher Shah has earned an undying 
fame for him and it became the basis of future agrarian systems 
in India. He had acquired sufficient experience in survey, assess¬ 
ment and settlement of land revenue in his father’s jagir at Sasa- 
ram, and when he occupied the throne as an emperor, he came 


84 


SHER SHAH AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


with his system successfully tested. In some regions steps were 
taken for survey of lands, and revenue was settled according to the 
fertility of the soil, based on the experience of the past average yield 
and the expected produce of the land. In many parts of the kingdom 
there was no survey, and revenue was fixed at a definite share of the 
produce. Although there are differences of opinion among the 
modern historians about the government’s share of land revenue, it 
appears from the Am-i-Akbari and the Makhzan 44 that it was less 
than one-third and probably one-fourth 44a of the average yield of the 
land, payable either in cash or in kind, preference being given to 
the former method. The Sultan’s instructions to his revenue officers 
were to show leniency at the time of assessment but to be strict at 
the time of realization of rent. Due consideration was, however, 
given in cases of damage to crops caused by movement of troops 
and to paucity of yield, nature’s vagaries like drought, etc. A 
Kabuliyat (deed of agreement) containing the tenant’s right in the 
land and his liabilities was taken from him, and the government 
issued a patta (title-deed) to him stating similar terms and condi¬ 
tions. Sher tried to do away with the authority of the middle¬ 
men and establish a direct relation with the tenants who were en¬ 
couraged to pay their dues direct to the government treasury. But 
there were also Jaglrs and ZamKmddri systems. As he considered 
agriculture to be the main source of prosperity of his empire, he 
took special interest in the welfare of the cultivators and took steps 
against any oppression or harassment to them. His salutary reforms 
benefited the peasants, enhanced cultivation, and increased the re¬ 
venue of the empire. Other sources of revenue included customs 
duties, Jizya, Zakat, cesses on a variety of articles and khums. 

Sher Shah’s currency and tariff reforms contributed a great 
deal towards the improvement of the economic condition of the 
country. The currency was then in a deplorable condition due to 
the paucity of current coins, the debasement in regard to their 
metal, and absence of any fixed ratio between the coins of gold 
and those of other metals. He took steps to remodel the currency. 
Coins of gold and mixed metal were abolished, and separate coins 
of gold, silver and copper of fixed standard were issued. He exe¬ 
cuted gold coins of 168.5 grains, 167 grains and 166.4 grains and 
his silver rupee, which weighed 180 grains, contained 175 grains of 
pure silver. He also issued a large number of new copper coins, 
subsequently known as dam. The silver rupee and the copper dam 
had their sub-divisions of halves, quarters, eighths, and sixteenths. 
The ratios between the silver coins and various gold coins were 
fixed; the rate of exchange between the copper dam and the silvter 


85 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


rupee was 64 to 1. These currency reforms removed the long-felt 
inconvenience and difficulties of the general public and the busi¬ 
ness community. “The reformed system of currency of Sher lasted 
throughout the Mughul period, was maintained by the East India 
Company down to 1835, and is the basis of the. . . .British currency 

(up to 1947). 45 

Sher Shah also facilitated trade and commerce by abolishing 
many vexatious imposts on merchandise and by realizing duties on 
them twice only, viz., once at the frontier when a commodity was 
imported, and again at the place of its sale. 

The Sultan acquired great reputation as a lover of even-hand¬ 
ed justice. Even if any of his relatives or grandees committed any 
offence, he did not hesitate to punish him in the same manner as 
he punished an offender belonging to the ordinary strata of the 
society. He heard cases in original as well as of appeals. Next to 
him was the Chief Qdzl of the empire, who heard primarily cases 
of appeals, but cases at the initial stage were also not outside the 
purview of his court. Besides, as head of the judicial department, 
he had to conduct the administration of his department. The head¬ 
quarters of the Sarkdrs and probably other important cities had 
Qdzis who tried criminal cases. As has been stated before, crimi¬ 
nal cases regarding infringement of law and order were tried by 
the Chief Shiqddrs in the Sarkdrs where the Chief Munsif heard 
civil cases, specially of revenue disputes, and similar cases were 
disposed of by the dmlns in the pargands. 

The police system of Sher Shah was simple, and, according to 
the Persian historians, worked well, achieving the objective aimed 
at. The Shiqddr-i-Shiqddrdn and the Shiqddr had to maintain 
peace and order within their jurisdictions. In the villages, the 
system of local responsibility was followed and the village head- 
men had to bear the responsibility for crimes committed within 
their jurisdictions. If they could find out the culprits or produce 
them within the stipulated time, the latter were duly punished, but 
if the headmen were unable to do so, they themselves would have 
to face the punishment for such crimes. ‘Abbas says that the head¬ 
men “used to protect the limits of their own villages, lest any thief 
or robber, or enemy of their enemies might injure a traveller, and 
so be the means of their destruction and death”. 46 About the effect 
of the system, Firishta says, “such was the public security during 
his reign, that travellers and merchants, depositing their property 
on the roadside, lay down to sleep without apprehension of 
robbery”. 47 


86 


SHER SHAH AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


One of the greatest contributions of Sher Shah was his con¬ 
struction of roads connecting important parts of his empire with his 
capital. They were necessary for a variety of causes, viz., the im¬ 
perial defence, quick and regular despatch of news to the emperor, 
improvement of trade and commerce, and convenience of the tra¬ 
velling public. The longest road built by him (fifteen hundred 
kos) ran from Sonargaon (near Dacca), via Agra and Delhi to the 
Indus; the second road ran from Agra to Jodhpur and the fort of 
Chitor, the third from Agra to Burhanpur, and the fourth from 
Lahore to Multan. For the convenience of the travellers, shade¬ 
giving trees were planted on both sides of these roads. Sard’is 
were established along them at intervals of four miles and separate 
arrangements provided for both the Hindus and the Muslims. These 
Sard’ls not only served as rest-houses for travellers but also as 
stations of dak chaukl. Sher Shah had a well-organized espionage 
system and his spies used to send him through the dak chaukl 
prompt information of every important matter even from the re¬ 
motest part of his empire. Such a system of conveyance of in¬ 
formation by means of dcik chaukl was not new to our country but 
he revived and improved it to a considerable extent. This depart¬ 
ment was under Ddrogd-i-Ddk-Chaukl and under him there were in¬ 
numerable news-writers and news-carriers. The efficiency of this 
department contributed much to the successful administration of 
this monarch. 

Fully aware of the defects of the feudal levy, the Sultan rea¬ 
lized the necessity of a strong and well-equipped standing army 
under his direct control. The system of feudal levy was not dis¬ 
continued but the well-organized imperial army added to his 
strength and power. His army consisted of different nationalities 
including the Hindus, but the Afghans formed the most predomi¬ 
nant element. He took personal interest in the recruitment of 
soldiers and revived ‘Ala-ud-din’s systems of branding the horses 
and recording the descriptive roll of every soldier in order to 
guard against proxies. His earnest effort was to maintain as much 
direct touch with the soldiers as possible, hearing their grievances and 
removing them, when necessary. All payments were made to them 
individually by the government. In order to minimize the risk of 
any military rising, his reforms further aimed at establish¬ 
ing an official relation, in lieu of any personal attachment, between 
an ordinary soldier and his officers. 

Sher Shah’s military strength under his direct control con¬ 
sisted of 1,50,000 cavalry, 25,000 infantry, and a park of artillery, 


87 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


besides 5,000 war-elephants. Contingents of imperial troops were 
maintained at the strategic places of his empire; each of these divi¬ 
sions known as fauj was under the command of a faujddr. 

The Sultan was a stern disciplinarian and maintained strict dis¬ 
cipline in his army. 

In spite of the stormy days that he had to pass through, he 
was fond of architecture, and the buildings which he constructed 
exhibit his grandeur of design and fine artistic taste. His own 
mausoleum at Sasaram is one of the most beautiful structures 
built in India during the medieval period. “The style may be 
described as intermediate between the austerity of the Tughluq 
buildings and feminine grace of Shah Jahan’s masterpiece.” 48 The 
magnificent mosque in the Purania-QiTa in Delhi also bears testi¬ 
mony to Sher’s superb ideas and taste for fine workmanship. In 
the field of constructing fortresses, he has left a deep impress of 
his military engineering by his gigantic and magnificent fort named 
Rohtas in the district of Jhelum. 

It is admitted by all that Sher Shah worked very hard, at¬ 
tending to minute details, promoted efficiency in the machinery of 
the State and was one of the greatest and most capable adminis¬ 
trators of medieval India. But on a careful scrutiny of his ela¬ 
borate regulations we do not find anything entirely new or origi¬ 
nal in them except in certain features of his land revenue system. 
He was thus more a reformer than an innovator. He did not create 
any new ministry; his administrative divisions and sub-divisions 
were taken from the past. He did not also introduce anything 
new either in the administration of justice or in judicial organiza¬ 
tion. His systems of espionage and dak chaukl were borrowed from 
his predecessors. Under ‘Ala-ud-dln Khaljl the system of espio¬ 
nage was carried to frightful perfection, and the institution of dak 
chaukl is also attributed to him. In regard to the army, Sher 
Shah revived the system of ‘Ala-ud-din Khalji with improvements, 
where considered necessary. In addition to reviving ‘Ala-ud-dln’s 
system of branding of horses, he instituted the practice of record¬ 
ing the descriptive roll of every soldier to put a stop to the prac¬ 
tice of sending proxies. Among the Sultans of Delhi it was ‘Ala- 
ud-din who first devised the scheme of measurement of lands and 
tried to improve the system of assessment prevalent in the coun¬ 
try, but it was neither so comprehensive nor so well-intentioned as 
that of Sher Shah. The system introduced by the latter had many 
salient features, new and original, and primarily aimed at the wel¬ 
fare of the peasants and increase of cultivation. 


88 


SHER SHAH AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


Although Sher Shah was mainly a reformer, he infused a new 
spirit into the old institutions, improved them, wherever necessary, 
and supervised the actual workings with plodding industry in order 
to turn the whole machinery of State into an instrument of popular 
weal. 

Judged by his wonderful activities and outstanding achieve¬ 
ments he undoubtedly occupies a high place among the crowned 
heads of medieval India. From the son of an ordinary jdgirddr 
harassed by serious obstacles and active oppositions even of his 
own men, he advanced step by step by sheer merit till he acquired 
the throne of Hindusthan and revived the Afghan rule by expelling 
Humayun from India. 

As a soldier, he possessed indomitable courage, extraordinary 
patience and untiring energy, and, as a general, he had that rare 
quality of a leader’s personal magnetism which endeared him to his 
followers whom he led from victory to victory and, with whom 
he toiled and mixed together, sharing their hardships and priva¬ 
tions, when necessary. His rapidity of movements and the tact and 
foresight that he displayed in his campaigns were beyond the ima¬ 
gination of his adversaries who had to face discomfiture. As far 
as possible, he tried to avoid open engagements and made sudden 
sallies on the enemies to take them by surprise. He did not also 
hesitate to outwit them by cunning and craftiness. Despite the 
ignoble means which he followed at times, his successes dazzled the 
eyes of his contemporaries and raised him to the pinnacle of glory. 

But his achievements as a ruler outweigh those as a general, 
and his place in history rests more on his constructive genius dis¬ 
played in his administrative policy than for victories in the battle¬ 
fields. He had a thorough grasp of all the departments of adminis¬ 
tration and they showed the salutary effect of his reforming hands. 
He reorganized the district administration and, in the case of 
Bengal, provincial administration, too; he reformed the land re¬ 
venue and currency systems, police, intelligence, and army depart¬ 
ments, and duties on merchandise were made conducive to trade 
and commerce. He kept in check the individualistic spirit of the 
Afghans—a hard task, indeed, beset with almost insuperable diffi¬ 
culties—and utilized their services to an extent which no ruler in 
medieval India prior to him could do. 

A benevolent ruler as he was, he aimed at the welfare of his 
subjects. W. Crooke says, “Sher Shah was the first who attempted 
to found an Indian Empire broadly based upon the people’s will. 
. . . .He had the genius to see that the Government must be popu- 


89 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


larized, that the king must govern for the benefit of his subjects, 
that the Hindus must be conciliated by a policy of justice and 

toleration.‘No Government, not even the British, has shown so 

much wisdom as this Pathan’ as Keene says.” 49 

Though he was an orthodox Sunrii in his private life, his 
general policy towards the Hindus, who formed the majority of his 
subjects, was one of toleration and good will, as he had enough of 
prudence and foresight of a true statesman to realize that, unless 
he could win over their sympathy and co-operation, the stability 
of his empire would be at stake. He allowed the Hindus to follow 
their religious tenets without any interference of the government, 
and many of them were employed both in his civil and military 
departments. A large part of his infantry consisted of the Hindus 
and one of his best and trusted generals was Barmazid Gaur whom 
he sent to pursue Humayun after the battles of Chausa and 
Bilgram. 

Considering from different aspects his love and sympathy for 
his subjects, care for the peasantry, liberal outlook, sense of even- 
handed justice, indefatigable industry, devotion to duty even at 
the cost of personal rest and comfort, and, above all, his construc¬ 
tive statesmanship, he must be accorded a position much ahead of 
his predecessors in medieval India and next only to that of Akbar. 

II. ISLAM SHAH (1545-1554) 

Of the three sons of Sher Shah, Qutb Khan, the youngest, had 
pre-deceased his father, and ‘Adil Khan, the eldest, and Jalal Khan, 
the second, were at Ranthambhor and Rewa, 50 respectively, at the 
time of their father’s death. Jalal Khan, who had given sufficient 
proof of his courage, industry and military abilities, and who was 
available nearer, was chosen by the nobles as the successor of his 
father in preference to ‘Adil Khan, who, in spite of his physical 
strength, was indolent and ease-loving, and not so easily available. 

Jalal Khan arrived at Kalinjar on May 26, 1545. He was crown¬ 
ed on the same day, and assumed the title of Islam Shah. Then he 
went to Agra, the imperial capital, and in order to enlist the sym¬ 
pathy and co-operation of the soldiers, he gave them two months’ 

pay. 


‘Adil Khan refused to give up the fort of Ranthambhor and was 
reluctant to go to the capital to settle the differences with his 


90 



SHER SHAH AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


brother amicably. But on receiving assurance of safe return from 
eminent nobles like Qutb Khan Nlaib, Khavass Khan, ‘Isa Khlan 
NiyazI, and Jalal Khan bin Jalu, he proceeded to meet his brother. 
In the meantime, Islam Shah had made a plan to murder him, but 
it did not succeed. Thereafter, Bayana, situated about fifty-three 
miles south-west of Agra, was assigned to him, but the Sultan again 
changed his mind and there was therefore no real reconciliation 
between the brothers, Islam Shah secretly arranged to bring his 
brother a prisoner, but the four nobles, mentioned above, took up 
his cause and made a plot to dethrone the sovereign. ‘Adil Khan’s 
luck did not turn in his favour in the ensuing battle near Agra, 
and, having suffered a reverse there, he fled towards Bundelkhand, 
never to be heard of again, while Khavass Khan and ‘Isa Khan 
NiyazI retreated towards Mewat. At Firuzpur, in Mewiat, they were 
able to defeat the Sultan’s army sent in pursuit of them, but the 
royal army having been soon reinforced, they were compelled to 
retreat to the Kumaon hills. 

The conspiracy to raise ‘Adil Khan to the throne made the 
Sultan suspicious about most of his nobles. Jalal Khan bin Jalu 
and his brother were put to death; Qutb Khan, another supporter 
of ‘Adil Khan, having been delivered over by Haibat Khan, the 
governor of Lahore, with whom he had taken shelter, was sent 
along with many other suspected nobles to Gwalior. Most of them 
were subsequently murdered. Such punishments on the nobility 
alarmed the rest and aroused the old tribal jealousies which Sher 
Shah had kept in check. The powerful Niyazis under the leadership 
of Haibat Khan NiyazI arrayed a strong party of opposition against 
the Sultan and proceeded to Ambala; Khavass Khan also joined 
them. But finding that Haibat Khan was ambitious to seize the 
throne in the event of success against Islam Shah, Khavass Khan, 
who was in favour of ‘Adil Khan, withdrew his forces on the day 
of the battle, the natural consequence of which was that Haibat 
was defeated in the battle fought near Ambala. He was pursued 
from place to place and eventually took shelter in Kashmir, but 
his mother and daughters who had fallen into the hands of the royal 
force, were ill-treated and ultimately put to death. 

Khavass Khan had gone back to the Kumaon hills and taken 
refuge with its Rdja, but, on his subsequent surrender to the Sultan, 
he was killed in an ignoble manner. 

The Sultan was too severe on the nobles of his father’s time 
whom, by his tact and foresight, he might have turned into his 
supporters and utilized, like his great father, in the service of the 


91 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


empire; but he considered them to have grown too much, almost 
overshadowing the Crown. His severity and unwonted harshness 
broke the spirit of the Afghans on whom he was loth to place con¬ 
fidence. He appointed men of his own choice, many from the Sur 
clan, in the various key positions of the empire. Ahmad Khan Sur 
was appointed governor of Lahore; ‘Isa Khan Sur was posted in 
Malwa in place of Shuja'at Khan; QazI Fazilat was removed from 
Bengal and replaced by Muhammad Khan Sur; Ghazi Khan Sur 
was placed in charge of Bayana; while his son Ibrahim Khan Sur 
received charge of Agra. A very high rank in the army—that of a 
command of 20,000, with the charge of Sarkar Sambhal—was bes¬ 
towed on the Sultan’s cousin and brother-in-law Mubariz Khan, 
who, later on, proved to be a great sore in the body-politic, en¬ 
dangering its peace and tranquillity. 

The Sultan was careful enough to watch the movements of the 
Mughuls, and when he learnt that Humayun had crossed the Indus, 
he, in spite of his illness, prepared to face the enemy, but the latter 
returned to Kabul. Islam Shah then went back to Gwalior which 
was his favourite place. Here a conspiracy was made by his dis¬ 
affected nobles to assassinate him, but it was foiled, and the ring 
leaders were put to death. He had also escaped another attempt 
on his life in the early part of his reign. 

After a reign of nine years and six months he died on 22 
November, 1554. 

Like his father, Islam Shah was a strong administrator and 
strict disciplinarian. He could not brook the idea of disobedience 
or any action against him, and insisted on implicit obedience from 
everyone, to whatever rank he might belong. His punishments to 
those who were implicated or suspected to be implicated in any 
action against him were severe. His authority was well-establish¬ 
ed in the empire and the efficiency of his espionage system and dak 
chauki contributed to this success to a large extent. 

He was very particular in maintaining the prestige and dignity 
of the King’s position. As the use of scarlet tents was the privi¬ 
lege of the Sultan alone, he forbade their use by the nobility or any¬ 
body else. 

Hb not only followed the administrative policy of Sher Shah 
but improved it, where deemed necessary. Detailed regulations 
were issued regarding every department of the government like 
general administration, revenue, and religion, whether these were 
agreeable to the Shar’iyat or not, for the guidance of the officers 


92 


SHER SHAH AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


and their subordinates. Darbars were held in all districts on 
Fridays when the military officers, dmlns and other officials used to 
make their obeisance with reverence to the shoes and the quiver 
of the Sultan . 51 

For better organization and efficiency, he introduced the grad¬ 
ed system in the army and there were different units, ranging from 
those of fifty to twenty thousand. Above fifty and below twenty 
thousand, there were units of two hundred, two hundred and fifty, 
five hundred, five thousand, and ten thousand . 52 

His keen knowledge of the military strategy may be realized 
from his construction of Mankot 53 in the Siwalik Hills, about one 
hundred and one miles north-east of Lahore, for the defence of the 
Punjab and keeping the Gakkhars in check. 

He added to the number of sard’is by constructing one sard’i be¬ 
tween every two sard’is of his father, and a rest-house, a mosque, 
and water-carriers were provided in them. Arrangements were also 
made for supplying uncooked and cooked food to the Hindus and the 
Muslims respectively. Orders were at the same time issued for the 
proper upkeep and maintenance of the sard’is and gardens construct¬ 
ed by Sher Shah. 

Besides his capabilities as a general, he was a steadfast admi¬ 
nistrator who worked with utmost devotion and industry in the in¬ 
terest of the empire. His reign may be said to be a continuation 
of that of his father, and in spite of the stormy days that he had 
to pass through, peace and prosperity prevailed in his empire. He 
encouraged cultivation and looked to the welfare of the peasantry 
as his father. 

Although he was an orthodox Sunni in his private life, his 
work as a ruler was never obsessed by his religious views, and he 
kept politics apart from religion. 

But in spite of his abilities as a ruler, it must be admitted that 
he was at times a poor judge of mein and was swayed by feelings 
of unwonted cruelty and vindictiveness as he showed in his treat¬ 
ment towards the experienced and veteran nobles of his father’s 
time. His appointment of Mubariz Khan, who proved to be un¬ 
worthy of his confidence, was a glaring instance of a mistaken 
choice, pointing to his poor knowledge and experience of human 
character, for which his son and successor had to pay dearly, and 
which was, to a great extent, responsible for the serious troubles 
that set in after him. 


93 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


III. FIRUZ SHAH (1554) 

Islam Shah was succeeded by his minor son Firuz, but Mubariz 
Khan, son of Sher Shah’s younger brother Nizam and brother of 
the minor king’s mother, Bibi Bai, murdered him and ascended the 
throne with the title of Muhammad ‘Adil Shah. 

Such a tragic death might have been averted had Islam Shah 
acted on his own initiative without waiting for his wife’s consent 
for the removal of his brother-in-law whose evil intentions he could 
gauge beforehand. 

IV. MUHAMMAD ‘ADIL SHAH (1554-1556) 

‘Adil Shah (also called ‘Adll Shah) tried to conciliate the 
nobles and the army by a profuse distribution of wealth and titles, 
where necessary. But his murder of the rightful sovereign had its 
repercussions, and it sounded the death-knell of the Sur dynasty. 
He was weak and incompetent to wield the sceptre and hold in 
check the disintegrating forces. But he appointed as Wazlr a very 
capable person called Himu, a Hindu, who, hailing from Rewiari, 
belonged to the Dhusar caste, and from a humble start in life, had 
occupied, during the reign of Islam Shiah, the posts of Shahna or 
Superintendent of the Delhi market, the head of the Departments 
of Intelligence and Posts (Ddrogd-i-Ddk-Chauki ), and afterwards 
high military command. But the weakness of the Sultan and his 
worthlessness let loose the centrifugal forces, and in different 
parts of the empire there were military upheavals which rocked it 
to its foundation. 

Ibrahim Khan Sur, son of Ghiazi Khan, and brother-in-law of 
the Sultan, who was in charge of Agra, revolted. He defeated the 
army which ‘Adil Shah had despatched against him and moved 
with his victorious forces to Delhi which was captured. There¬ 
after he assumed the regal title and it was not possible for ‘Adil to 
displace him. Ahmad Khan Sur, another brother-in-law of the 
Sultan and governor of Lahore, took the title of Sikandar Shah and 
declared his independence. Muhammad Khan Sur, governor of 
Bengal, also revolted and assumed the title of Shams-ud-dln Muham¬ 
mad Shah Ghazi. The empire, which had been built by Sher Shah 
and maintained with care by Islam Shah, thus fell to pieces, and it 
was parcelled out into four main divisions—Delhi and Agra under 
Ibrahim Shah; the Punjab under Sikandar Shah; Bengal under 
Shams-ud-din Muhammad Shah; and the territories from the vicinity 
of Agra to Bihar under Muhammad ‘Adil Shah. 


94 


SHER SHAH AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


Not satisfied with the Punjab alone, Sikandar marched against 
Ibrahim for the possession of Delhi and Agra and defeated him at 
Farah, about twenty miles from Agra, despite the overwhelming 
numerical superiority of the forces of his opponent. Sikandar then 
took possession of both Delhi and Agra (A.D. 1555). 

The rivalry and hostility among the Afghans not only jeopar¬ 
dized the peace and security of northern India but also afforded 
Humayun a good opportunity for the recovery of his lost possessions 
there. From Kabul, he started on his Indian expedition in Novem¬ 
ber, 1554. On hearing of his advance, Tatar Khan Kashi evacuated 
the fort of Rohtas without any attempt to defend it. In February, 
1555, Humayun occupied Lahore, too, without any opposition while 
another detachment of his forces defeated the Afghans at DIpalpur. 
The Mughuls also occupied Jullundur and their advance guard pro¬ 
ceeded towards Sirhind. This rapid progress of the Mughul army 
was due to Sikandar Shah’s preoccupation in his struggle against 
Ibrahim. The alarming situation in the Punjab roused the former 
to action, and he despatched a force of 30,000 horse against the 
enemies with whom an open encounter took place at Machlwara, 
in Ludhiana district. But the Afghans were defeated and the 
Mughuls captured Sirhind. Sikandar then marched in person at 
the head of 80,000 cavalry and met the Mughul army at Sirhind. 
Despite the vast superiority of his forces in number, he was de¬ 
feated before the superior generalship and military tactics of his 
enemies (June 22, 1555) and was compelled to retreat to the Siwa- 
lik hills. The Mughuls marched triumphantly to Delhi and occu¬ 
pied it. 

Taking advantage of misgovernment by the Mughul governor 
in the Punjab, Sikandar came out of his retreat to recover his terri¬ 
tories, but, being unable to achieve anything tangible, he took 
shelter in the fort of Mankot. 

In spite of the Mughul menace there was no cessation of 
hostility among the Afghans, and Ibrahim renewed his strife with 
‘Adil Shah. HImu, the Wazlr of ‘Adil, defeated him twice—once 
near KalpI and, again, near Khanua—and compelled him to seek re¬ 
fuge in the fort of Bayana which was besieged; but, as Muhammad 
Shah of Bengal had created an alarming situation and was march¬ 
ing towards KalpI, ‘Adil Shah recalled his minister who, thereafter, 
joined his master at KalpI. Muhammad Shah was defeated at 
Chhapparghatta, about twenty miles from KalpI, and forced to take 
to his heels. ‘Adil Shah occupied Bengal, and, after retaining 
Shahbaz Khan as governor there, he came back to Chunar which 
he had made his residential capital. 


95 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Taking advantage of the death of Humayun (January, 1556) 
and the accession of young Akbar, HImu proceeded from Gwalior 
to Agra with a huge force and occupied it easily, as its governor 
Iskandar Khan Uzbeg fled to Delhi out of fear, without offering any 
resistance. Next, he marched on Delhi and took possession of it 
after defeating its governor Tardi Beg Khan. 

Emboldened by his successes and being in possession of Delhi, 
HImu assumed independence, with the title of Raja Vikramaditya, 
and in order to gain the support of his Afghan officers and soldiers 
he made a lavish distribution of wealth among them. Next he took 
necessary steps to withstand the Mughuls who had been proceeding 
against him. But his advance guard was defeated by that of Akbar 
under the command of ‘All Quit Khan and his artillery fell into the 
hands of the enemies. This discomfiture did not in any way dispirit 
him and he marched on with a huge force consisting of infantry, ca¬ 
valry, artillery and war-elephants to the memorable battlefield of 
Panlpat, where he met his adversaries on 5 November, 1556. The 
numerical strength of Himu’s army was decidedly much above that 
of his opponents. 

i 

The battle began with a bold charge by HImu on the Mughuls 
whose right and left wings were thrown into confusion. Then, 
with the help of his 1500 war elephants he dashed against the ene¬ 
mies’ centre and, although the fight appeared to be in his favour, 
it continued unabated, when an arrow pierced his eye, making him 
unconscious. This decided the fate of the day, as his army, con¬ 
sidering him dead, fled pell-mell in all directions. While he was 
being carried to a safe place by his elephant-driver, he was cap¬ 
tured by Shah Quli Mahram, a Mughul officer, and taken to Akbar 
who, at the request of his guardian and protector, Bairam Khan, 
first struck him with his sword and, then, the protector followed 
him, severing his head from the body. 54 

The victory of the Mughuls was thus complete, and it not only 
decided the fate of HImu but also of the Afghans. Delhi and Agra 
soon fell into the hands of the victors. 

Meanwhile Sikandar had been active in the Punjab, defeating 
Khizr Khvaja Khan at Chamiari, about thirty-five miles from La¬ 
hore, and driving him to the latter place. Not content with sending 
relief, Akbar and Bairam Khan proceeded against Sikandar who, 
therefore, took refuge at Mankot which was also besieged. He 
held on for about six months, depending on the strength of the fort 
as well as in expectation of a diversion to be possibly created by 
‘Adil Shah who was still in possession of Chunar. His expectation 


96 


SHER SHAH AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


came to naught at ‘Adil’s defeat and death in a battle against Khizr 
Khan Sur of Bengal (1557), and this disquieting news disheartened 
him so much that he surrendered, receiving an assignment in Bihar, 
whence he was expelled within a short time by Akbar and died 
about two years later in Bengal. Ibrahim Sur took refuge in Orissa 
where he met his doom about ten years later (1567-1568). 

Thus disappeared the different Sur rivals from the political 
arena of northern India which, by their selfish designs, had been 
converted into an unhappy land of turmoil and confusion, and their 
exit made room for the re-establishment of the Mughul rule under 
the strong but benevolent regime of Akbar. 


APPENDIX 

( BY THE EDITOR ) 

HiMU—A FORGOTTEN HINDU HERO 

Neither fate nor historians have been kind to Hlmu to whom 
reference has been made above (pp. 94-96). Historians, medieval 
and modern, have done scant justice to, and failed to show due 
appreciation of, the unique personality and greatness of a Hindu 
who, during the heyday of Muslim rule in India, worked his way 
from a grocer’s shop to the throne of Delhi, and, but for an accident 
in a battle which turned victory into defeat, might have founded a 
Hindu ruling dynasty, instead of the Mughuls, in Delhi. Although 
his career is known to us almost exclusively from the writings of 
historians who looked down upon him as an upstart Hindu and an 
arch-enemy of their patrons, the Mughul rulers, yet enough has 
been preserved in their chronicles 55 to show that bare historical jus¬ 
tice demands that the career of this great Hindu should be impar¬ 
tially reviewed as a whole, separately, as an important episode in 
the history of medieval India. For, there is no doubt that he 
furnishes the only shining example of a Hindu, born and brought 
up as such in a Muslim State, who once dominated the political 
stage of North India by sheer merit and personality without any 
advantage of birth or fortune. As no such attempt seems to have 
been made in any general history of India so far, no apology is 
needed for the short sketch of the life and activities of the great 
Hindu Commoner, Hemchandra, called by his Afghan followers 
after his accession to the throne of Delhi, Hlmu Shah. 

Hlmu was born in a poor family of Dhansar section of the 
Baniya caste, living in a town in the southern part of Alwar. Ba- 
dauni calls him “the greengrocer, of the township of Rewari in 
Mewat, whom Islam Shah had gradually elevated from the position 
of Police Superintendent of the bazars and confirmer of punishment, 
and had by degrees made into a trusted confidant”. In other 
words, Hlmu, originally a grocer (or hawker) by profession 
in a small township in Alwar, somehow came to the notice of Islam 

97 


M.E.—7 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Shah who, satisfied with his ability, successively promoted him to 
the posts of Superintendent of the Delhi market ( Shahna ), and 
head of the Departments of Intelligence and Posts (Ddrogd-i'-Dak- 
Chauki). Islam Shah also trusted him with important and confi¬ 
dential business, involving military commands. 

The death of Islam Shah, as stated above (p. 94), was fol¬ 
lowed by a period of troubles. His minor son, who succeeded him, 
was murdered by Mubariz Khan who ascended the throne with the 
title of Muhammad ‘Adil Shah. But this regicide was hopelessly 
incompetent, and rebellions broke out in all quarters. Ibrahim Khan 
Sur, governor of Agra, Sikandar Sur, governor of Lahore, and Mu¬ 
hammad Khan Sur, governor of Bengal, revolted and assumed royal 
titles. Other chiefs also broke into revolt from time to time. 

Emperor ‘Adil Shah had already recognised the great abilities of 
Hlmu and appointed him his Prime Minister, leaving the heavy 
burden of administration on his shoulders. 

Mughul historians like Abu-’l-Fazl and Badauni paint the cha¬ 
racter of Hlmu in the blackest colour and represent him as having 
won the confidence of the king by ignoble means. But this is only 
natural for those who rightly looked upon Hlmu as the greatest 
enemy of the Mughuls. But in view of the abilities displayed by 
Hlmu, we should not put any faith in these slanders. In any case, 
in this great crisis of the empire ‘Adil practically left the full con¬ 
trol of political and military affairs in his hands. It reflects great 
credit upon Hlmu that the Afghan ruler relied upon a Hindu officer 
in preference to the great chiefs of his own tribe, and that Hlmu 
proved equal to the task imposed upon him. He had to fight con¬ 
stantly in order to put down the rebel chiefs, and always won vic¬ 
tories, sometimes against heavy odds. 

The account of the battles fought and victories won by Hlmu 
is given by Abu-’l-Fazl and Badauni. As both of them hated Himu 
as an upstart and painted him in the blackest colour, as noted 
above, their unrestrained praise is all the more valuable as a testi¬ 
mony to the valour and military skill of Himu. Abu-’l-Fazl writes: 
“Battles took place between Hemu and Ibrahim, who was a claimant 
for the Sultanate, and the former was always victorious. Sultan 
Muhammad, who had assumed the kingly title in Bengal, was also 
defeated, and was made to tread the land of annihilation. Hemu 
also engaged in conflicts with Taj Kararani and Rukn Khan NuhanI 
and defeated them. He fought two and twenty battles with the 
opponents of Mubariz Khan, and was victorious in all of them.” 56 

Badauni gives more details. Thus when Taj Khan, aided by 
two other chiefs, openly broke into revolt, Himu, we are told, fought 
a desperate battle with them, gaining victory (p. 541). 

Regarding the more formidable rival Ibrahim Sur, Badauni says: 
“Himun, regarding Ibrahim as his own especial prey, considered it 
essential to overthrow him; Ibrahim came out to oppose him ready 
for battle, and taking up a strong position showed a resolute deter¬ 
mination to withstand him, such as perhaps Rustum, if anyone, dis- 

98 


SHER SHAH AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


played before. But for all this, by the decree of the Almighty he 
was not successful.... Ibrahim Khan after this defeat, leaving KalpI, 
made straight for Baiana with all speed, and Hlmu pursuing him 
arrived at Baiana.. . . Ibrahim Khan, taking a body of the Nuhani and 
Afghan cultivators and landholders of Baiana, again went out to 
meet Hlmun and, making a night attack upon him, the following 
morning fought a fierce battle with him near to the township of 
Khanwah, ten krohs distant from Baiana, but could not prevail 
against his destiny.” 57 

Ibrahim Khan then shut himself in the fortress of Bayana “a 
fort of exceeding loftiness and strength”. Hlmu kept up the siege 
for three months and made inroads on the districts of Bayana on all 
sides, pillaging and destroying. While thus engaged, news reached 
Hlmu that “Muhammad Khan Sur, governor of Bangala, had as¬ 
sumed the title of Sultan Jalal-ud-Dln, and was marching with an 
army like the ants and locusts for multitude from Bangala, and 
having reduced Jaunpur was making for KalpI and Agra. Just at 
this juncture an urgent summons arrived from ‘Adil to Hlmun in 
these words: ‘At all costs come to me at once as I am confronted 
by a powerful enemy.’ Hlmun thereupon abandoned the siege”. But 
before he could proceed very far, Ibrahim attacked him but was 
d'efeated. Then, after some time, Ibrahim, after obtaining rein¬ 
forcements again advanced against Hlmu, was again defeated, and 
finally abandoned the struggle. 58 

Hlmu then advanced quickly to join his master ‘Adil Shah’s 
forces sent against the other rebel, Muhammad Khan of Bengal. 
BadaunI thus describes the situation: Muhammad Khan, “confi¬ 
dently relying upon his superior force to overcome the forces of 
‘Adli, had drawn up his cavalry and infantry and elephants to a 
number surpassing all computation, and was every moment expect¬ 
ing victory, when suddenly the scale turned against him, and Hlmun 
swept down upon him like a comet, and no sooner did he reach 
the ranks of the picked elephants after crossing the river Jamna, 
than he swooped down upon the army” of Muhammad Khan, tak¬ 
ing them unawares and practically annihilated the army. ‘The 
greater part of his Amirs were slain; while the rest took to flight.’ 
Muhammad Khan vanished for ever. 59 

Hardly had these revolts been suppressed when Humayun re¬ 
turned to India to recover his lost throne. ‘Adil sent Hlmu north¬ 
wards to oppose him, while he himself retired to Chunar. Humayun, 
as stated above, succeeded in re-establishing himself for a few 
months. When he met with his fatal accident, in January, 1556, 
Hlmu remained in the field on behalf of ‘Adil Shah to prevent Akbar 
from taking effective possession of his father’s kingdom. When 
Akbar was formally proclaimed at Kalanaur as Padshah, TardI 
Beg was appointed governor of Delhi. Hlmu advanced by way of 
Gwalior and Agra to Old Delhi, and “inflicted a severe defeat on 
the Mogul forces, capturing 160 elephants, 1,000 Arab horses, and 
an immense quantity of valuable booty. He thus gained posses¬ 
sion of both Delhi and Agra.” 60 


99 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


It was at this stage that Himu’s ambitions soared high and he 
wistfully looked towards the sovereignty of Hindusthan. Accord¬ 
ing to Abu-’l-Fazl, Himu’s “victories impressed him with evil ideas” 
and his capture of Delhi “increased his arrogance so that his intoxi¬ 
cation became madness”. 61 Other Muslim chroniclers of old 
expressed the same view, and many modern historians of India 
seem to hold the same opinion. V. A. Smith, who takes a more 
liberal view, observes: “Hemu, who had won Delhi and Agra in 
the name of his master Adall, now began to reflect that his sove¬ 
reignty was a long way off, that he himself was in possession of the 
army and elephants, and that it might be better to gain a kingdom 
for his own benefit rather than for that of his absent employer.” 62 
No one today can reasonably claim to know the thoughts in 
Himu’s mind. But a little reflection will show that there was 
nothing unreasonable or immoral in the aspiration of Himu. No 
doubt personal ambition played a great part, but it may not be 
altogether wrong to think that he was also inspired by the idea 
of founding a Hindu raj. This is supported by his assumption of 
the title Vikramaditya. 

The opportunities, as V. A. Smith points out, were really very 
good, and the recent examples of Babur, Sher Shah and Humayun 
(after his return from exile in Persia) within living memory, de¬ 
monstrated the feasibility of a bold military adventurer seizing the 
throne of Delhi. Himu’s chances of success cannot be reasonably 
regarded as much less than that of any one of these. This view is 
strongly supported by the details of the second battle of Panlpat 
which decided the fate of Himu, to which reference has been made 
above (p. 96). 

Whatever might have been his motive or justification, Himu 
decided upon his course of action and made preparations accordingly. 
He won over the Afghans, who accompanied him, by distributing 
the spoils of war among them. He occupied Delhi with their con¬ 
currence, declared his independent status in a practical manner 
by ascending the throne, with the imperial canopy raised over his 
head, issued coins in his name, and assumed the historic name 
Vikramaditya or Raja Bikramjit. 

Bairam Khan, the guardian of minor Mughul ruler Akbar, was 
advised by his counsellors to retire from India, but, disregarding 
their advice, he decided to advance against Himu, whose army 
greatly outnumbered that of the Mughuls. The battle between 
them was fought at Panlpat, on 5 November, 1556. V. A. Smith 
gives the following account of the battle: “Each army was drawn 
up in three divisions. On November 5 Hemu succeeded in throw¬ 
ing both the right and the left wings of his opponents into confu¬ 
sion, and sought to make his victory decisive by bringing all his 
mountain-like elephants to bear on the centre of the enemy, com¬ 
manded by Khan Zaman. Probably he would have won but for 
the accident that he was struck in the eye by an arrow which pierced 
his brain and rendered him unconscious. An Indian army never 
could survive the loss of its leader, on whose life its pay depended. 

100 


SHER SHAH AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


Hemu’s soldiers at once scattered in various directions and made no 
further attempt at resistance.” 63 

V. A. Smith rightly uses the word ‘accident’—and it is un¬ 
doubtedly a mere accident that deprived Hlmu of victory, throne 
and life. While Smith, thinks that Hlmu had every chance of win¬ 
ning the battle, Sir Wolseley Haig asserts that the Mughul forces 

“would certainly have been overpowered had not Himu’s bye been 
pierced by an arrow.” 64 More or less the same view has been held 
in this volume also (above, p. 96). It may, therefore, be rea¬ 
sonably held, that Himu’s failure was, in a great measure, due to 
that unknown and unknowable factor, called fate or destiny, which 
plays no inconsiderable part in the affairs of men. Himu was cap¬ 
tured in an unconscious state and met with a tragic end, as des¬ 

cribed above (p. 96). 

V. A. Smith writes: 

“Bairam Khan desired Akbar to earn the title of Ghazi, or Slayer 
of the Infidel, by flashing his sword on the captive. The boy natu¬ 
rally obeyed his guardian and smote Hemu on the neck with his 
scimitar. The bystanders also plunged their swords into the bleed¬ 
ing corpse. Hemu’s head was sent to Kabul to be exposed, and his 
trunk was gibbeted at one of the gates of Delhi.” 65 

But the tragedy did not end here. The forces of Akbar con¬ 
quered the Sai'kar of Alwar wherein was situated the home of Hlmu. 
The Mughul officer, who conquered it, proceeded to the township 
where Himu’s family lived. 

Abu-’l-Fazl, the trusted friend of Akbar and chronicler of his 
reign, describes what happened in the following words: “The place 
was strong and there was much fighting, and the father of Hemu 
was captured and brought alive before the Nasir-al-mulk. The lat¬ 
ter called upon him to change his religion. The old man answered, 
‘for eighty years I have worshipped my God, according to this reli¬ 
gion. Why should I change it at this time, and why should I, merely 
from fear of my life, and without understanding it come into your 
way of worship?’ Pir Muhammad treated his words as if he heard 
them not, and answered him with the tongue of the sword.” 66 

Such was the noble end of the family of Hlmu, a great Hindu 
who was born in humble life, but made his way to the throne of Delhi 
by dint of sheer ability and military skill—a unique episode in the 
history of India during Muslim rule. Unfortunately, Himu’s history 
has been written almost wholly by his enemies who dreaded him most, 
and, far from doing justice to his greatness, they have tarnished 
his name with unmerited odium. It is time to resuscitate the me¬ 
mory and give a true account of the life of Hemchandra, really a 
great hero, whose dreams and achievements have been forgotten 
by his countrymen. 


101 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


1. Akbar-nama, I, 326 (English translation). 

2. P. Saran, Studies in Medieval Indian History, pp. 40-46; Journal of Bihar 
and Orissa Research Society (1934), pp. 108-122. 

3. ‘Abbas Sarwanl, MS., p. 12, Elliot, IV, p. 308. 

4. K. R. Qanungo, Sher Shah and His Times, Vol. I, pp. 9, 24-25, Ishwari 
Prasad, The Life and Times of Humayun, pp. 94-95. 

5. P. Saran, op. cit., p. 38, Ishwari Prasad, op. cit. p. 94 (1956 Edition). 

K. R. Qanungo, op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 9-10, 25-28. 

6. Makhzan-i-Afghani, MS., F 204b. 

7. Abu-’l-Fazl, Akbar-nama, Vol. I, p. 327 (English translation). 

8. K. R. Qanungo, op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 39-40. 

9. Briggs, Firishta, Vol. II, p. 100. 

10. ‘Abbas, MS., pp. 28-29 a)s quoted in Qanungo’s Sher Shah and His Times , 
Vol. I, p. 52. 

11. Briggs, Firishta, Vol. II, p. 101. 

12. The pargana of Chaund comprised a portion of modern Shahabad district and 
the greater portion of modern Mirzapur district. 

13. Briggs, Firishta, Vol. II, p. 103, ‘Abbas, MS., p. 62. 

14. The Makhzan, MS., p. 19. 

15. For the name of the place and the date of the battle, cf. Ch. Ill, f.n. 2, 2a. 

16. K. R. Qanungo, op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 108-109. 

17. History of Bengal, Vol. II, (Dacca University), Edited by Sir Jadunath 
Sarkar, p. 160. 

18. K. R. Qanungo, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 142. 

19. J.J.A. Campos, History of the Portuguese in Bengal, p. 40. 

20. The fort was not besieged by Humayun before the second week of January, 
1538. For its siege and capture, vide Jauhar’s Tazkirat-ul-Waqi‘dt, MS., 
pp. 21-24, Elliot IV, 339, V, 139-140; Elphinstone, History of India, 6th edition; 
pp. 446-447; K. R. Qanungo, op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 175-178. 

21. Briggs, Firishta, pp. 114-117. 

22. Islamic Culture, 1936, pp. 127-130, Introduction, Catalogue of Coins collected 
by Sayyid A.S.M. Taifur, Dacca Museum, Dacca, 1936; E. Thomas, Chroni¬ 
cles of the Pathdn Kings of Delhi, p. 393; H. N. Wright, The Sultans of Delhi 
and their metrology, pp. 269, 270, 323. 

22a. Cf. Chapter III, f.n. 9a and 11. 

23. ‘Abbas, Elliot, IV, p. 368. 

24. Sir Jadunath Sarkar, Military History of India, p. 63. 

25. Ibid. 

26. Jauhar, Tazkirat-ul-Wdqi e dt, pp. 36-37. 

27. Sir Jadunath Sarkar, Military History of India, p. 64. 

28. K. R. Qanungo, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 205. 

29. Akbar-nama, English translation I, 345, Riydz-us-Salatin, text, 147. 

30. History of Bengal, Vol. II, edited by J. N. Sarkar, and published by the 
Dacca University, p. 174. 

31. The Makhzan, MS., p. 35; Firishta, text, p. 226; Tabaqat-i-Akban, text, 
p. 230. 

32. The battle was fought near Bilgram, three miles away from the Ganga 
(Ganges) and opposite Kanauj. 

33. Haidar’s description of the battle may be seen in Tarikh-i-Rashidi, Elias’s trans., 

pp. 475-77. 

34. Sir Jadunath Sarkar, Military History of India, p. 64. 

35. K. R. Qanungo, op.cit., Vol. I, p. 314. 

35a. Ibid. 


102 


SHER SHAH AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


36. Tabaqat-i-Akbari, pp. 271, 592. 

37. Tabaqat-i-Akbari, p. 231; Briggs, Firishta, II, pp. 117-118. 

38. Firishta, text. 228. 

39. ‘Abbas, MS, p. 237; Elliot, IV, p. 407. 

40. Elliot, IV, p. 407, footnote. 

41. Arail is situated on the right bank of the Yamuna and opposite to Allahabad fort. 

42. The History and Culture of the Indian People (Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan), Vol. 
VI, p. 449. 

43. Sir Jadunath Sarkar, Mughul Administration, p. 116. 

44. Ain-i-Akbari, II, pp. 63, 66; Elliot IV, p. 399, footnote. 

44a. According to P. Saran, “Sher Shah used to charge one-third of the produce 
as revenue” ( Studies in Medieval Indian History, p. 85). Reference, however, 
should be made to an important innovation of Sher Shah, namely, schedules 
(ray 1 ) of the assessment rates for the different kinds of crops ( Rabi crop, Kharif 
crop, etc.). In other words, land was divided into several classes according to 
the nature of the crops cultivated therein, and the rate of assessment was fixed 
for every one of them. For details, cf. ibid (Editor). 

45. Imperial Gazetteer of India, II, pp. 145-146; vide, also E. Thomas, Chronicles of 
the Pathan Kings of Delhi, pp. 408-409; H. N. Wright, Catalogue of Coins in the 
Indian Museum, Calcutta, II, pp. 11-12, 84-109. 

46. ‘Abbas, Elliot, IV, p. 421. 

47. Briggs, Firishta, Vol. II, p. 125. 

48. A History of Fine Arts in India and Ceylon, p. 406. 

49. Memoirs of the Races of the North Western Provinces of India, II, 97. 

50. About 85 miles south-east of Kalinjar. 

51. BadaunI, text, Vol. I, pp. 384-385. 

52. Ibid, p. 385. 

53. Mankot was built in about two years, and it had four forts and four townships. 

54. Briggs, Firishta, II, p. 189; Dacca University Studies, November, 1935, pp. 67- 
101. See Appendix. 

55. For example, Abu-’l-Fazl’s Akbar-nama (Reference below is to the English 
translation by H. Beveridge, Vol. II; Calcutta, 1912) and ‘Abdul-Qadir Badauni's 
Muntakhab-ut-Tawdrikh (Reference below is to the English translation by 
G. S. A. Ranking, Vol. I, Calcutta, 1898). 

56. Beveridge, op. cit., p. 45. 

57. Ranking, op.cit., pp. 548-9. 

58. Ibid, pp. 552-3. 

59 Ibid, p. 555. 

60. V. A. Smith, Akbar The Great Mogul (Oxford, 1926), pp. 34-5. 

61. Beveridge, op.cit., pp. 45, 50. 

62. V. A. Smith, op.cit., pp. 36-7. 

63. Ibid, pp. 38-9. 

64. CHI, IV, p. 72. 

65. V. A. Smith, op. cit., p. 39. 

66. Beveridge, op. cit., pp. 71-2. 


103 


CHAPTER V 


AKBAR (1556-1605) 

I. PERIOD OF TUTELAGE 

The news of Humayun’s death was concealed by Bairam Khan 1 
in order to prepare for the unopposed succession of Akbar. A man 
resembling Humayun and dressed up like him made public appear¬ 
ance while the Turkish admiral Sldi ‘All Ra’is, who happened to 
be at Delhi, left for Lahore la and assured the people of Huma¬ 
yun’s recovery. On 14 February, 1556, Akbar ascended the throne 
at the age of thirteen years and a few months. 15 The task before 
the young emperor and his veteran guardian was very difficult 
and complicated. His hold on the kingdom, only recently recover¬ 
ed, was very uncertain. The small army under Bairam Khan had 
but a precarious hold on certain districts in the Punjab; and both 
the army and the nobility were heterogeneous bodies of uncertain 
loyalty. Three Afghan princes of the Sur family still contested 
the sovereignty of Hindusthan. Himu, the Hindu general, who 
nominally acted on behalf of his Afghan master but aspired to 
sovereign power, further complicated the situation. The fairest 
parts of Hindusthan were devastated by a frightful famine and an 
epidemic plague. 

Immediately after Akbar’s accession, Bairam Khan, who held 
the reins of government, had to arrest Shah Abu-T-Ma‘ali, a favou¬ 
rite noble of Humayun, who at first refused to attend the emperor’s 
court and misbehaved when he did attend it- 2 Bairam wanted to 
execute him but, at the young sovereign’s intercession, the culprit 
was sent to Lahore in confinement. Bairam Khan then resumed his 
activity against Sikandar Sur and from Kalanaur proceeded with 
Akbar up to Dahmiri (modern Nurpur in Kangra district) where 
they remained for about three months in order to keep watch over 
the Sur 'pretender’. But the arch-enemy was neither Sikandar, 
who had become a spent force after Machiwara and Sirhind, nor 
Ibrahim Sur, whose ambition had been frustrated by Sikandar at 
Farah, nor even the musician king ‘Adi! Shah who was at Chunar, 
but his powerful lieutenant Hlmu. 

Himu must be regarded as a very remarkable personality 
among the Hindus in medieval India. By his uncommon ability 
and commanding talent Hlmu had raised himself from an humble 


AKBAR 


shop-keeper at Rewarl to the cabinet of ‘Adil Shah who made him 
his first minister and chief commander- It is said that he fought 
‘two and twenty’ battles with his master’s opponents and was victo¬ 
rious in all of them. Nominally acting on behalf of ‘Adil Shah, 
HImu really aspired to carving out a Hindu kingdom on the ruins 
of Muslim power. The accession of young Akbar offered him the 
opportunity for striking at Delhi. With a huge body of cavalry 
and elephants, he marched from Gwalior to Agra whose governor 
Iskandar Khan, the Uzbeg, failed to defend it against the superior 
force of the invader and fled to Delhi. HImu took Agra and then 
advanced on Delhi. Tardl Beg Khan, the governor of Delhi, gave 
battle. The Mughuls began by routing Himu’s vanguard and right 
wing but HImu suddenly made such a violent charge on the 
Mughul centre that Tardl Beg who commanded it failed to resist 
and fled from the field of battle. This broke the morale of his 
army, the flight became general and Delhi fell into Himu’s hands. 

When the report of the fall of Delhi reached Akbar at Jullun- 
dur, the majority of his nobles advised an immediate retreat to 
Kabul as the enemy’s force was far stronger. But the hero of 
Machlwara and Sirhind was not to abandon so easily the throne of 
Hindusthan; Bairam, rejecting all defeatist counsel, decided to give 
battle. Leaving Khizr Khvaja Khan at Jullundur to subdue Sikan- 
dar Sur, Akbar and Bairam marched towards Delhi. At Sirhind, 
they were joined by the fugitive governors, Iskandar Khan, Tardl 
Beg Khan and ‘All Qull Khan, who had been forced to leave Sam- 
bhal. Here Bairam Khan took the drastic step of executing Tardl 
Beg Khan for his failure at Delhi while Akbar was away on hunt¬ 
ing. Some modern historians follow Firishta in justifying it on 
the ground of State necessity and there can be no doubt that Bai¬ 
ram Khan’s bold step calmed all disaffection among the nobles and 
restored unity and discipline to the army which were so essential 
for the infant Mughul State at that critical juncture. A dispassion¬ 
ate study of the contemporary chronicles, however, reveals that 
the Shiah Bairam wanted to remove a powerful Sunni rival, and 
Tardl Beg Khan’s failure at Delhi, due to cowardice or negligence 
or indiscretion, offered him the opportunity when State necessity 
coincided with self-interest; and afterwards Bairam exacted from 
the emperor a reluctant approval of his action- 3 

From Sirhind, Akbar and Bairam advanced towards Delhi to 
meet the enemy who was now master of Delhi and Agra. HImu 
at the height of his power gave up the mask, took the title of 
Raja Vikramaditya and made his Afghan soldiers call him HImu 
Shah. The defeat of his advance guard and the capture of his 


105 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


artillery by ‘All Quli Khan did not dishearten Himu who marched 
on with a huge cavalry of 50,000 Afghans and Rajputs and 1,500 
elephants. On 5 November, 1556, the two armies met face to 
face on the historic battlefield of Panipat. The Mughul army, 
which was positively inferior in number, did not possess more than 
25,000 horse. Himu began the battle with a vehement charge on 
the Mughul ranks which threw the wings into confusion. He then 
directed his attack with all his elephants against the centre com¬ 
manded by ‘All Quli Khan. In spite of their valiant efforts, the 
Mughuls under ‘All Quli Khan could not stand the onset of Himu. 
He was on the point of gaining victory when an arrow struck him 
in the eye and pierced his brain and he fell unconscious in the 
saddle. This turned the tide of the battle- Himu’s army lost its 
morale and dispersed. Two thousand were killed during retreat 
and all of Himu’s elephants fell into the hands of the Mughuls 
who obtained a complete and decisive victory. The battle sealed 
the fate of the Afghans and completed the work of Machiwara and 
Sirhind. The story of the Mughul empire now begins- 

Himu was captured by Shah Quli Khan Mahram who brought 
him to the presence of Akbar at a short distance from the field 
of action. Bairam Khan begged him to slay Himu with his own 
hand in order to gain the reward of jihad (crusade against in¬ 
fidels) and the title of ghazi (hero combating infidels). Akbar ac¬ 
cordingly struck Himu with his sword and Bairam Khan followed 
him. The story of Akbar’s magnanimity and refusal to kill a fallen 
foe seems to be a later courtly invention. 41 The humane and libe¬ 
ral emperor of Hindusthan who preached sulh-i-kull (universal 
toleration) was not born but made. 

After the victory of Panipat Akbar made his triumphant entry 
into Delhi. Bairam Khan appointed his servant Pir Muhammad 
Sherwanii to suppress Haji Khan, an officer of Sher Shah, who was 
acting independently in Alwar and to capture the family and pro¬ 
perty of Himu which were there. Haji Khan fled before the arrival 
of the Mughul army and Himu’s wife also escaped, but Pir Muham¬ 
mad captured his vast wealth and his octogenarian father whom he 
put to death on his refusal to accept Islam. 

Meanwhile Sikandar Sur had defeated Khizr Khvaja Khan at 
Chamiari (in Amritsar district), driven him back to Lahore and 
begun to collect taxes with Kalanaur as his headquarters- Bairam 
Khan promptly sent Iskandar Khan, the Uzbeg, now styled Khan 
‘Alam, to assist Khizr Khvaja Khan and on 7 December, 1556, he 
and Akbar left Delhi to deal with the enemy. They proceeded on 


106 


AKBAR 


to Dahmlrl, but Sikandar retreated to the hill country of the Siwa- 
liks and took refuge in the strong fortress of Mankot 5 which Islam 
Shah had built at enormous cost as a bulwark against Gakkhar 
aggression. Bairam Khan besieged the fort but its natural advan¬ 
tages and store of provisions enabled Sikandar to resist the Mughuls 
for about six months. But Sikandar relied more on the Afghans 
in other parts of the country who, he expected, would create diver¬ 
sion. The defeat and death of ‘Adil in the battle near Chunar 
with Khizr Khan Sur of Bengal and the suppression of Rukn Khan 
LohanI and Jalal Khan Sur by ‘All Quit Khan, Khan Zaman, un¬ 
nerved Sikandar who surrendered the fort on 25 July, 1557, and 
left for Bihar and then for Bengal where he died two years later. 

Akbar marched to Lahore where he remained for four months. 
Bahadur Khan put down the Baluch disturbances in Multan and 
Bairam executed Takht Mai, raja of Mau (Pathankot), for his 
alliance with Sikandar. In December Akbar left for Delhi and on 
the way at Jullundur, Bairam Khan, then aged more than fifty, 
married his nineteen year old cousin Salima Begam. 6 After cross¬ 
ing the Sutlej, Akbar learnt of the growing power of HajI Khan 
who had fled from Alwar to Ajmer, established his authority there 
and was marching on Hissar. Bairam Khan accordingly sent to 
Hissar reinforcement under Pir Muhammad Khan, whereupon HajI 
Khan escaped to Gujarat and the Mughuls took possession of Ajmer- 
Akbar returned to Delhi on 14 April, 1558. 

Early in 1557 Qiya Khan Gung had been sent to capture the 
famous fort of Gwalior, ‘the pearl in the necklace of the castles 
of Hind’, which was held by Bahbal Khan, an officer of ‘Adil Shah. 
Qiya Khan laid siege to the fort but the garrison did not surrender 
even after a continued siege for months. In November, 1558, 
Bairam Khan sent from Agra reinforcement under Habib ‘All Khan 
which alarmed Bahbal Khan who surrendered the fort in January 
next year. The same year Khan Zaman annexed Jaunpur after an 
easy victory over Ibrahim Sur. After an effort of one year Habib 
‘All Khan besieged the fort of Ranthambhor which Islam Shah’s 
officer Jajhar Khan had just sold to Rai Surjan, a servant of Rana 
Uday Singh of Chitor, but the siege had to be raised on account 
of the downfall of Bairam Khan. Similarly a grand expedition 
under Bahadur Khan, which Bairam sent for the conquest of Malwa 
and proceeded up to Siphi in Gwalior State, was recalled early in 
1560. 

For four years (1556-1559) Bairam Khan had bravely piloted 
the ship of the Mughul State against enormous odds. But the re- 


107 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


verse of the medal offers a less pleasing record. The scandalous 
conduct and misdeeds of ‘All Quit Khan, who had enticed a page 
of Humayun and disregarded the order of Akbar, required drastic, 
punishment. But Bairam Khan passed over his guilt while he put 
to death Musiahib Beg for lesser fault and approved of the execu¬ 
tion of Khvaja Jalal-ud-din Bujuq by Mun‘im Khan for personal 
and trifling cause. 

Pir Muhammad Khan had gradually raised himself by loyal 
services to the position of Bairam Khan’s right-hand man. He 
was also appointed tutor to the prince and won royal favour and 
confidence, so much so that he became almost as powerful as Bai¬ 
ram Khan himself. Bairam would brook no rival and availed of 
the earliest opportunity for dismissing the upstart. One day he 
even insulted his patron by refusing admission when he made a 
courtesy visit to his house during his illness- Pir Muhammad 
Khan was at first sent in confinement to Bayana and then allowed 
to go on pilgrimage to Mecca by way of Gujarat. Though Bairam 
Khan was amply justified in discharging this ungrateful servant, 
Akbar was displeased. 

After Pir Muhammad’s dismissal Bairam Khan appointed 
Shaikh Gadal, a Shiah of no eminence to the important position of 
Sadr-us-Sudur. This appointment raised a storm of indignation 
among the orthodox Muslims who, to quote Badauni, ‘flew into a 
rage at the advancement, honour and unseasonable exaltation of 
Shaikh Gadal.’ The unbecoming treatment which Bairam Khian, 
under Shaikh Gadai’s influence, meted to Shaikh Muhammad Ghaus 
when he visited Agra in April, 1559, highly displeased Akbar who 
revered the Shaikh (Muhammad Ghaus) and afterwards became 
his disciple- 7 

The chronicles deal at great length with the circumstances 

that led to Bairam Khan’s downfall. In spite of their differences 

in minor details they reveal one fact: the root cause of the regent’s 

fall was the desire of the prince to be the king in fact as in 

name. As Akbar advanced in years to manhood he found that he 
was a mere puppet in the hands of his guardian who did not con¬ 
sult him in the gravest matters of public importance and did not 
allow him the least power in financial affairs, so much so that his 
personal expenses were sanctioned by Bairam with stringency. 
Akbar wanted to set himself free and this could be done only by 
the dismissal of his all-powerful guardian, for Bairam would not 
have tolerated subordination to one whose obedience he had so 
long enjoyed. This desire of the young emperor to drop the pilot 


108 


AKBAR 


was further strengthened by a series of incidents which highly dis¬ 
pleased him and completely alienated him from his valued guardian- 

From the very beginning the precocious ward had begun to 
differ with his powerful guardian. As early as May, 1557, Bairam 
Khan suspected that Akbar had begun to dislike him; he misinter¬ 
preted the accidental running of two royal elephants near his tent 
as an attempt on his life and held Atga Khan responsible for the 
displeasure with which he was occasionally treated by his young 
sovereign. The execution of Tardi Beg Khan and Musahib Beg, 
the dismissal of Fir Muhammad Khan, the cold treatment of Shaikh 
Muhammad Ghaus and the two elephant incidents (1559-60) when 
Bairam put to death two drivers of the royal elephants—on the 
first occasion, because a drunken royal elephant had wounded one 
of Bairam’s elephants, and, on the second, another royal elephant 
had rushed towards the boat of the minister on the Yamuna where 
he had been airing—all these added to the displeasure and vexa¬ 
tion of the growing ward and made him all the more conscious of 
his real position. 

Bairam Khan was harsh in temper, overbearing in manner, 
arbitrary, dictatorial in method, highly ambitious and jealous of 
power, and would brook no rival. His administration, though effi¬ 
cient, was marked by high-handedness and nepotism. A Shiah, who 
had raised the Shiah Shaikh Gadai to the highest position in the 
State, he was disliked by the majority of the Muslims in Hindu- 
sthan who were Sunnis, while he had incurred the jealous hosti¬ 
lity of not a few among the nobles by his exalted position, though 
he obtained it by his superior merit. 

The leaders of the opposition against the regent, however, 
formed a small faction whose personnel was drawn from the mem¬ 
bers of the harem and their relations or more properly Akbar’s 
foster-relations known as Atga-Khail : Maham Anaga, the chief 
nurse of the emperor who had risked her life when the prince was 
thrown open to the gun shots of Mirza Kamran at Kabul, 7a her son 
Adham Khan, her relations Shihab-ud-din Ahmad Khan, governor 
of Delhi, and Mirza Sharaf-ud-dln Husain, and Jijli Anaga who had 
suckled the prince, her husband Shams-ud-din Atga Khan with his 
brothers and sons as well as Hamida Begam, the queen-mother. 
They were mainly inspired by jealousy and self-interest and avail¬ 
ed of the growing discontent against the regent and hoped to 
monopolize power should they be able to overthrow him. 

The dismissal of so powerful a man like Bairam Khan by the 
young emperor was not an easy task. A secret plot was made by 


109 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Akbar and the opposition party so that Bairam Khan might be 
taken by surprise and would have no time to prepare for opposi¬ 
tion. The chronicles differ as to the comparative share of Akbar 
and the Maham Anaga junto in the plot for the dismissal of the 
great minister. It seems that the decision for dismissal was main¬ 
ly Akbar’s own and he himself took the initiative and in this action, 
which required great firmness and much address, he had to take 
the help of, and was absolutely helped by, the harem party which 
was hostile to the minister. The dismissal of Bairam Khan was 
achieved by a coup, decided on and to a great extent planned by 
Akbar, prepared by the harem cabal and worked by all who were 
hostile to the Khan Khanan. 

On 19 March, 1560, Akbar and the collaborators left Agra on 
the pretext of hunting, taking with them Abu-’l-Qasim, son of 
Mirza Kamran, whom Bairam might use as a pretender. As his 
mother was lying sick at Delhi, Akbar made this his motive to pro¬ 
ceed to that city. At Delhi the enemies of Bairam did their ut¬ 
most to hasten his dismissal. Shihab-ud-din Ahmad Khan made 
arrangements for the defence of the city, and officers from all 
directions were called to join the emperor. Atga Khan was the 
earliest to arrive and others followed. 

On receiving Akbar’s message from Delhi, 7b Bairam Khan was 
surprised and immediately sent envoys to the emperor begging his 
pardon and assuring him of loyal service in future. But Akbar 
imprisoned his envoys and then refused him permission to inter¬ 
view. The die was now cast. The followers of Bairam advised 
him to march on Delhi and seize the emperor’s person but the 
great minister refused to disgrace his old age by rebellion after 
passing a lifetime in loyal service. 8 Early in April he left Agra 
announcing that he was going on pilgrimage to Mecca. The harem 
party, however, got alarmed and induced Akbar to march against 
Bairam and send Mir ‘Abdul-Latif with a message that, as he had 
taken the reins of government in his own hands, Bairam should 
proceed to Mecca and that due provision would be made for his 
expenses there. On the way Pir Muhammad Khan joined the em¬ 
peror from Gujarat and he was sent with a large force towards 
Nagaur To pack Bairam as quickly as possible to Mecca.’ From 
Nagaur which he had reached by way of Alwar, Bairam went to 
Bikaner to avoid Raja Maldev of Marwar who was hostile to 
him; but the studied insult which his enemies had meted to him 
by appointing his dismissed servant gave him provocation. Against 
the explicit warning of Akbar he turned his direction towards the 
Punjab and ‘crossed the Rubicon’. 9 


110 


AKBAR 


Bairam placed his family at Tabarhinda (modern Bhatinda), 
and proceeded towards Jullundur via Dipalpur and Tihara, 27 miles 
west of Ludhiana. Akbar now recalled Fir Muhammad Khan and 
appointed Atga Khan with a large force to deal with the rebel 
minister. Atga Khan defeated Bairam in a battle at Gunachaur in 
Jullundur district (August, 1560) and forced him to flee to the 
fortress of Tilwara in the Siwalik hills. Meanwhile Akbar in per¬ 
son had marched to Sirhind. Here Mun‘im Khan joined him from 
Kabul and was appointed to the office of vakil with the title of 
Khan Khanan which Bairam had so long held. The royal troops 
besieged the fortress of Tilwara, but after a short resistance Bairam 
offered to surrender on condition that he would be assured of safe 
conduct to the emperor. In October, 1560, at Hajipur (in Hoshiarpur 
district) he presented himself before Akbar who received him 
kindly and offered him the alternatives of service as his personal 
companion or as a jdgirdar of Kalpi and Chanderi and pilgrimage. 
Declining to serve where he had ruled, the great minister chose 
the second and left for Gujarat where at Patan he was assassinated 
on 31 January, 1561, by some Afghans led by one Mubarak Khan 
whose father had been killed at the battle of Machiwara in which 
Bairam was in command. There is no positive evidence in support 
of the suggestion of Count Von Noer that the enemies of Bairam 
who had worked for his downfall might have had a hand in it. 
Bairam’s family became stranded and it was not before September, 
some eight months after the tragic incident, that they reached the 
court. Bairam’s infant son Mirza ‘Abdur-Rahlm grew up in royal 
favour and gradually rose high in position till he became the Khan 
Khanan in 1584. 

The services of Bairam to the Mughul dynasty were great; his 
gifts and ability, undisputed. He was the real author of the Mughul 
restoration and without him Akbar could hardly have retained his 
throne. His exit from the stage of Mughul history marks the end 
of an epoch, the age of military conquest, the age of Babur. A 
new era with a new orientation commences in Indo-Islamic history, 
the age of Akbar. 

Some modern historians regard the dismissal of Bairam Khan 
as premature and state that for the next four years Akbar remain¬ 
ed under a ‘petticoat government of the worst kind.’ They exag¬ 
gerate the influence of Maham Anaga both in bringing about Bai¬ 
ram’s downfall as well as during the period immediately following. 
True, the harem party and Maham Anaga in particular secured 
important positions as the natural reward of the great services 
they had recently rendered, but it is inaccurate to say that Akbar 


111 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


became a victim of the harem cabal. It would be more accurate 
to say that the period immediately following the downfall of Bai- 
ram Khan was marked by an attempt made by the harem party to 
dominate Akbar who, however, revealed his own personality and 
was able to assert himself without any serious difficulty and with¬ 
in a short time. Akbar used Maham Anaga for his own purpose 
and he overthrew her when she proved hostile to his policy and in¬ 
terests. 10 The buffet which struck down the audacious Adham Khan 
did not make Akbar a man, as Count Von Noer states; it was the 
man who struck the buffet. 

Akbar now undertook the conquest of Malwa which had been 
interrupted by the events leading to Bair am Khan’s downfall. The 
choice of commanders was unfortunate and proves the unmistak¬ 
able influence of Maham Anaga and the harem party. The Mughul 
army led by Adham Khan, his foster-mother’s son, and Pir Muham¬ 
mad Khan invaded Malwa and marched unopposed to Sarangpur 
where at last the musician-king Baz Bahadur, a voluptuary par ex¬ 
cellence , gave battle but, deserted by his Afghan officers who were 
discontented, was easily defeated by the superior army of Akbar 
and put to flight (29 March, 1561). All his treasures, elephants and 
his harem fell into the hands of the victors but his beloved, 
the famous Rupamati, the romantic theme of artists and poets, took 
poison to evade the clutches of ‘her conqueror rude.’ The two com¬ 
manders, who, according to Badauni, considered human beings as 
'leeks, cucumbers and radishes’, perpetrated acts of barbaric cruel¬ 
ty, massacring the prisoners and putting to death even their wives 
and children—not even sparing Sayyids and holy men with copies 
of the Qur’an in their hands, as Badauni expresses with righteous 
indignation. Adham Khan, puffed up with pride at his easy suc¬ 
cess, behaved as if he were independent. He sent to the emperor 
a report of his victory and only a few elephants, himself appropriat¬ 
ing the rest of the spoils. Akbar resented this insolence and per¬ 
sonally marched to Sarangpur to punish the delinquent who, being 
taken by surprise, surrendered to the emperor. Adham Khan was 
excused through the intercession of Maham Anaga who did not hesi¬ 
tate to kill two innocent girls of Bahadur’s harem as they were 
witnesses to her son’s scandalous conduct. Though not immediately, 
Adham Khan was recalled from Malwa and Akbar made over the 
command to Pir Muhammad who reduced Bijagarh with general 
massacre and then invaded Khandesh where Baz Bahadur had taken 
refuge. He captured the fort of Aslrgarh and proceeded as far as 
Burhanpur, massacring or enslaving the people and destroying towns 
and villages on the way, but was defeated by a coalition of three 


112 


AKBAR 


powers: Mubarak Khan of Khandesh, Baz Bahadur and Tufal Khan, 
the de facto ruler of Berar. As he was retreating towards Malwa 
he was drowned while crossing the Narmada, the just retribution 
for the sighs of the orphans, the weak and the captives, as BadaunI 
affirms. The confederate army pursued the Mughuls and drove 
them out of Malwa, and Bahadur recovered his kingdom. In 1562 a 
second army sent by Akbar under ‘Abdullah Khan, the Uzbeg, in¬ 
vaded Malwa and compelled Baz Bahadur to flee to Chitor. ‘Abdul¬ 
lah Khan took Mandu and restored Mughul authority in Malwa. Baz 
Bahadur remained a fugitive at various courts until November, 1570, 
when he surrendered to Akbar at Nagaur and joined his service. 

Early in 1561 Khan Zaman and his brother Bahadur Khan 
suppressed a formidable uprising of the Afghans under Sher Khan, 
son of ‘Adil Shah, who marched from Chunar with a big army but 
suffered total defeat near Jaunpur. Khan Zaman behaved like Adham 
Khan and appropriated the spoils. Akbar would not tolerate such 
a gross infringement of his prerogative and marched from Agra 
towards Jaunpur (July, 1561). Alarmed at this the brothers paid 
homage to Akbar at Kara and returned him all the spoils including 
the elephants. Akbar pardoned them and re-instated them in their 
position. The emperor then sent Asaf Khan to the important for¬ 
tress of Chunar which the Afghans surrendered without any re¬ 
sistance. 

In November, 1561, Atga Khan was appointed vakil or the prime 
minister. This appointment displeased Maham Anaga and Mun‘im 
Khan who had been holding the position since the discharge of 
Bair am Khan. The harem party was now broken into two groups: 
the Maham Anaga group and the party of Atga Khan. 

In the middle of January, 1562, Akbar made a pilgrimage to 
the tomb of the famous saint of Ajmer, Khvaja Mu‘!n-ud-d!!n Chishti. 
On the way Raja Bihar! Mai of Amber paid homage to the empe¬ 
ror and offered him the hand of his daughter. Akbar agreed and 
during his return journey the marriage was celebrated at Sambhar. 
Man Singh, the nephew and adopted son of Raja Bhagwan Das, the 
heir of Raja Bihar! Mai was taken into the royal service. The prin¬ 
cess afterwards became the mother of Emperor Jahangir. This pil¬ 
grimage to Ajmer, which henceforward Akbar made annually until 
1579, is a landmark not only in Akbar’s but also in Indo-Muslim 
history. The Rajput alliance was not merely the stroke of a diplo¬ 
mat to win the support of militant Hinduism; it was the beginning 
of a new orientation of State-policy, the first expression of that 
doctrine of sulh-i-kull (universal toleration) which his great Per- 

113 

M.E.—8 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


sian tutor Mir ‘Abdul-Latif Qazvlnl had infused into Akbar. He was 
not to be the head of a community but all people. No Muslim ruler 
before, not even Sher Shah, with all his benevolence, held this 
exalted conception of State and kingship so definitely and vividly. 

On his way from Ajmer, Akbar sent Mlrza Sharaf-ud-din Husain 
to take the fort of Merta, then held by Jai Mai for Rana Uday Singh 
of Mewar. The fort surrendered to the Mughuls after a siege of 
several months and a stubborn fight offered by Jai Mai’s commander 
Dev Das. 

The appointment of Atga Khan as vakil had provoked the dis¬ 
pleasure of the Maham Anaga group and the malcontents found in 
the unscrupulous Adham Khan, freshly embittered by his recall 
from Malwa, a pliable instrument for the fulfilment of their desires. 
On 16 May, 1562, the hot-headed youth, accompanied by a few 
ruffians, burst in upon Shams-ud-dm as he sat in the hall of audience 
and murdered him. Adham Khan then rushed to the inner apart¬ 
ment where he was caught by Akbar, just roused from sleep by 
the tumult, who only replied to the murderer’s explanation to pal¬ 
liate his crime by striking him down with a heavy blow of his fist. 
Adham was twice thrown from the terrace by royal order and put 
to death. Akbar himself broke this news to Maham Anaga who 
made the simple but dignified reply that he did well, and forty days 
later followed her son to the grave. In grateful remembrance of his 
foster!-mother who had once risked her life for his sake on the bat¬ 
tlement of Kabul and sheltered him from the cradle to the throne, 
Akbar raised a noble mausoleum at Delhi where mother and son 
lie interred. 

Akbar meted out magnanimous treatment to the conspirators. 
They were pardoned and both Shihab-ud-dm Ahmad and Munfim 
Khan, the ringleaders, were reinstated in their position. The Atga- 
Khail or the Atga group who thirsted for vengeance were removed 
from court by employment in an expedition against the Gakkhars. As 
a result of this expedition Akbar’s protege Kamal Khan was given 
back the Gakkhar country lying between the upper courses of the 
Jhelum and the Indus which had been seized by his uncle Sultan 
Adam. 

The Adham Khan affair is not the beginning of Akbar’s asser¬ 
tion of his own individuality; it is the logical end of a policy which 
he had been following since 1557 when the great Bairam had be¬ 
gun to feel the weight of his personality. In 1560 he overthrew 
his all-powerful guardian who had maintained his throne; in 1562 
he overthrew the Maham Anaga group who had assisted him to 


114 


AKBAR 


drop his pilot but abused the power he had bestowed on them. 
Two years later he revealed the same strength of character when 
he did not hesitate to order death sentence on his maternal uncle 
Khvaja Mu‘azzam for having murdered his wife. The Rajput al¬ 
liance and Akbar’s prohibition in 1562 of the practice of enslaving 
prisoners of war were expressions of that marked individuality of 
the young emperor. In 1563 Akbar abolished the tax on Hindu 
pilgrims to holy places and early next year he took the revolutionary 
step of abolishing the j izya or poll-tax on non-Muslims. Tt was 
an assertion of Akbar’s will and conscience against a tradition of 
all the Muslim conquerors of India, sanctioned by centuries of cus¬ 
tom, against all his advisers’ (Binyon). 

Already Akbar had begun to inquire about the view of his sub¬ 
jects by nocturnal visits among them in disguise and on one occa¬ 
sion in 1561 he was recognized. Next year he appointed a capable 
officer' of Islam Shah Sur, on whom was now conferred the title of 
Ttimad Khan, to remove the abuses that had crept into the adminis¬ 
tration of the reserved ( khalisa ) lands, and this was followed in 1564 
by the appointment of Muzaffar ‘All Turbatl, who had served under 
Bairam Khan and gained experience in the local revenue adminis¬ 
tration of a pargana, as the Diwan or the finance minister of the 
empire. He had also curtailed the authority of the Sadr-us-Sudur 
when he appointed Muhammad Salih of Herat to that position (1562). 
He was replaced in 1565 by Shaikh ‘Abdun-NabI who, however, 
disappointed Akbar’s hope for reformation in the administration 
by lavish abuse of his power. He was dismissed in 1578 when the 
office was shorn of its ‘ancient dignity’ as Akbar substantially cur¬ 
tailed the powers of the Sadr. Ultimately in 1582 he effected 
further curtailment of the power and authority of the Sadr-us-Sudur 
by appointing six provincial Sadrs. 

II. EARLY CONQUESTS 

Akbar now seriously undertook the work of conquest. He was 
a self-confessed annexationist; in his ‘Happy Sayings’ his ideology is 
clearly expressed: ‘A monarch should be ever intent on conquest, 
otherwise his enemies rise in arms against him’. Without scruple 
and even without provocation he invaded kingdom after kingdom 
and annexed them to his expanding empire. The people whom he 
conquered were reconciled to his rule because they enjoyed the 
blessings of peace which Akbar extended to them. The policy of 
expansion had been initiated by his valued guardian under whom 
Ajmer, Gwalior and Jaunpur had been annexed and it was followed 
by Akbar when he sent the expedition for the conquest of Malwa 


115 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


(1562). But from 1564 onwards when he began his attack on Gond- 
wana, Akbar systematically pursued a policy of expansion which 
did not end until the fall of Aslrgarh in 1601. In fairness to Akbar 
it has to be conceded that, though most of his wars were motivated 
by earth-hunger, yet all of them cannot be dismissed as purely annex¬ 
ationist in nature. Some of them were what Mommsen calls defen¬ 
sive-offensive: as for example, his conquest of Bengal and his wars 
in the North-West Frontier; and at least one of his conquests can be 
justified: the conquest of Gujarat which he undertook in response 
to an invitation from that quarter. 

Asaf Khan, the governor of Kara, was entrusted with the task of 
subduing the kingdom of Gondwana or Garha-Katanga now includ¬ 
ed in Madhya Pradesh, bounded, according to Abu-’l-Fazl, on the 
east by Ratanpur, a dependency of Jharkhand or Chota Nagpur, and 
on the west by Malwa, while Panna (the Bhath kingdom) lay north 
of it, and the Deccan, south. It was then ruled by Rani Durgavati, a 
princess of the famous Chandel dynasty of Mahoba, as regent for 
her son Bir Narayan. She was a capable and benevolent ruler, a 
good shot and a courageous leader; she possessed an army of 20,000 
cavalry and 1,000 elephants and had defeated in battle Baz Bahadur 
and the Miyana Afghans. The advance of the Mughul army 
alarmed Durgavati’s soldiers, many of whom deserted. The rani, 
however, made a gallant stand at Narhi to the east of Garha 11 against 
the Mughuls in spite of their overwhelming superiority in number. 
She was easily overpowered, received two wounds from arrows and 
stabbed herself to death to avoid disgrace. Two months later, Asaf 
Khan marched on the capital Chauragarh 12 and defeated Bir Narla- 
yan who, though wounded in the battle of Narhi, offered battle and 
was slain. Two women who escaped death at jauhar —one of them 
being Rani Durgavati’s sister, Kamalavati—were sent to Akbar’s 
harem. Asaf Khan obtained rich spoils in gold, coined and uncoined, 
and in figures of men and animals, jewels, pearls as well as 1,000 
elephants and he followed the evil example of Adham Khan in appro¬ 
priating the major portion. 

Towards the end of 1564, Akbar laid the foundation of a town 
which he named Nagarchain (the city of repose) on the site of the 
village of Kakrali, seven miles to the south of Agra. 13 It became his 
favourite resort where he received even ambassadors from abroad, 
but was deserted some years later when Fathpur Sikri became the 
capital of the empire. About this time Akbar began also the resto¬ 
ration of Agra by building a new fort of stone to replace the old 
crumbling brick fort. We are told by Abu-’l-Fazl that Akbar erected 
at Agra 'more than five hundred buildings of masonry after the 


116 


AKBAR 


beautiful designs of Bengal and Gujarat, which masterly sculptors 
and cunning artists of form have fashioned as architectural models’. 
Most of them were demolished by his grandson when he recon¬ 
structed the fort. 

Akbar’s work of conquest was now seriously interrupted by a 
formidable rebellion of the Uzbegs. The Uzbegs in Akbar’s service 
formed a party; in a sense they were the hereditary enemies of the 
Timurids as it was they who had driven Babur from Transoxiana. 14 
They had joined the Indian expeditions of the Timurids and entered 
their service but their loyalty to the dynasty was lukewarm and 
uncertain. Khan Zaman and his relations were proud of their line¬ 
age from the royal line of Shaiban. 15 They resented Akbar’s prefer¬ 
ence to Persians who were appointed to high positions at court 
while they were placed far away in the eastern provinces requiring 
constant exertion. As bigoted Sunnis they were hostile to the Per¬ 
sians who were mostly Shiahs but it would not be quite proper to 
describe the Uzbeg rebellion as a protest of Sunni orthodoxy against 
Akbar’s liberal policy towards the Shiahs and the Hindus, as a 
modern author has suggested. 16 It was the protest of a lawless 
aristocracy, accustomed to the laxity of Humayun’s days, against 
centralised government which Akbar was building, leavened by the 
racial factor and to a certain extent by personal ambition. The 
Uzbeg officers comported themselves like veritable satraps aspiring 
to independence. At one stage the rebels were in communication 
with Akbar’s half-brother MIrza Hakim, but there is no evidence 
of their complicity with ‘Abdullah Khan, the famous Uzbeg chief 
of Bukhara. The prominent Uzbeg officers were ‘All Qull Khan, 
Khan Zaman who was governor of Jaunpur and their leader, his 
brother Bahadur Khan, their uncle Ibrahim Khlan who held Surhur- 
pur, north of Jaunpur, Iskandar Khan whose fief was Awadh and 
‘Abdullah Khan who had succeeded Plr Muhammad Khan in the 
government of Malwa. 

Already in 1561 Khan Zaman had shown the complexion of his 
allegiance and again in 1564 after his surprising victory over the 
Afghans in full force under Fath Khan, who had invaded and occu¬ 
pied Bihar, he dismissed Akbar’s messengers who demanded assur¬ 
ance of his allegiance with an evasive reply. In Malwa ‘Abdullah 
Khan showed symptoms of revolt. In July, 1564, Akbar marched 
through Narwar to Mandu, overtook the fleeing rebels near the city 
and drove him into Gujarat. He sent an envoy to Chingiz Khan, 
ruler of Southern Gujarat, requesting extradition of his fugitive 
officer or at least his expulsion. Chingiz Khan sent a polite reply 
asking pardon for the refugee and promising his expulsion if he 


117 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


were not forgiven. At Mandu Akbar received in marriage the 
daughter of Mubarak Shah, ruler of Khandesh. He appointed Qara 
Bahadur Khan, a cousin of Haidar Mirza, the historian, to the govern¬ 
ment of Malwa and returned to Agra on 9 October. 

The evasive reply of Khan Zaman and the misconduct of 
‘Abdullah Khan bred suspicion in Akbar’s mind about the Uzbegs 
in general. Early in 1565 Akbar sent Ashraf Khan to bring Iskandar 
Khan to court but Iskandar proceeded to Jaunpur, taking with him 
Ibrahim Khan from Surhurpur, and there under the leadership of 
Khan Zaman the Uzbegs decided on a systematic campaign against 
the emperor. Iskandar and Ibrahim marched on Kanauj and defeated 
the Mughul troops at Nimkhar in Sitapur district. Khan Zaman and 
Bahadur besieged Majnun Khan Qaqshal at Mlanikpur who, though 
reinforced by Asaf Khan from Chauragarh, was unable to maintain 
himself against the enemy. Akbar immediately sent Mun‘im Khan 
to his aid and on 24 May himself set out from Agra with a large 
force. He joined Mun‘im Khan at Kanauj and made a rapid march 
on Lakhnau and forced Iskandar to evacuate it. Alarmed at this, 
Khan Zaman raised the siege of Manikpur and fled eastwards. Ulti¬ 
mately the Uzbegs took their stand near Hajipur whence they nego¬ 
tiated with the Afghans of Rohtas and Sulaiman Kararam, sultan of 
Bengal, for help. Akbar marched to Jaunpur and replied by sending 
an emissary to Mukunda Dev, raja of CMssa, asking him to attack 
Sulaiman if the sultan would help the rebels, to which he agreed. But 
Akbar’s situation became complicated by the sudden defection of 
Asaf Khan on 16 September as he was called to account for the 
spoils of Gondwana. Khan Zaman now sent Iskandar and Bahadur 
into the territory north of the Gogra to divide the royal troops. Akbar 
despatched Mir Mu‘izz-ul-Mulk to Khairabad in Sitapur* district to 
arrest their aggression, while he himself proceeded to Allahabad. 
Finding Akbar equal to the situation, Khan Zaman sent a messenger 
to Mun‘im Khan asking pardon and a reconciliation was patched up 
on condition that Khan Zaman should send his mother and uncle 
to court and he should not cross the Gogra as long as the imperial 
army would remain in that neighbourhood. Meanwhile in spite of 
these negotiations Mir Muhzz-ul-Mulk and Raja Todar Mai who had 
joined him, forced on Bahadur and Iskandar a battle in Khairabad 
and suffered an ignominious defeat. Akbar, however, extended gene¬ 
ral amnesty to the Uzbegs and recalled as well as reproved his 
officers. 

On 24 January, 1566, Akbar left Jaunpur for Banaras, in¬ 
specting on the way the important stronghold of Chunar. No sooner 
had Akbar set out than ‘All Quli Khan violated the conditions of 


118 


AKBAR 


peace, crossed the Gogra, marched to Muhammadabad and sent a 
force to take Ghazipur and Jaunpur. Akbar turned back to chastise 
the faithless Uzbeg who, however, fled to the hills. But Bahadur 
had advanced on Jaunpur, captured Ashraf Khan and released his 
mother and then, plundering Banaras, retreated across the Ganga 
(Ganges). Akbar hastened to Jaunpur and declared it his head¬ 
quarters, determined to quell the rebellion root and branch. Khan 
Zaman was alarmed and again opened negotiation for submission 
and pardon. Akbar, weary of the long campaign, forgave the rebels 
and reinstated them in their positions. On 3 March, 1566, he 
left for Agra. 

The storm apparently subsided but it broke again early next 
year when the Uzbegs, who were in secret communication with the 
ruler of Kabul, encouraged him to invade India and Khan Zaman 
read the khutba in his name at Jaunpur. In a family conclave 
held at Surhurpur the Uzbeg leaders decided on a renewed cam¬ 
paign. Khan Zaman, taking advantage of Akbar’s absence in the 
Punjab where he had marched in November, 1566, to ward off Mirza 
Hakim’s invasion, invaded Kanauj and besieged the fort of Sher- 
garh, near Kanauj, where the Mughul officer Mirza Yusuf Khan had 
taken refuge. Bahadur Khan attacked Asaf Khan and Majnun 
Khan at Manikpur while Iskandar and Ibrahim marched on Awadh. 
On 23 March, 1567, Akbar left Lahore for Agra and on 6 May 
marched from Agra on Shergarh. Khan Zaman escaped to Manik- 
pur. Akbar despatched a force under Raja Todar Mai and Muzaffar 
Khan against Iskandar Khan in Awadh, while he himself marched 
towards Manikpur to deal with the main body of rebels. At Rae 
Bareli he learnt that Khan Zaman and Bahadur Khian had crossed 
the Ganga (Ganges) with a view to proceeding to KalpL 17 On 7 
June he marched on from that town, disregarding the murmuring 
reluctance of his troops weary of incessant campaigns, and on ar¬ 
rival at Manikpur ferry he despatched the main body of his troops 
under Raja Bhagwan Das and Khvaja Jahan to Kara while he, with 
some 1500 men, displayed extraordinary courage in crossing the 
swollen river. Meanwhile the Uzbegs had crossed the Ganga 
(Ganges) and on their way to Kara encamped in the neighbour¬ 
hood. On 9 June at dawn Akbar surprised the Uzbegs who could 
not suspect his arrival and had spent the whole night in a dissolute 
carousal. They marched off without offering battle, but Majnun 
Khian and Asaf Khian were despatched in advance to intercept them. 
In the battle that followed, the Uzbegs resisted for some time but 
were ultimately defeated. 18 Khan Zaman was slain and Bahadur 
Khan was taken captive. Bahadur was executed and some ring¬ 
leaders were trampled to death and a reward of one gold mohur 


119 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


was paid for every Uzbeg’s head. Akbar then marched to Allaha¬ 
bad and on to Banaras which was sacked because it closed its gates 
against him. From Banaras he marched to Jaunpur and conferred 
the assignments of Khan Zaman and other Uzbeg chiefs on Mun‘im 
Khan. Meanwhile Todar Mai and Muhammad Quli Khan Barlas 
had besieged Iskandar in Awadh and driven him to the Afghans 
at Gorakhpur. 19 The great Uzbeg rebellion, the gravest menace 
in the early years of Akbar’s reign, came to an end. On 18 July, 
1567, Akbar returned to Agra. 

Hardly had the Uzbeg menace been surmounted when Akbar 
had to face another rebellion, though less formidable, organized 
by the Mirzas. They were Tlmurid princes, descended from ‘Umar 
Shaikh Mlrza, the second son of Timur while Akbar was descended 
from the third son Mlran Shah. The doyen of these Mirzas, Mu¬ 
hammad Sultan Mlrza who was a grandson (daughter’s son) of 
Sultan Husain Mlrza, the grand monarch of Khurasan, joined Babur’s 
service. In the reign of Humayun he with his sons Ulugh Mlrza 
and Shah Mlrza gave the emperor not a little trouble. 20 Both these 
sons died before Akbar’s accession, so that the family now consisted 
of Muhammad Sultan Mlrza and his other sons, Ibrahim Husain 
Mlrza, Muhammad Husain Mlrza, Mas‘ud Husain Mlrza and ‘Aqil 
Husain Mlrza as well as two grandsons Ulugh Mlrza and Shah Mlrza, 
sons of the deceased Ulugh Mlrza. Rebellion against the Mughul 
emperor was their political creed; in Akbar’s reign they shifted 
the theatres of their activities from Sambhal and the neighbour¬ 
hood to Malwa and then to Gujarat. They were given assignments 
in the districts of Sambhal and A‘zampur. During the invasion of 
Mlrza Hakim, when Akbar, already exhausted with the task of sup¬ 
pressing the Uzbeg revolt, was away in the Punjab, the Mirzas, true 
to their tradition, raised the standard of revolt, and marched plun¬ 
dering through the country at the head of a hastily collected swarm 
of disaffected persons and partisans and even threatened Delhi whose 
gates were closed by Tatar Khan. Mun‘im Khan marched from 
Agra, captured Muhammad Sultan Mlrza whom he imprisoned at 
Bayana and compelled the other Mirzas to retire to Malwa. There 
their designs were favoured by independent Rajput chiefs and they 
were able to take some important towns and districts including 
Ujjain. After the final suppression of the Uzbeg revolt, Akbar left 
Agra on 31 August, 1567, for Dholpur and Gwalior and on reaching 
Gagraun on the Malwa frontier sent Shihab-ud-din Ahmad Khan to 
deal with the troublesome Mirzas. Shihab-ud-din marched on Uj¬ 
jain and the Mirzas fled to Mandu and from there they took refuge 
with Chingiz Khan who was then supreme in Gujarat. 


120 


AKBAR 


In September, 1567, Akbar undertook one of the most famous 
military operations of his life, the siege and capture of Chitor. To 
the ruler of Northern India the importance of Rajasthan was great: 
through it lay the route to Gujarat, the Narmada valley and the 
Deccan and without the possession of its strong fortresses he could 
not feel himself secure. The key to Rajasthan was Mewar whose 
capital Chitor was the £ sanctuary of Rajput freedom’. Akbar had 
come into contact with the Rajputs as allies; he was now to meet 
the Rajputs in arms. The solemn vow of the ranas of Mewar, 
that they would not sully their blood by matrimonial alliance with 
any Muslim ruler nor diminish the honour of the house of Bappia 
Rawal by acknowledging his sovereignty, wounded the imperial 
pride of Akbar* who found in the hospitality the riana had extended 
to Baz Bahadur and the assistance he had rendered to the rebel¬ 
lious Mi'rzas in Mjalwa his casus belli. The Rajput annals refer to 
an unsuccessful attempt before that of 1567 when Chitor was saved 
by ‘the masculine courage’ of its queen, but Muslim chronicles are 
absolutely silent on it. 

Legend and history are equally eloquent in praising the grand¬ 
eur and strength of the historic fortress of Chitor, the handiwork 
of both art and nature, which stands on a long narrow hill, lying 
almost exactly north and south and about 500 feet above the sur¬ 
rounding plain. Its length is about three miles and a quarter and 
its greatest breadth, half a mile. 203 In the time of Akbar the city 
was on the hill within the fort. On 23 October, 1567, Akbar pitched 
his camp before Chitor. 21 On the approach of the Mughul army 
rana Uday Singh, the unworthy son of a worthy father who had 
fought gloriously against the emperor’s grandfather, abandoned the 
capital and took refuge in the defiles of the Aravalll hills. But this 
did not facilitate the capture of the fortress in which there was a 
strong garrison commanded by Jai Mai of Bednor who had 
bravely resisted Sharaf-ud-dln Husain in Merta. A month elapsed 
before the fort was completely invested and the three batteries con¬ 
structed. Akbar made many unsuccessful attempts to take it by 
direct assault which caused heavy loss of 200 men a day and he 
decided to proceed by means of mines and sabdts (covered ways) 
which were completed at enormous cost, more than a hundred men 
being killed daily. On 17 December two mines were fired and, as 
one exploded, the Mughuls rushed into the breach when suddenly 
the second exploded and killed 200 of them, half of them being 
officers, while the garrison, which lost only 40, easily repaired the 
breach. Akbar realized that success required greater caution, plan¬ 
ning and perseverance and the siege was protracted. On the night 


121 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


of 22-23 February, 1568, a general attack was made on the fort 
from all sides and several breaches were made. In the early hours 
of 23 February, Akbar observed at the breach a man of com¬ 
manding presence, armed in mail, directing the restoration and de¬ 
fence of the works. He immediately fired at him with his favourite 
gun sangrdm and the Rajput fell shot through the forehead. Not 
until the next morning did Akbar come to know that he had brought 
down the ‘lion of Chitor’. The Rajputs immediately withdrew from 
the ramparts and the fire that broke out in several places within 
the fort during the night was rightly explained by Raja Bhagwan 
Das as the jauhar, ‘the last awful sacrifice which Rajput despair 
offers to honour and the gods.’ 

The mantle of Jai Mai now fell on the young and gallant Patta 
of Kailwa, but with his fall Chitor also fell. Early in the mor'n- 
ing Akbar entered the fortress in triumph and ordered a general 
massacre ‘which ceased only for lack of victims’ in the afternoon, 
for each bazaar, each street and each house was a fortress and centre 
of resistance. Thirty thousand were slain; among them was the 
gallant Patta who fell after he had displayed ‘prodigies of valour.’ 
One thousand musketeers from Kalpi managed to escape, to the 
utter indignation of Akbar, by a stratagem, passing themselves off 
as Akbar’s troops. To expiate ‘the sin of the slaughter of Chitor’ 
Akbar honoured the memory of his vanquished adversaries by erect¬ 
ing the statues of Jai Mai and Patta mounted on elephants which 
he placed at the gate of Agra fort. 

Akbar 1 made over the government of Mewiar to Asaf Khan, 
left Chitor on 28 February and after a pilgrimage to Ajmer re¬ 
turned to Agra on 13 April. An expedition sent to besiege the 
fortress of Ranthambhor was recalled in order to deal with the 
Mirzas who, forced to leave Gujarat on account of disagreement 
with Chingiz Khan, invaded Malwa and besieged Ujjain. The ad¬ 
vance of the Mughul troops under Ashraf Khan forced the Mirzas 
to retreat to Mandu and they were pursued across the Narmada, 
They then escaped again to Gujarat where the assassination of 
Chingiz Khan and the consequent confusion in the country opened 
to them fresh prospects for their ambitions. 

Akbar now took important steps to improve the administration 
(September, 1568). The Atga-KhaU (‘foster-father cohort’) held 
extensive fiefs in the Punjab and their leader Khian Kalan was 
governor of the province. Akbar broke up the confederacy by dis¬ 
persing them. The government of the Punjab was made over to 
Husain Qul’i Khian who was transferred from Nagaur. Khan Kalan 


122 


AKBAR 


was sent to Sambhal, his younger brother Qutb-ud-dln Muhammad 
Khan to Malwa, and Kanauj was assigned to another brother Sharif 
Khan. Mirza ‘Aziz Kuka, the son of Khjan Kalan, was allowed to 
retain his assignment of Dipalpur in the Punjab. These measures 
he adopted with a view to preventing the gathering of relations and 
prolonged service of officers at the same place. Shihab-ud-dm 
Ahmad Khan was called from Malwa and placed in charge of the 
reserved lands as Muzaffar Khan, the revenue minister, was over¬ 
worked. Shihab-ud-dm abolished the annual assessment of land 
revenue, which was expensive and led to corruption, and esta¬ 
blished group-assessment ( Nasaq) of a village or a par gaud as a 
whole. 22 

Towards the end of the year, Akbar was able to send an ex¬ 
pedition for the conquest of Ranthambhor, the great stronghold in 
Rajasthan, which had been invested as early as 1558 but the siege had 
to be raised on account of the imbroglio with Bairam Khan. On 
8 February, 1569, Akbar pitched his tent before the fort which 
was held by Rai Surjan Hara, chief of Bundl, as a vassal of the 
rania, of Chitor. The fortress, which was remarkable for its height 
and strength, was also well-provisioned. Akbar opened the siege 
with sabtits (covered ways) and fifteen huge mortars were dragged 
to the hill Ran which commands the fortress. There is a discre¬ 
pancy between the version given in the Muslim chronicles and that 
in the Rajput annals. According to the former, Akbar’s mortars 
caused breaches in the walls of the fort and destruction of the 
houses within it. Rai Surjan took a lesson from the fate of Chitor, 
sent his two sons to* Akbar asking his pardon and surrendered the 
fort on 21 March, 1569. Abu-T-Fazl boasts that Akbar conquered 
the fort in a month whereas ‘Ala-ud-dm Khaljl had taken one year. 
According to the Rajput version, as the garrison did not show any 
sign of surrender Raja BhagWan Dias and Man Singh seduced Surjan 
to transfer his allegiance to the Mughul emperor and Man Singh, 
accompanied by Akbar in the guise of a mace-bearer, secured access 
to the fortress to discuss the matter. Akbar was, however, recog¬ 
nized and terms were negotiated in his presence and Surjan agreed 
to surrender the fort on conditions which were favourable to him: 
Surjan was to join Akbar’s service and be placed in charge of fifty- 
two districts; the chiefs of Bund! were to be exempted from the 
duty of sending a bride to the royal harem and payment of the 
jizya; they should have the privilege of entering the hall of audience 
fully armed and were to be exempted from prostration ( sijda ); 
their temples should be respected; their horses should not be brand¬ 
ed; they should not be required to cross the Indus and should be 


123 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


placed under the command of a Hindu leader; and Bund! should re¬ 
main their permanent capital. In the present state of our know¬ 
ledge, it is not possible either to reject or to accept the Rajput ver¬ 
sion definitely. It does not, however, appear improbable as it was 
not unlike Akbar, who had no scruple to employ diplomacy where 
his sword was not enough. Rai Surj an was at first given a command 
in Gondwiana and then appointed governor of Banaras, including 
Chunar, with the rank of a commander of 2,000. Akbar made over 
the fort of Ranthambhor to Mihtar Khan and returned to Agra on 
10 May, 1569, after making his annual pilgrimage to Ajmer. 

During his march on Ranthambhor, Akbar had ordered Majnun 
Khan Qaqshal to capture the fortress of Kalin jar, the stronghold 
which had cost the life of Sher Shah and was then held by Raja 
Ram Chand Baghela of Rewah who had already been reduced to 
obedience by Asaf Khan, the conqueror of Gondwiana and had de¬ 
monstrated it by surrendering his minstrel Tansen to the emperor. 
The fort was invested but the raja, taking lessons from the de¬ 
vastated battlements of Chitor and the fall of Ranthambhor, sur¬ 
rendered it without offering any serious resistance (August, 1569). 
Akbar granted him a jdglr near Allahabad and placed Majnun Khan 
Qaqshal in charge of the government of Kalin jar. 

After the fall of the strong Rajput fortresses, Jodhpur and 
Bikaner judged it expedient to make submission. In November, 
1570, while the emperor was encamped at Nagaur, Chandra Sen, 
son of Raja Mai Dev of Jodhpur and Kalyan Mai, raja, of Bikaner, 
with his son Rai Singh paid homage to the emperor who received 
in marriage the niece of the raja of Jodhpur. Rawal Har Rai of 
Jaisalmer also entered into matrimonial alliance with the Mughul 
emperor by offering him the hand of his daughter. Partly by his 
sword, partly by the threat of his mailed fist as well as magnani¬ 
mous diplomacy, Akbar was able to establish his supremacy over 
the Rajputs who gradually reconciled themselves to Mughul rule 
and found in their conqueror a beneficent protector under whose 
banner they fought the battles of the empire from the glaciers of 
the Hindu Kush to the marshes of Bengal. The ruthless victor 
of Chitor succeeded in healing the wounds which his soaring ambi¬ 
tion had inflicted. Rajasthan was indeed Akbar’s testing ground for 
exhibition of his mastery in arms, diplomacy and statesmanship. 

In spite of these brilliant successes, Akbar had no peace of 
mind as he was still denied the blessing of a son, several children 
born to him having died in their infancy. He prayed fervently at 
the shrines of Ajmer and Delhi for an heir to his throne. He now 


124 


AKBAR 


approached the venerable Shaikh Salim ChishtI who lived at Sikri, 
23 miles to the west of Agra, and was assured by him of the early 
fulfilment of his prayers. Early in 1569 the daughter of Raja Bihari 
Mai was found to be with child and she was sent to the Shaikh’s 
hermitage at Sikh! where, on 30 August, she gave birth to a son who 
was named Salim in honour of the saint. In the course of a few 
years the royal nursery was enriched by new arrivals in succession: 
in November, a daughter was born to him and on 7 June, 1570, 
Prince Murad saw the light. Two years after, on 10 September, 
1572, was born a third son at Ajmer in the house of Shaikh Daniyal 
whom he named after the saint. Two daughters also were born 
after Daniyal. These three sons of Akbar all attained mature age. 

In pursuance of a vow, Akbar set out on foot on pilgrimage to 
Ajmer to offer thanks for the birth of Salim (20 January, 1570). 
From Ajmer he returned to Delhi where he inspected the splendid 
mausoleum of his father which had been recently built, thanks to 
the affectionate fidelity of a wife, Haji Begam. In September he 
set out again on pilgrimage to Ajmer where he repaired and en¬ 
larged the fortifications and began construction of buildings for him¬ 
self and his nobles. On 3 November he left for Nagaur 22a where 
he stayed a few months and received the homage of the Rajput 
States of Jodhpur, Bikaner and Jaisalmer as well as that discrown¬ 
ed fugitive Baz Bahadur of Malwa. From Nagaur he arrived at 
Pak Pattan in the Punjab to visit the shrine of Shaikh Farid Shakar- 
ganj (March, 1571). From there he returned to Ajmer by way 

of Hissar and on 9 August, 1571, arrived at Sikri which he now 

decided to make his capital as the auspicious place where his two 

sons Salim and Murad had been born. The resources of his ex¬ 

panding empire and the artistic genius of India and Persia were 
employed to convert the petty, quiet hamlet into the crowded proud 
metropolis which even in its lost glory was regarded by Fitch in 
1585 as much greater than Elizabethan London. From the time 
when it was built until 1585 when it was abandoned, Sikri, which 
was named Fathpur after the conquest of Gujarat, remained the 
capital of Akbar’s empire. 

Akbar had become supreme in Northern India and he could 
now turn to extending his dominion to the sea in the west as well 
as in the east. The conquest of Malwa and the supremacy over 
Rajasthan opened the road to Gujarat whose anarchical condition 
invited foreign invasion. Muzaffar Shah III, the nominal king, 
was a mere puppet in the hands of ambitious and unscrupulous 
nobles who partitioned the kingdom among themselves and were 
often at war with one another. One of these, Ptimad Khan, who 


125 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


had already sought Akbar’s help and intervention in 1567 against 
his rival Chingiz Khan, invited him in 1572, hard-pressed by Sher 
Khan Fuladi whom Muzaffar Shah joined at Ahmadabad, to put 
an end to the anarchy in Gujarat by annexing it to the Mughul 
empire. But Akbar had more than one reason for his invasion of 
the kingdom. Gujarat had been in temporary Mughul occupation 
under Humayun and its recovery would be quite legitimate for his 
successor. The rebellious Mlrzas, who had returned to Gujarat 
after the assassination of Chingiz Khan, entered upon his inheritance 
by defeating his son and made themselves masters of the southern 
portion of the kingdom. It was high time for Akbar to suppress 
these incorrigible rebels and strike at their power before they should 
usurp the whole kingdom. Besides, Gujarat lay on the road to 
Mecca and Medina, and in the interest of the pilgrim traffic its 
security was essential. It intervened between the Portuguese ter¬ 
ritory and the Mughul empire and its weakness might as well offer 
an opportune soil for the aggression of the Portuguese who were 
already masters of the western coast of India and the Arabian Sea. 
With its fertile soil, flourishing ports and extensive foreign trade, 
the rich kingdom of Gujarat could not but attract the ambitious 
sovereign, who could secure through its ports a window for his 
land-locked empire. 

On 2 July, 1572, Akbar set out from Fathpur Sikrl for Ajmer 
from where he sent Khan Kalan with 10,000 horse as an advance 
guard and himself followed by leisurely marches. Through Nagaur 
and Merta he marched to Sirohl where he made a charge on the 
Rajputs as one of them had made a murderous attack on Khan 
Kalan, and in the fight that ensued 150 of them were slain. He 
then left for Patan, after sending Raja Man Singh towards Idar in 
pursuit of the sons of Sher Khan Fuladi. On 7 November Akbar 
reached Patan where he received the homage of the people. He 
then marched on towards Ahmadabad and on the way at Jotana, 
two stages from Patan, he received the fugitive Muzaffar Shah who 
had left Sher Khan Fulladl as the latter had, on the approach of 
Akbar, raised the siege of Ahmadabad and fled to Sauriashtra. 
Shortly after, Ptimad Khan and other noblemen came to pay him 
homage. On 20 November, Akbar reached the capital of Gujarat 
and he made over the government of the country to the north-west 
of the river Mahi to Khan A‘zam and of the southern portion, where 
the turbulent Mlrzas had established themselves, to Ptimad Khan. 

On 8 December Akbar left Ahmadabad for the wealthy port 
of Cambay where he had the first sight of the sea and came into 
contact with the merchants of Portugal, Turkey, Syria, Persia and 


126 


AKBAR 


Transoxiana. Akbar then turned his direction towards the Mirzas: 
Ibrahim Husain who held Baroda; Muhammad Husain, Surat; and 
Shah Mirza, Champaner. On reaching Baroda Akbar despatched 
an army under Shlahbaz Khan towards Champaner and a large force 
under Sayyid Mahmud Khan Barha towards Surat. He rapidly 
marched towards the Mahi to intercept Ibrahim Husain who was 
moving towards the north and contacted the enemy who was at 
Sarnal on the opposite bank. At heavy risk and with a following 
of 200 men only, he crossed the river at night and as he entered 
the town Ibrahim Husain, who had 1,000 troopers, left it by another 
gate. Akbar made an intrepid pursuit of the enemy and the battle 
that ensued was fought ‘man to man, hand to hand’ and ‘more re¬ 
sembled a tourney than a battle.’ At one stage Akbar’s life was 
in imminent danger when he was directly attacked by two of the 
enemy’s troopers. Ibrahim Husain Mirza was ultimately defeated 
and escaped under cover of darkness. 

Akbar next undertook the investment of Surat. Ibrahim Hu¬ 
sain’s wife, with her young son Muzaffar Husain, escaped to the 
Deccan and the commandant of the fort surrendered it after a re¬ 
sistance of one month and a half on 26 February, 1573. Akbar 
again came into contact with the Portuguese, who had come in res¬ 
ponse to an invitation of the Mirzas but, finding them a spent force, 
paid a friendly visit to the emperor. 

Meanwhile Muhammad Husain Mirza and Shah Mirza, in com¬ 
bination with Sher Khan FuladI, laid siege to Patan. Khan A‘zam, 
joined by the fief-holders of Malwa and Chanderl, marched to the 
relief of Sayyid Ahmad Barha, the Mughul commandant, and forced 
the rebels to raise the siege and inflicted on them a major defeat on 
22 January, 1573. Sher Khan fled to Junagarh and the Mirzas, 
to the Deccan. 

On 2 April Akbar returned to Ahmadlabad. He made over 
the government of the whole of Gujarat to Khan A‘zam and that 
of Malwa to Muzaffar Khan Turbati and proceeded towards his 
capital. On the way at Sirohi he received the report of the death of 
that arch-rebel Ibrahim Husain, who after leaving Gujarat had been 
creating trouble in the Punjab and was defeated by the Mughul gov¬ 
ernor Husain Qull Khan. Husain Qull was then engaged in the siege 
of Nagarkot but he had hastened to oppose Ibrahim after making 
a favourable peace with its raja, Bidai Chand, on condition of 
acknowledgement of Akbar’s sovereignty. On 3 June Akbar re¬ 
turned to Fathpur Sikril and found the head of Ibrahim Husain. 22b 
His brother Mas‘ud, with his eyes sown up, was brought as a cap¬ 
tive to the emperor who however pardoned him. 


127 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

Hardly three months had elapsed before Gujarat was again 
aflame and Mughul authority was challenged by a confederacy of 
rebels. Muhammad Husain Mlrza, who had returned from the 
Deccan soon after Akbar’s departure, invaded Surat and captured 
Broach and Cambay. Ikhtiyar-ul-Mulk and the sons of Sher Khlan 
FuladI, in conjunction with the raja of Idar, took Ahmadnagar. 
The rebels jointly advanced on Ahmadabad and besieged Khan 
A‘zam. On receipt of this disconcerting news Akbar left Fathpur 
SikrI on 23 August with an army of 3,000 and, marching by way 
cf Ajmer and Merta with lightning speed, reached the vicinity of 
Ahmadabad on 2 September, thus covering a distance of about 500 
miles in eleven days which caravans took two months to complete, 
The enemy was taken by absolute surprise and Muhammad Husain 
was reluctant to believe the report of the arrival of Akbar whom 
his scouts had left at Fathpur SikrI just two weeks back. The 
amazed Mlrza sent Ikhtiyar-ul-Mulk with a force of 5,000 horse 
to prevent Khan A‘zam from sallying out of Ahmadabad and himself 
drew out his forces for battle. The battle remained long undecided 
but ultimately Akbar gained a complete victory over the enemy who 
had 15,000 men. Muhammad Husain was wounded and captured and 
shortly after put to death. The Mughuls, who were resting after the 
victory and expecting Khan A‘zam, were surprised by the sudden 
arrival of a new foe, Ikhtiyar-ul-Mulk, who hastened to the Mlrza’s 
aid. Akbar, in spite of great consternation in his army, attacked 
the enemy, routed his vanguard and forced him to retreat. Ikhtiyar- 
ul-Mulk lost battle as well as life. A minaret was made of 1,000 
heads of the slain. In the evening the Mughuls had a second sur¬ 
prise when a fresh army was observed proceeding towards them: it 
however proved to be the force of Khan A‘zam who now joined the 
emperor. Akbar then made his triumphant entry into Gujarat’s 
capital and turned his direction to the final settlement of Gujarat 
affairs. An army was sent to Broach and Champaner in pursuit of Shah 
Mlrza who now disappears from history. Raja Todar Mai was 
appointed to restore order in the financial administration of the 
province by revising the revenue settlement. Akbar returned to 
Fathpur SikrI on 5 October, 1573, after an absence of only 43 days. 
The second campaign of Gujarat is the most amazing military 
achievement of Akbar’s life. 

With the expansion of his kingdom Akbar realized the necessity 
for its consolidation. The year 1573 saw the inauguration of far- 
reaching reforms in the administration of the empire by the intro¬ 
duction of the branding system (dagh), the conversion of the 
assignments ( jagirs ) into reserved lands ( khalisa ) 23 and fixing the 


128 


AKBAR 


rank ( mansab ) and gradation of pay of the officers of the State. 
First introduced by ‘Ala-ud-din Khalji and revised by Sher Shah, 
the branding of horses in every officer’s due contingent was aimed 
at stopping the fraud of false musters when baggage ponies hired 
or borrowed would be produced, an evil from which the Mughul 
army suffered even in its most palmy days; and the system continued 
till the breakdown of the Mughul government in the middle of the 
eighteenth century. The institution of the mansab system led to 
the establishment of a well-regulated bureaucracy which with cer¬ 
tain modifications remained the basis of Mughul administration. All 
officers were placed in ranks ranging from the commander of 10 up 
to 5,000 horsemen with the exception of princes and a few nobles 
who were given commands of 7,000. The other measure of Akbar, 
the conversion of the assignments into reserved lands, was of a 
revolutionary nature. Akbar wanted to bring the whole of his king¬ 
dom under his direct administration and pay all his officers in cash 
with a view to removing the evils arising from the assignment 
system. In the absence of a correct valuation of the empire, the 
assignment system proved defective in its working: the two valua¬ 
tions made early in his reign were ‘corruptly falsified’; over-valua¬ 
tion of the assignments led to discontent in State service. The 
whole empire was divided into circles, each estimated to yield a 
crore of dam (Rs. 250,000). The experiment lasted for five years and 
in 1579/80 a new and precise valuation of the empire was made and 
the assignment system was revived. Akbar’s policy of absolute cen¬ 
tralization received a check. 

The Surs, who held Bengal at Akbar’s accession, maintained 
friendly relations with him, but in 1564 Taj Khan Kararam, an officer 
of Sher Shah, overthrew them. Under his brother Sulaiman 
(1565-72) there was a revival of the Bengal sultanate and his autho¬ 
rity extended from Cooch Behar to Purl and from the Son to the 
Brahmaputra. Sulaiman was shrewd enough to acknowledge Akbar’s 
sovereignty by reading the khutba in his name. After Sulaiman’s 
death in 1572 his elder son Bayazid succeeded him but after a few 
months he was put to death by the Afghan nobles who raised Sulai¬ 
man’s younger son Daud to the throne. 

Inheriting his father’s vast treasures and grand army, Daud 
defied Akbar’s authority by reading the khutba in his own name, 
invading Mughul territory and destroying the fort of Zamaniya in 
Ghazipur district. On instruction from Akbar, then in Gujarat, 
Mun‘im Khan marched on Patna, but Daud’s Minister Ludi Khan 
bought him off with gifts and delusive assurances of loyalty. Akbar 
disapproved Mun‘im’s conduct and sent further reinforcement. 

129 

ME.—<*» 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Mun‘im Khan now besieged Patna where Daud, after murdering 
Ludi Khan, had shut himself up. As the aged Khan Khanan experi¬ 
enced difficulties, Akbar set out on 20 June, 1574, from Agra by 
boat while the army marched by land and on 4 August arrived at 
Patna with a large flotilla carrying elephants and guns. 

Akbar quickly perceived that the strength of Patna lay on 
Hajipur on the north bank of the Ganga (Ganges) from where it 
drew its supplies. On 7 August he took it after a few hours’ 
assault. In the fall of Hajipur, Patna read its doom. That very night 
Baud fled and Patna also fell into the hands of the Mughuls. Akbar 
pursued the fugitive Afghans upto Daryapur 233 and then returned 
with much booty in treasures and 265 elephants. He proceeded to¬ 
wards Delhi and sent Mun‘im Khan with 20,000 men to conduct the 
campaign. Surajgarh, Monghyr, Bhagalpur and Colgong (Kahalgam) 
fell in quick succession and Mun‘im Khan marched triumphantly 
through the fortified pass of Teliyagarhl into Daud’s capital Tanda 
(25 September). 

Daud fled to Orissa and Mughul authority was easily established 
in Ghoraghat (Dinajpur-Bogra), Satgaon (Hooghly) and Burdwan. 
The Mughul soldiers, weary of incessant campaigns, were reluctant 
to proceed further but Todar Mai persuaded them to march on and 
their reluctant commandant in Tanda, now in senile decay, to join 
them and make a decisive end of the war. Daud, encouraged by the 
dissensions and apathy in the Mughul camp, was also proceeding to 
meet the invaders. They met at Tukaroi, nine miles south-east of 
Dantan, in Midnapur district. Daud began the battle (3 March, 
1575) with a vigorous offensive: a furious elephantry charge. The 
Mughul van was dispersed, Khan ‘Alam was killed, the centre was 
broken and Mun‘im Khan was wounded. Todar Mai, who alone 
held the Mughul left wing, rallied the shaken divisions and made a 
successful charge on the Afghan vanguard. He then dispersed the 
Afghan right wing and the left wing also was ultimately defeated. 
Daud could not maintain his position and fled to Cuttack. The 
Afghans suffered a complete rout. On 12 April Daud made his 
submission to Munhm Khan at Cuttack and delivered his nephew 
as a hostage at the Mughul court, and he was given a considerable 
portion of Orissa in fief. The victory of Tukaroi, however, led to 
the de jure annexation of Bengal to the Mughul empire, though the 
effective establishment of Mughul authority was still far off. 

Mun‘im Khan hurried to the north to recover Ghoraghat which 
had been occupied by the Afghans during his absence. He trans¬ 
ferred his capital from marshy Tanda to pestilential Gaur where the 


130 


AKBAR 


Mughuls died in hundreds until Mun‘im Khan returned to Tarida 
just to die (23 October, 1575). In utter indiscipline, born of terror, 
the Mughul officers and troops evacuated Bengal and retreated to 
Bhagalpur. Baud issued from his retreat, took Bhadrakh and Jales- 
war and recovered the whole of Bengal. Akbar sent Khan Jahan, 
governor of the Punjab, with Todar Mai as his lieutenant, to deal 
with the situation. The Bengal officers were, with great tact, per¬ 
suaded by Todar Mai to rally under the Shiah governor. Junaid 
Kararanl, Baud’s cousin, had raised his head in South-East Bihar, 
and ‘Isa Khan was supreme in Bengal. It was with difficulty that 
Muzaffar Khan, governor of Bihar, held Hajipur. Khan Jahan, how¬ 
ever, advanced and captured Teliyagarhi from Baud’s commandant. 
Baud was forced to retire into the fortress of Rajmahal. Here Khan 
Jahan, reinforced by the army of Bihar, gave battle on 12 July, 
1576. After a stubborn and long-wavering fight, the Afghans were 
completely routed and their leaders slain. Baud’s veteran general 
Kala Pahar fled wounded and Baud himself was taken prisoner and 
executed. His head was received by Akbar one stage from Fathpur 
S'ikri as he was proceeding to Bengal to deal with the situation 
personally. The battle of Rajmahal overthrew Baud and the Kara- 
rani dynasty but it did not result in the effective Mughul conquest 
of Bengal. Mughul authority was established in towns but the coun¬ 
try at large remained at the mercy of the dispossessed Afghans and 
local Hindu chiefs. Bengal remained under Akbar rather as a ter¬ 
ritory under military occupation than an integral part of the empire 
with settled administration. 

Before the fall of Baud at Rajmahal, Akbar had to face his 
indomitable foe in Rajasthan. Chandra Sen, son of Raja Mai Bev 
of Jodhpur, had taken up arms in March, 1574 and not until 1576, 
two years later, could the Mughuls bring about the capitulation of 
Siwana, the fulcrum of his resistance. But it was Rana Pratap Singh 
of Mewar, the chivalrous grandson of Rana Sangram Singh, who 
voiced the discontent of sullen Rajasthan. ‘Race feeling taught him 
to hate the foreigners, ancestral pride to despise them and high mar¬ 
tial spirit, his grandsire’s legacy, to resist them.’ Succeeding his 
father in 1572, he disciplined his troops in the art of guerilla warfare 
and was master of Udaipur, his new Chitor, Kumbhalgarh (Kumal- 
garh) and Gogunda. Akbar needed no casus belli : to the emperor 
liberty is license, as Bryce has well expressed. In April, 1576, he 
sent from Ajmer Raja Man Singh and Ghiyas-ud-din ‘All, known as 
Asaf Khan, against the Rana. They marched through Mandalgarh 
towards Gogunda, but were opposed by Rana Pratap at Hal dighat. 
Here, near the pass, the memorable battle was fought on 21 June. 


131 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


We have a graphic account of the battle from the historian Badauni 
who was present in the field. 

Pratap Singh advanced with a force of three thousand horse 
which he arranged in two divisions. One of these, under Hakim 
Khan Sur, charged the Mughul vanguard and dispersed it and put 
the Rajputs in the Mughul left wing under Rai Lon Karan to flight. 
Badauni who could not distinguish the friendly from the enemy 
Rajputs shot arrows indiscriminately for, as Asaf Khan remarked, 
‘on whichever side they may be killed, it will be a gain to Islam. 
The second Rajput division, led by the Rana himself, charged Qaz'I 
Khan at the entrance of the pass and threw his foi^ce into confusion. 
The battle raged from early morning till midday, but the desperate 
valour of the Rajputs was ultimately unavailing against a superior 
force ‘with a numerous field artillery and a dromedary corps mount¬ 
ing swivels.’ 23b Pratap lost the battle with a considerable loss. 
Gogunda fell into the Mughul hands. 

Akbar regretted the escape of the Rana and even suspected loyal 
Man Singh of connivance. He was, however, able to establish effec¬ 
tive Mughul authority in the southern part of Rajasthan. Sirohi was 
occupied, the principality of Idar was reduced to obedience and 
Akbar received the submission of several minor chiefs: the rulers of 
Banswara and Dungarpur, the latter offering the emperor the hand 
of his daughter. In 1577 the chief of Bund! was subdued and next 
year Madhukar, the Bundela chief of Orchha, who had been defying 
the imperial authority, surrendered and acknowledged Akbar’s 
sovereignty. 

Akbar was determined to overthrow the Rana of Mewar. In 
October, 1578, a considerable force under Shahbaz Khan was des¬ 
patched against Pratap Singh. The Mughuls seized Kelwi'ara, defeat¬ 
ed the Rajput garrison at Kumbhalgarh and captured Gogunda and 
Udaipur. The Rana retired to the remote fastness of Chavand and 
from that base began to recover his territories. Kumbhalgarh was 
recovered and the chiefs of Banswara and Dungarpur acknowledged 
the Rana’s sovereignty. Shahbaz Khan made a renewed attempt at 
suppressing the Rana who retired to the hills, but the Mughuls re¬ 
turned unsuccessful. Six years later another expedition was sent 
by Akbar under Zafar Beg and Jagannatha, the Kachhwahlah, which 
met with the same fate. Akbar’s preoccupation in the Punjab, the 
troubles in the north-west frontier and the bogey of Uzbeg invasion 
prevented the emperor from undertaking active campaign against 
an enemy who harassed and exhausted the invaders by guerilla 
tactics. Before his death in 1597 the Rana had recovered all his 


AKBAE 


territory except Ajmer, Chitor and Mandalgarh. In 1600 Akbar 
made another attempt against Mewar when the expedition led by 
Prince Salim and Raja Man Singh defeated Pratap’s successor, Amar 
Singh, and devastated the country; but the expedition came to an 
abrupt end due to the recall of Man Singh whose services were ur¬ 
gently required in Bengal. 

In 1577 Gujarat became the scene of a revolt led by Mihr 'AH, 
an ambitious servant of Ibrahim Husain Mirza, who set up his youth¬ 
ful son Mirza Muzaffar Husain as the puppet king of the country. 
The rebels took Baroda and the governor Vazir Khan was unable to 
resist them. Todar Mai drove the rebels to Cambay and defeated 
them at Dholka and the Mirza retired to Junagarh. But as soon as 
the Rlaja left, Muzaffar Husain returned, defeated Wazir Khan at 
Sarnal and besieged him at Ahmadabad. But Mihr ‘Ali was killed by a 
stray bullet and so the Mirza raised the siege and withdrew. He fell 
into the hands of Raja ‘Ali Khan of Khandesh who ultimately surren¬ 
dered him to Akbar’s envoy. Akbar replaced the weak and ineffi¬ 
cient Vazir Khan by Shihab-ud-dm Ahmad Khan in the government 
of Gujarat. 

The same year Akbar undertook an important reform: the re¬ 
organization of the mints. The various provincial mints were placed 
under the management of high officials and the famous artist and 
calligrapher ‘Abdus-Samad was appointed Master of the Mint to ex¬ 
ercise general supervision over the department. 

III. RELIGIOUS POLICY 

By the year 1578 Akbar’s religious belief had ceased to be a mere 
personal affair. No aspect of Akbar’s character and history has been 
the subject of so much interest and controversy as his faith and religi¬ 
ous policy. The influence of heredity upon the development of Akbar’s 
religious ideas should not be unduly exaggerated: there was wide 
difference between the indifferentism of his early Central Asian an¬ 
cestors, the unorthodoxy of his grandfather, the superstitious mysti¬ 
cism of his father and the rational eclecticism and dreamy mysti¬ 
cism of the great Akbar. A mystic as well as a rationalist, Akbar 
was sincerely religious and an earnest seeker after truth. From early 
youth he was fond of the society of faqlrs and yogis. From 1562 for 
long eighteen years he made annual pilgrimage to the shrine of 
Shaikh Mu‘iin-ud-din Chishti at Ajmer. He had early come into 
contact with Sufi literature and thoughts: Hafiz and Rumi were read 
to him and he maintained this contact in advanced years. 


133 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Behind the conqueror and the diplomat there lay a melancholy 
soul, suffering from ‘internal bitterness’ and ‘lack of spiritual provi¬ 
sion’, yearning for truth. The Jesuit Fathers found him melancholic. 
In his ‘Happy Sayings’ Akbar tells us how one night his heart was 
weary of the burden of life, when suddenly between sleeping and wak¬ 
ing a strange vision appeared to him and his spirit was somewhat 
comforted. Such visions came to him from time to time. According to 
Abu-’l-Fazl, as early as 1557, when Akbar was barely fifteen, during 
the siege of Mankot he had experienced religious ecstasy when sud¬ 
denly he broke away from the camp into a distance where he spent 
many hours in solitary meditation. 230 Seventeen years later as he 
would often listen to Mir Sharif reading books on spiritual lore, tears 
would roll down his eyes. Badauni tells us that he passed whole nights 
in praise of God and ‘would sit many a morning alone in prayer and 
meditation on a large flat stone in a lonely spot’. In his eager search 
for truth, Akbar imbibed a passionate love for philosophical discus¬ 
sions and only the pressure of duties forced him to abstain from them 
and ‘return from the errancy into the infinite’. In the liberal Shaikh 
Mubarak and his two sons, particularly Abu-’l-Fazl, ‘the king’s 
Jonathan’, as the Jesuits call him, Akbar found his true spiritual 
companions. Abu-’l-Fazl, who according to Badauni ‘set the world 
in flames’, was a true eclectic whose heart was equally drawn towards 
the sages of Cathay, the ascetics of Mount Lebanon, the Lamas of 
Tibet, the padres of Portugal, the mubids (Zoroastrian theologians) 
of Persia and the secrets of the Zend Avesta. 

All these led to the foundation in 1575 of the ‘ Ibddat-Khdna 
(House of Worship) at Fathpur Sikri where religious discussions 
were held every Friday evening. It was confined to Muslims and was 
divided into four sections, occupied by four classes of members: the 
nobles of the court, Shaikhs or ascetics, Sayyids or descendants of 
the Prophet, and the ‘Ulamd or jurists. The violent intolerance of 
the orthodox party led by Shaikh ‘Abdun-Nabi and Makhdum-ul- 
Mulk and bitter differences between the Sunnis and Shiahs disgust¬ 
ed the emperor and alienated him from orthodox Islam. Of course he 
showed his interest in pilgrimage by arranging Gulbadan Begam’s 
journey to Mecca (1575) and next year he himself intended to pro¬ 
ceed on pilgrimage. But Akbar was passing through a mental crisis, 
and ‘the internal bitterness’, which is referred to in one of his ‘Happy 
Sayings’ as having been experienced in his twentieth year, he 
was in all probability experiencing in the twentieth year of his 
reign. In January, 1578, he expressed his abhorrence of meat diet 23d 
and in April at Bhera, on the bank of the Jhelum, occurred the 
famous hunting incident: when after ten days’ preparation birds and 


134 


AKBAE 


beasts within a circumference of fifty miles had been encircled for 
'monstrous slaughter’, Akbar all on a sudden broke the hunt and 
set free all animals: 'not the feather of a finch was to be touched/ 'A 
strong frenzy’ seized him and he distributed alms and gold to faqirs. 
A garden was laid and a structure raised to commemorate the hallow¬ 
ed spot where, sitting under a tree, he had experienced the call. 

In October, 1578, discussions in the ' Ibddat-Khana were revived 
with renewed vigour and the House of Worship had become a Parlia¬ 
ment of religions where the Sufi, the philosopher, the orator, the 
jurist, the Sunni and the Shiah, the Brahman and the atheist 
(Chdrvdka ), the Jain and the Buddhist, the Christian and the Jew, the 
Sabaean and the Zoroastrian and others met and debated under the 
presidency of the Mughul Caesar. The bitter differences among the 
‘Ulamd in these debates, which revealed their shallow pride as well 
as the narrowness of orthodox Islam, further weakened his faith in 
it and he decided to take all religious matters in Islam into his own 
hands. The series of brilliant military successes had given him mas¬ 
tery over a considerable portion of Northern India and he had al¬ 
ready adopted measures for its consolidation by the establishment 
of a centralized government. The time had arrived when the king 
as the secular head of the State should be the head in spiritual mat¬ 
ters as well. The exalted conception of sovereignty that he held neces¬ 
sitated it, and the Tlmurid tradition pointed to it. On Friday, 26 
June, 1579, emulating the Caliphs and his illustrious ancestor Timur, 
Akbar mounted the pulpit of the mosque at Fathpur Sikri and recited 
the khutba composed by Faizi in verse which ended with the words: 
Allahu Akbar. Some modern authors believe with BadaunI that 
Akbar made ambiguous use of these words to mean both God is great 
as well as Akbar is God. But Akbar was no Mansur-al-Hallaj for 
whom he had little respect. Like several Muslim rulers before 
him, Akbar claimed that he was the agent of God, KhallfatuT-lah; he 
never laid claim to divinity. 23e 

On 2 September, 1579, Akbar took the final step when he be¬ 
came the Imam and the Mujtahid of the age by the famous Mahzar 
(Declaration) which he obtained from the ‘Ulama. It determined 
the rank of just king as higher than that of mujtahid (highest autho¬ 
rity on law) and declared that Akbar as the just ruler ( sultdn-i- 
‘ddil) could decide between mujtahids, if they differed in opinion 
on any religious question, by accepting any of the conflicting views 
and that his decision was final and binding. Also it empowered him 
to issue new orders which the people must obey, provided they were 
in conformity with the Qur’an and were for the benefit of the 
people. This document was drafted by Shaikh Mubarak and sign- 


135 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


ed reluctantly, according to Badauni, by five others, the principal 
‘Ulamd and prominent theologians of Hindusthan. It made Akbar, 
who was the temporal head of the State, the Supreme Head of the 
Church or more properly the Islamic faith in India as well. The 
mahzar was really c the funeral oration of the ‘Ulama’ as it over¬ 
threw the nimbus of their legal and spiritual power. It was the 
natural corollary to Akbar’s ideal of royal absolutism. It led to 
the virtual assumption by Akbar of the title of the Caliph and is 
closely connected with the ‘pulpit incident.’ Some of his coins also 
bear the title of exalted Caliph and we are told by ‘Arif Qan- 
dahari that in all the mosques of the Mughul empire the khutba 
mentioned him as Amir-ul-mumimn. The decree had its signifi¬ 
cance in the outer Islamic world as well. It was a vindication of 
Akbar’s sovereign authority and a challenge to the Sultan-Caliph 
of Turkey, the juridical head of Islam in whose name the khutba 
was recited at Mecca and Medina. It was a reply to the Safavi 
Shahs of Persia as well, who posed as the perpetual patrons of the 
Mughul dynasty because both Akbar’s father and grandfather had 
sought and obtained Persian help on condition of accepting the 
Shiah faith. Akbar’s authority was now superior to that of the muj- 
tahids, the highest ecclesiastical and juridical authorities of the 
Shiahs. 24 The decree, however, did not at all involve Akbar’s re¬ 
pudiation of Islam: it was as a Muslim king that Akbar could de¬ 
cide between the conflicting views of the mujtahids. Neither was 
Akbar invested with infallibility. The scope of the decree was 
limited: the king should accept one of the conflicting views and 
any new order he might issue must be in conformity with the 
Qur’an and for the benefit of the people. 

There can be no doubt that the declaration displeased the 
‘Ulamd and orthodox Muslims. Soon after, Akbar made his last 
pilgrimage to Ajmer and he showed extraordinary reverence to a 
stone brought from Mecca, carrying an impression of the Prophet’s 
foot. Akbar, however, had definitely become estranged from ortho¬ 
dox Islam. The creed of his birth could no longer satisfy his en¬ 
quiring spirit; and contact as well as acquaintance with diverse 
creeds made him a confirmed eclectic. The influence of the 
Hindu wives of his household had been strengthened by the 
Brahmans, particularly Debi and Purushottam, who participated in 
the debates of the ‘ Ibddat-Khana and instructed the emperor in the 
secrets of Hinduism. Akbar was converted to belief in transmi¬ 
gration. He gave private interviews to several Hindu yogis from 
whom he made enquiries about the secrets and spiritual questions 
regarding Hinduism. 


136 


AKBAR 


Zoroastrianism found its able exponent at the ‘ Ibadat-Khana 
in its theologian Dastur Mahyiarji Rana whom Akbar had met in 
Gujarat in 1573 and who arrived at the court in 1578. His in¬ 
fluence was so great that it was believed Akbar had become a con¬ 
vert. A sacred fire was established in the palace. In 1580 Akbar 
began to prostrate himself publicly before the fire and the sun. 
In this the emperor was influenced also by Birbal, who gave em¬ 
phasis to sun-worship, and by the Hindu ladies of his harem who 
performed homa. Persian festivals were revived and the solar Ildhl 
era, with Persian names for months and days, was adopted in 1584. 

In response to Akbar’s invitation the first Jesuit mission from 
Goa arrived on 28 February, 1580, at Fathpur Slkri, 25 and was 
received with gracious respect. It consisted of Father Rudolf 
Aquaviva, an Italian, Antony Monserrate, a Spaniard, and Francis 
Henriquez, a Persian convert who acted as the interpreter. Akbar 
showed profound reverence for a copy of the Bible which the 
Fathers presented and made respectful salutation to a picture of the 
Madonna. He appointed Abu-’l-Fazl to translate the Gospel and 
Monserrate to give Murad ‘a few lessons in Christianity.’ The em¬ 
peror built for them a chapel in the palace and held prolonged dis¬ 
cussions with them on Christianity. The Fathers took part in the 
discussions at the ‘ Ibadat-Khana where they used very strong words 
about Islam and its Prophet, so much so that Akbar had to give them 
mild warning. Akbar was highly impressed by Christianity, though 
he was not convinced of the doctrines of the Trinity, of the Virgin 
birth of the Son and the Incarnation. The Fathers hoped that they 
had discovered the Second Constantine in the Mughul Caesar, for in 
their zeal and bigotry they could not properly understand him and 
failed to notice the varied appeals to which he equally responded. 

Akbar invited and in 1582 received a Jain delegation as well 
which consisted of HiJravijaya Suri, Bhanuchandra Upadhyaya and 
Vijayasena Suri. Jainism, with its doctrine of non-violence, made a 
profound impression on him and influenced his personal life. He 
curtailed his food and drink and ultimately abstained from flesh 
diet altogether for nine months in the year. He renounced hunting 
which was his favourite pastime, restricted the practice of fishing 
and released prisoners and caged birds. Slaughter of animals was 
prohibited on certain days and ultimately in 1587 for about half 
the days in the year. 

Already Akbar had become acquainted with Sikhism and came 
into contact with its Gurus, Amar Das (died 1574) and Ram Das 
(died 1581). He found in the Granth only love and devotion to 
God. 26 


137 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


These studies and discussions on religions of various hues con¬ 
firmed the growing eclecticism of the emperor who, as Badauni 
points out, found truth in all religions and realized that it was not 
the monopoly of Islam. 27 The idea gained ground among the 
people that ‘Akbar was the Sdhib-i-Zaman who would remove all 
differences of opinion among the seventy-two sects of Islam and the 
Hindus.’ The turbulence of schisms grieved him and he sought 
the way for its subsidence. He had so long strayed in the maze 
of jarring creeds and he would now find out the path. The zero 
hour had arrived in Akbar’s spiritual evolution and early in 1582 
he promulgated the Din-i-Ilahi. It is difficult to define the Divine 
Faith, for its author did not define it. It was neither inspired by 
Revelation nor based on any well-defined philosophy or theology. 
It was deism modified by Hindu and predominant Zoroastrian in¬ 
fluence, a religion without priests and books, ‘an ethical rationalism 
leading to the ideal of mystic union of the soul with the 
divine,’ in which respect it was based on the Sufi idea of absorp¬ 
tion of the soul in the Divine Being. It enjoined such ethical and 
social reforms as recommending alms-giving and sparing of animal 
life, permitting remarriage of widows, prohibiting child-marriage 
and marriage among close relations as well as forced sati, recom¬ 
mending monogamy, enforcing chastity and controlling gambling 
and drinking by restricting the sale of drink. The Dm-i-Ilahi was 
definitely an attempt at religious syncretism, as much a child of 
Akbar’s spiritual development as a product of the age, following as 
it does the movement of Kablr and Nanak. The syncretism was not 
quite happy because, though Akbar was ‘a rare jeweller and seeker 
after truth,’ his knowledge could neither be systematic nor 
thorough, acquired as it was through ears. He sought for light in 
the variegated and jarring creeds of man, but could not find it. 

Though Akbar asserted what Gibbon calls ‘a necessary fiction’ 
that he was God’s vicegerent and, if we are to believe Badauni, 
demanded from his followers ‘readiness to sacrifice property and 
life, honour and religion’, he was no zealot and regarded religion 
as a matter of private conscience. As the bigoted chronicler him¬ 
self affirms: ‘His Majesty was convinced that confidence in him as 
a leader was a matter of time and good counsel, and did not re¬ 
quire the sword.’ Unlike the ‘Abbasid Caliph Ma’mun, Akbar did 
not become intolerant in the name of toleration to push the child 
of his own fancy; he forced it on none and he did not persecute 
orthodox belief in a fever of authoritarian rationalism. The charge 
of persecution of Islam laid at his door by the bigoted annalist of 
Badaun and the equally bigoted Jesuit Fathers is quite natural. 


138 


AKBAR 


The fundamental of Akbar’s religion, sulh-i-kull (universal tolera¬ 
tion), was equally obnoxious to Sunni orthodoxy and Jesuit 
Catholicism. The Fathers were anxious to prove that Akbar was 
about to embrace Christianity by describing him as an enemy and 
persecutor of Islam. Most of the charges made by BadaunI do not 
stand the test of scientific criticism. From the Muslim chronicles 
as well as Jesuit accounts we find that throughout the reign of 
Akbar and even after the promulgation of the Din-i-Ilaht, Muslims 
could pray, observe fasts and festivals, give the name of Ahmad 
and Muhammad to their children and go on pilgrimage to Mecca, 
though BadaunI would have us believe to the contrary. In Islam 
politics and religion fuse, and the question naturally arises how 
far the destruction of mosques or their conversion into stables in 
certain places 278 was a campaign against disintegration or an attack 
on Islam. The Bengal rebellion of 1580 which began with the 
slogan of Islam in danger suggests the former. It is certain that 
Akbar must have received the greatest opposition to his religious 
beliefs from the orthodox Muslims for ‘in religious societies tolera¬ 
tion is no virtue, it is the despised offspring of lukewarmness or in¬ 
difference’. This affected to a certain extent the emperor’s feeling 
towards them. In fact, Akbar, with his principle of universal 
toleration, was far in advance of his age. As the historian Free¬ 
man says: ‘In his age he stood alone, not only in Islam, but in the 
whole world; Catholic and Protestant Christendom might both have 
gone and sat at his feet’. 27b No wonder that the Dm-i-Ildht could ob¬ 
tain hardly twenty-five converts of note and died with its author. 
The ‘ethical rationalism’ of Akbar, which was to have united all, 
pleased none; it was many centuries too soon. It appealed neither 
to the Hindus nor to the Muslims. Hinduism moved on in the 
old track while reactionary Islam, championed by Shaikh 
Ahmad, became triumphant with Shah Jahan. It would, however, 
be rash to describe the Din-i-IldhI as ‘a monument of Akbar’s folly’, 
because it was not a ‘monument of his wisdom’. It was a failure; 
none-the-less it was sublime. 

Some modern writers 270 maintain that the Din-i-Ildht was not 
a new faith but a reformation of Islam. The Divine Faith ignored 
both the Prophet and the Qur’an. Its ceremonial law and theolo¬ 
gical doctrines were considerably different from those of Islam. As 
an eminent authority has remarked: ‘The religion of Akbar is not 
to be looked upon as a reform but a denial of Islam—a break with 
its traditions more decided than that which manifests itself in the 
doctrines of Isma‘il’. 28 In one of his ‘Happy Sayings’ Akbar con¬ 
fesses that he is no longer a Muslim. He ignored revelation and 


139 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


rejected the Islamic doctrines of Resurrection and Judgment. He 
believed in the doctrine of transmigration of souls and in the wor¬ 
ship of the sun which Islam does not admit. But in his letter to 
the Sharlfs of Mecca, written not long before 1582, and in his two 
letters written in 1586 to ‘Abdullah Khan, ruler of Bukhara, Akbar 
maintains that he is not only a good Muslim but a champion of 
Islam: he was not prepared to risk his empire for the sake of his 
personal religion. There was a tradition also that Akbar died a 
Muslim as Sir Thomas Roe states. The Jesuit writers record the 
truth when they say: ‘Among the people there are various opi¬ 
nions regarding the emperor; some holding him to be a Christian, 
others a heathen, others a Muhammadan. The more intelligent 
however consider him to be neither Christian nor heathen nor 
Muhammadan, and hold this to be the truest’. 281 Akbar went very 
far with Hinduism and Jainism as well as with Zoroastrianism and 
Christianity but everywhere he ‘stopped upon the threshold’. In 
reality Akbar was born a Muslim but died, as he had lived, an 
eclectic. 


IV. CONQUESTS IN NORTH INDIA 

As if to doubt the efficacy of the consolidation of his authority, 
Akbar had to face the alarming force of disintegration from three 
quarters: Bengal, Kabul and Gujarat rose almost simultaneously to 
arms. The Bengal revolt came first and it was the most serious of 
the three. It was primarily and in reality a struggle between the 
crown which was asserting its power and the nobility whose autho¬ 
rity was curtailed, a challenge of aristocratic force against centra¬ 
lized government. But the Bengal rebellion assumed a cloak in 
which it appeared as a conflict between orthodox Islam and Akbar’s 
heterodoxy. To Monserrate it was ‘a war chiefly undertaken against 
the religion of Christ’, while other Jesuit writers ascribe it to 
Akbar’s devotion to Christianity. 2813 The rebellion obtained support 
from the Afghan chieftains of Bengal who regarded Mughul occu¬ 
pation as nothing but usurpation. There is truth in the contention 
of R. D. Banerji that “what Abul Fazl terms ‘the rebellion of 
Bengal officers’ was really another Afghan war during the reign of 
Akbar.” 28c The rebellion did not remain confined to Bengal; it spread 
like infection to Bihar, Orissa, Ghazipur, Banaras, Allahabad, 
Awadh and Katehr (Rohilkhand). 

Muzaffar Khan Turbatl, the governor of Bengal, with a view 
to building the administration of the province and guarding the 
interests of the State, revoked unauthorized alienation of land and 
enforced the branding of horses to stop the prevalent fraud of false 


140 


AKBAR 


musters. He decreased the pay of the troops in Bengal by 50 per 
cent and in Bihar by 30 per cent. All these measures were 
adopted on instruction from the centre and they were well-moti¬ 
vated as well as necessary, but they were carried out by the 
Mughul governor and his lieutenants without tact and moderation 
and with undue severity. 28 ' 1 The result was a mutiny of the Mughul 
officers which first began in Bihar and then spread to Bengal. The 
Bengal officers left Tanda and on 28 January, 1580, openly raised 
the standard of revolt. The rebels planned, with a view to giving 
some legality to their agitation, to raise Mirza Hakim to the throne 
and considered the pretender of Kabul, a worthless drunkard, the 
champion of orthodox Islam ! Resumption of suyilrghdl lands 
(grants made by way of charity) was regarded as an encroach¬ 
ment on Islam, and the newly-appointed qazl of Jaunpur, Mulla 
Muhammad Yazdi, issued a decree enjoining on all Muslims to rise 
in revolt against the crowned infidel of Fathpur Sikri who had 
assumed the title of Imam. Thus the rebellion of the malcontent 
party of Bihar and Bengal assumed the garb of a struggle between 
Islam in danger and heresy in triumph. 

The rebellion was led by the Qaqshals, one of the proudest of 
the Turkish tribes. The Bengal mutineers crossed the Ganga at 
Rajmahal and joined with the Bihar rebel force at Teliyagarhi where 
they defeated the imperialist army sent by Muzaffar. The rebels 
besieged Muzaffar in Tanda, captured him and put him to death. 
The khutba was recited in the name of Muhammad Hakim, and 
Baba Khan Qaqshal was appointed viceroy of Bengal. Bengal and 
Bihar were lost to the empire. 

Muhibb ‘All Khan of Rohtas relieved Tirhut from the rebel 
Bahadur Badakhshi. Todar Mai met the rebels at Monghyr. At first 
they besieged him, but on arrival of fresh reinforcement under Khan 
A‘zam raised the siege and took to flight. An imperialist force re¬ 
covered Bihar from M‘asum Khan Kabuli who had to evacuate Gaya 
as well on the approach of Todar Mai. Order was thus restored in 
Bihar by the end of 1580, but jealousy between the two imperial 
commanders, Khan A‘zam and Shahbaz Khan, delayed the recovery 
of Bengal. Qutlu Khan Lohani, a lieutenant of Daud, defeated 
several Mughul officers and set up an independent principality in 
Orissa. The rebel leader of Bengal, Bahadur Kheshgi, was soon kill¬ 
ed in an engagement and this was followed by other losses: the 
death of Baba Khan Qaqshal from cancer and the poisoning of 
Sharaf-ud-dm Husain by his rival M‘asum Khan Kabuli. M‘asum 
Khan Farankhudi, who had recently deserted the royal cause and 
opened a second front for the rebels from Jaunpur as his base, was 


141 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


badly defeated by Shahbaz Khan in Awadh (January, 1581), while 
Allahabad, where the infection had spread, was recovered from the 
rebels under Niyabat Khan and the rebellion in Katehr was sup¬ 
pressed by ‘Ain-ul-Mulk who defeated the leader ‘Arab Bahadur. 

Their third front was broken when on 10 August the im¬ 
perialist troops made their triumphant entry into Kabul and drove 
the pretender to the hills. 

In April, 1582, Khan A‘zam was sent as the governor of Bengal. 
Taking advantage of his absence, the Bengal rebels entered Bihar 
and took Hajlpur. On his return from court Khan A‘zam finally 
expelled them from Bihar, recovered Teliyagarhl (March, 1583) and 
pursued them to the Kati Gang near Rajmahal. Dissensions, how¬ 
ever, broke out among the rebels, particularly between M‘asum 
Khan Kabuli and the Qaqshal clan, but operations were delayed by 
the recall of Khan A’zam, and it w T as not until several months later, 
on 26 November, 1583, that his successor Shahbaz Khan could de¬ 
feat M‘asum Kabuli and drive him to East Bengal. Shahbaz Khan 
even pursued him to ‘Isa Khan’s territory of Vikrampur (Dacca dis¬ 
trict) and demanded of ‘Isa Khan his surrender, but that wily 
chief simply detained him for several months by delusive promises 
of expulsion or surrender, defeated him in a battle on 30 Septem¬ 
ber, 1584, and forced him to retreat to Tanda. In 1585 Akbar' sent 
strong reinforcement with a view to suppressing ‘Isa Khan but 
mutual jealousies of the imperial commanders hampered the work 
of pacification. The Afghans moved out from Orissa and Dastam 
Qaqshal besieged Ghoragbat. With the return of Shahbaz Khan to 
Bengal in January, 1586, the tide turned. He won over most of 
the Afghans by diplomacy and thus isolated ‘Isa Khan who was 
obliged to make peace. M‘asum Kabuli sent his son to the em¬ 
peror’s court and proceeded to Mecca, and the last flame of the 
Bengal revolt was put out (1587). The de jure authority of Akbar 
over all Bengal was acknowledged. 

Until the death of Muhammad Hakim in 1585 Kabul was the 
plague-spot of Akbar’s empire. On Humayun’s death the territory 
of Kabul, including Ghazni, became the appanage of his younger 
son Mirza Muhammad Hakim, but the government was really in 
the hands of his guardian Mun‘im Khan. Sulaiman Mirza of 
Badakhshan, on hearing of Humayun’s death, made an attempt to 
seize Kabul. Mun‘im Khan asked for help and when Sulaiman 
Mirza learnt that Akbar’s troops had crossed the Indus, he opened 
negotiations for peace and retired on condition that his name should 
be recited in the khutba and that the other side of the Baran should 
belong to Badakhshan. 


142 


AKBAR 


For the next four years peace reigned in Kabul but trouble 
began in 1560 when Mun‘im Khan was recalled to Akbar’s court 
on the occasion of Bairam Khan’s rebellion. ‘Intrigue followed in¬ 
trigue, and crime succeeded crime.’ Mun‘im Khan, who was re¬ 
appointed to the government of Kabul, hastened with an army to¬ 
wards that country but on the way at Jalalabad he was defeated 
by the prince’s mother Mah Chuchak Begam and retreated to court 
in disgrace. Mah Chuchak Begam then herself assumed the govern¬ 
ment. 

The situation in Kabul became far worse with the arrival of 
that ‘stormy petrel’, Shah Abu-T-Ma‘all, who, after his failure to 
create strife in Hindusthan by setting up Mirza Hakim as a pre¬ 
tender to the Delhi throne, sought shelter with Mah Chuchak 
Begam and obtained an influential position in the government. But 
his ambition overleaped itself; he gathered round him the mal¬ 
contents of Kabul and slew the queen-mother. Muhammad Hakim 
secretly asked help of Sulaiman Mirza who marched towards Kabul, 
defeated and seized Abu-T-Maiaii on the bank of the Ghurband 
river and delivered him to Muhammad Hakim who had him hanged 
on 13 May, 1564. 

Hakim now became a puppet in the hands of Sulaiman Mirza 
who assumed all power and fortified his position by giving Hakim 
his daughter in marriage. The nepotism and highhandedness of 
Sulaiman raised a storm of protest and led to the expulsion of all 
Badakhshanis. Mirza Sulaiman thereupon marched on towards 
Kabul with a large army. Hakim escaped to Peshawar and, pur¬ 
sued there by Sulaiman, came to the Indus and appealed to Akbar 
for help. Akbar sent the officers of the Punjab under its governor 
Khan Kalan who marched on to Jalalabad, took it from Sulai- 
man’s officer and forced Sulaiman to beat an inglorious retreat to 
Badakhshan. Mirza Hakim was restored to power by imperial aid 
but he compelled Khan Kalan to leave Kabul. Encouraged by the 
return of the imperial officers, Sulaiman made another attempt on 
Kabul and besieged the fort. Hakim escaped to the Indus and, 
taking advantage of the revolt of the Uzbegs in Hindusthan with 
whom he was in secret communication, he crossed the river and, 
passing through Bhera with plunder and rapine, appeared before 
Lahore. Akbar himself set out from Agra on 16 November, 1566. 
Ten days later he reached Delhi and as he advanced he learnt 
near the Sutlej that the invader had already retreated. Meanwhile 
Mirza Sulaiman had continued the siege of Kabul but Hakim’s officer 
M‘asum Khan put the Badakhshanis to great straits. Sulaiman there- 


143 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


fore made peace with M‘asum Khan and the prince of Kabul re¬ 
turned to his capital. 

Hakim in reality began to rule Kabul as an independent prince. 
In 1578 Akbar sent a mission to his half-brother with a view to per¬ 
suading him to acknowledge his sovereignty, but Hakim did not res¬ 
pond. On the contrary he opened the western front for the rebels 
of Bihar and Bengal two years later. The Bengal rebels were in 
collusion with him and read the khutba in his name. Hakim re¬ 
ceived invitation to invade India from some officers of Akbar’s 
court as well, who wanted to raise him to the Mughul throne. It 
was suspected that Shah Mansur, the revenue minister, was the 
leader of this treacherous conspiracy. Akbar accordingly suspend¬ 
ed him from office and dispersed his colleagues, but he was after¬ 
wards pardoned and reinstated. Two reconnoitring expeditions of 
Mlrza Hakim into the Punjab led by Nur-ud-dln and Shadman fail¬ 
ed in December, 1580, and the prince then personally invaded the 
Punjab. Passing through Rohtas which rejected proposal of sur¬ 
render, Hakim appeared before Lahore on 6 February, 1581. The 
valiant and ever loyal commander Man Singh strongly defended it 
against the invader. Hakim, who had counted on an uprising in 
his favour, was not joined by anybody and, when he heard of the 
advance of Akbar, beat a hasty retreat. 

Early in February, Akbar had set out from Fathpur Slkrl with 
a considerable force against the invader. Shah Mansur, who had 
been pardoned and reinstated, accompanied the emperor. At Son- 
pat near Delhi he was met by Malik Sant who had been formerly 
in the service of Mlrza Hakim. This revived Akbar’s suspicion 
against Mansur; fresh evidence of his complicity and treasonable cor¬ 
respondence with Mlrza Hakim was brought. Mansur was accord¬ 
ingly hanged at Kot Kachhw.aha near Shahlabad in Karnal district. 
Recent writers on Akbar, relying too much on the version of Father 
Monserrate, regard Shah Mansur guilty of treason, but it is difficult to 
reject the version of Nizam-ud-din and BadaunI who state that the 
letters, on the basis of which Mansur was executed, were forged, 
while from Abu-’l-Fazl we learn that Akbar regarded as forgeries 
the previous letters, which were found by Man Singh in Shadmfen’s 
baggage, proving Mansur’s treasonable complicity with Mlrza 
Hakim. According to Mzam-ud-dm and BadaunI all the letters were 
forged by Mansur’s enemies. Shah Mansur’s policy of economy and 
rigour made him unpopular and the nobles, who were too glad to 
see his downfall, must have prejudiced Akbar against him. The 
emperor afterwards regretted the ‘judicial murder’ which he had 
unconsciously committed. 29 


144 


AKBAR 


Near Sirhind Akbar learnt of the retreat of Mirza Hakim but 
he marched on. On reaching the Indus by way of Kalanaur and 
Rohtas, he began the construction of the fortress of Attock. From 
here he sent an army under Rajla Man Singh, though under the 
nominal command of Prince Murad, towards Kabul. On 12 July 
he himself crossed the Indus and set out for Peshawar. Mirza Hakim 
was severely defeated by Prince Murad in Khurd Kabul near Kabul, 
and fled to Ghurband. On 10 August, 1581, Akbar made his 
triumphant entry into the historic city of Kabul. He left it after a 
week, after having pardoned and reinstated his rebellious half- 
brother to the government. 293 On 1 December, the emperor re¬ 
turned to his capital. 

Kabul continued to be a source of anxiety to Akbar particu¬ 
larly because of the Uzbeg supremacy in Central Asia. The menace 
became imminent when civil war between Mirza Sulaiman and 
Shah Rukh led to the Uzbeg annexation of Badakhshan in 1584. The 
death of Mirza Hakim in July 1585 relieved Akbar of a critical situa¬ 
tion, and Kabul was formally annexed to the Mughul empire. 

A serious revolt in Gujarat followed the rebellion in Bengal 
and Mirza Hakim’s invasion. In the pages of the Mughul historians 
it was merely the rising of a pretender; in reality it was the feeble 
protest of Gujarat for its loss of independence. On a similar oc¬ 
casion the people of Gujarat had stood behind Bahadur when he 
recovered his territory from the Mughuls under Humayun. King 
Muzaffar III, who had been kept in Mughul custody since his cap¬ 
ture in 1572, had in 1578 eluded the vigilance of the imperial ser¬ 
vants and fled to Saurashtra. In 1583 when 1‘timad Khlan had just 
arrived in Gujarat as its new viceroy, Muzaffar raised a formidable 
rebellion against the Mughul authority, joined by Gujarat officers 
groaning under the burden caused by the enforcement of the brand¬ 
ing regulations by the retiring viceroy Shihab-ud-din Ahmad Khan. 
Ptimad Khan, finding the situation grave, sought the help of his 
retiring predecessor, but before he could settle terms with the re¬ 
luctant Shihab-ud-din, Muzaffar had captured Ahmadabad where the 
people made common cause with him (September, 1583). Muzaffar 
granted titles and jagirs to his followers and was joined by Sher 
Khan Fuladi. Qutb-ud-din Muhammad Khan, governor of Broach 
and Baroda, marched against the invader from Broach but was de¬ 
feated at Baroda by Muzaffar who forced Qutb-ud-din to surrender 
on promise of safe conduct but violated it by putting him to death. 
Muzaffar then marched to Broach and took it, and the wealth as 
well as property of Qutb-ud-dln fell into his hands. People began 

145 


M.E.—10 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


to gather round him and he was able to raise an army of 30,000 
men. 

Akbar accordingly sent Mirza Khan, son of Bairam Khan, 
to Gujarat. In January, 1584, he defeated the ‘pretender’ seriously 
at Sarkhej and made his triumphant entry into Ahmadabad. The 
report of this victory reached Akbar while he was returning to the 
capital from Allahabad which he had just founded. He conferred 
on the young Mirza Khan, then twenty-eight years old, the title 
of Khan Khanan. Mirza Khan then pursued Muzaffar to Cambay 
and drove him first to Baroda and then to Nandod where he inflicted 
a severe defeat on him and forced him to take to flight (March, 1584). 
But, for about ten years the ex-king offered stubborn resistance, 
hoping to recover his throne. He was hotly pursued until in 1593, 
‘hounded like a wild beast’, he was captured. Khan A‘zam, then 
viceroy of Gujarat, took Junlagarh where he had taken refuge and 
Muzaffar fled to Cutch. But Khan A‘zam pursued him there and 
forced the chief of Cutch to reveal Muzaffar’s hiding place. Muzaffar 
was captured but on the way, a day after his capture, he committed 
suicide to save his honour. Thus ended the last effort of reviving 
the old kingdom of Gujarat. 

At the end of 1585 Akbar was comparatively free to undertake 
seriously the conquest of Kashmir. The Mughul emperors had al* 
ways an eye on Kashmir with its cool climate, running streams 
and charming gardens. Babur had sent a small unsuccessful expe¬ 
dition against the country and Mirza Haidar, who had advised Huma- 
yun to occupy it as a point d’appui for the recovery of Hindusthan, 
established himself and ruled in Kashmir for ten years (1541-1551). 
As early as 1559 GhaZi Khan who was the de facto ruler of Kashmir, 
anxious to establish friendly relations with Akbar, sent his envoy 
Nusrat Chakk who waited upon the emperor and his guardian. But 
Bairam Khan replied by despatching an expedition next year under 
Mirza Qara Bahadur which was seriously defeated near Rajaorl by 
the infantry of Ghazi Khan. 

After the inglorious end of his first attempt Akbar postponed 
the conquest of Kashmir for a more opportune moment, but he did 
not fail to maintain regular contact with her rulers. In 1568 we 
find Akbar’s ambassadors Mirza Muqim and Ya‘qub at the court of 
Husain Shah who treated them with all honours and had to tolerate 
the arrogance of Mirza Muqim who, by virtue of his position as the 
Mughul envoy, interfered in the domestic affairs of the country. 
Husain Shah, with a view to pleasing Akbar, sent with the envoys 
his daughter to the Mughul emperor who however rejected her. 


146 


AKBAR 


In 1578 Akbar sent Mulla ‘IshqIS and Q/&zl Sadr-ud-din to ‘All Shah, 
successor of Husain Shah, at whose court they remained until they 
were sent back to the imperial court. The khutba was read and 
coins were struck in Kashmir in Akbar’s name and ‘All Shah sent 
along with the imperial ambassadors his own envoy Muhammad 
Qasim with rich presents and the daughter of his nephew for Prince 
Salim. 

In January, 1580, Yusuf Shah, ‘All Shah’s son, on being over¬ 
thrown by his cousin Lohar Chakk, sought shelter with Akbar. A 
few months later Akbar ordered Raja Man Singh and Mirza Yusuf 
Khan to assist Yusuf in recovering his kingdom. Meanwhile the 
report of imperial intervention alarmed the Kashmir nobles who in¬ 
formed Yusuf that they would restore him to his throne if he would 
abandon Mughul assistance. Accordingly he left Sialkot for Kashmir 
and was joined by his supporters at Baramgalla. At Sopur Yusuf 
defeated Lohar Chakk on 8 November, 1580, and recovered his 
kingdom without Mughul assistance. Akbar was outwitted and de¬ 
prived of any immediate pretext for intervention in Kashmir. 

At the end of 1581 after his successful Kabul campaign Akbar 
sent from Jalalabad Mirza Tahir and Salih ‘Aqil as envoys to 
Kashmir. Yusuf Shah received them with spectacular respect and 
sent them back with his third son Haidar Khan to wait on Akbar. 
Haidar remained at court for one year. Three years later Yusuf 
Shah sent on Akbar’s demand his eldest son Ya‘qub who arrived at 
court on 10 February, 1585. Ya‘qub however became suspicious 
of Akbar’s designs and fled to Kashmir. In October Akbar sent 
from Kalanaur Hakim ‘All and Baha-ud-din to summon Yusuf to 
court or at least to send Ya‘qub. In December while Akbar was 
encamped at Hasan Abdal, the envoys returned: Yusuf did neither 
come nor send his son. Accordingly on 31 December, 1585, an 
army under Mirza Shah Rukh and Raja Bhagwan Das with 5,000 
horse was despatched to Kashmir. 

The imperial force immediately marched by the Pakhli route 
and reached the Buliyan Pass, some fifty miles west of Baramula, 
but they found the road closed by Yusuf who had already reached 
there. Severe cold, scarcity of provisions, difficult communications 
as well as rain and snow exceedingly harassed the Mughuls who 
decided oin peace. Yusuf also agreed and saw Raja Bhagwan Das 
on 24 February, 1586, and offered his submission to the emperor. 
But his son Ya‘qub, joined by his nobles, offered resistance. The 
Kashmiris were however defeated by Madhu Singh, son of Raja 
Bhagwan Das, at the Kuarmat Pass and were forced to offer the 


147 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


following terms: coins were to be struck and the khutba recited in 
Akbar’s name and ‘the mint, the saffron, the silk and the game 
should be imperial/ The report of the Yusuf zai disaster broke the 
morale of the Mughul leaders who readily accepted them and Yusuf 
Shah was taken by Raja Bhagwan Das to Akbar at Attock on 7 
April, 1586. Akbar disapproved of the treaty, imprisoned Yusuf 
and made him over to Raja Todar Mai, though the Kashmir sultan 
had been assured of safe conduct by Bhagwan Das. The treacherous 
imprisonment of Yusuf is a dark blot on the character of the chi¬ 
valrous Akbar. 

Ya‘qub continued to challenge the imperial authority and Akbar 
accordingly sent another expedition under Qasim Khan on 8 July, 
1586. The Mughul army passed by the defile of Bhimbar and then 
marched through RajaorL Neither the nobles nor the people gave 
solid support to Ya‘qub who retired to Kishtwar. Qasim Khan easily 
defeated a Kashmiri force and entered Srinagar on 15 October, 
1586, and the khutba was recited in Akbar’s name. Kashmir was 
now formally annexed to the Mughul empire. Ya‘qub continued to 
resist for the next three years. In 1586 he made two unsuccessful 
attempts on Srinagar and next year his third attempt was foiled 
by Mirza Yusuf Khan, governor of Kashmir. In 1589 while Akbar 
was returning from Kashmir, Ya‘qub surrendered to him at Sopur 
on 7 August and the last spark of Kashmir independence was put 
out. 

The death of Mirza Hakim and the annexation of Kabul were 
immediately followed by troubles in the North-Western frontier. 
Like his predecessors Akbar had to face the ever-lasting frontier 
problem. The tribes inhabiting what was until recently known as 
the North-West Frontier province were absolutely independent. As 
Kabul ceased to be the centre of disturbances, Akbar turned his 
attention towards making the frontier secure by suppressing the 
Raushanais and the various Afghan tribes of Swat and Bajaur. The 
Raushanais were the followers of Bayazid who set aside the autho¬ 
rity of Qur’an and founded a new creed. His doctrine, which was 
extreme pantheism, shows a curious mixture of lofty ethics and 
crude barbarity. Bayazid obtained many followers among the Af¬ 
ghan tribes of Tirah. After his death in 1585 his youngest son 
Jalal-ud-din became the leader of the Raushanais. In 1581 while 
Akbar was returning from Kabul, he saw the emperor and was 
kindly received but he escaped and created troubles (‘raised the 
standard of revolt’ in the words of Mughul historians) in the country 
west of the Indus. The Raushanais infested the routes between 
Kabul and the Punjab and the Khyber route was so effectually 

148 


AKBAR 


blocked by them that ‘Abdullah Khan, Uzbeg’s envoy to Akbar, 
could not pass through it. Akbar accordingly appointed Man Singh 
to the government of Kabul with directions to suppress the Afghan 
tribes leavened with a new spirit. 

On 22 August, 1585, Akbar himself left Fathpur Slkrl for the 
Punjab with a view to keeping watch over the frontier as well as to 
conducting campaigns for the conquest of Kashmir. On 31 De¬ 
cember Akbar sent from Attock, simultaneously with the Kashmir 
expedition, Zain Khan at the head of a considerable force to Swat 
and Bajaur. Zain Khan pushed on to Bajaur while another force 
despatched by the emperor entered and devastated the Samah, the 
country of the Mandars, lying between Peshawar and the Swat 
river. Zain Khan chastised the Yusufzais of Bajaur and advanced 
to Chak-darah on the Swat river where he erected a fortress. As 
his troops were much depressed by continued marching, Zain Khan 
asked for reinforcements. Akbar directed Raja Birbal, who had 
already been despatched to Bajaur through the Samah, and Hakim 
Abu-’l-Fath to join Zain Khan in Swat. No sooner had the rein¬ 
forcement arrived than disagreement began between the generals. 
Zain Khan was in favour of holding and strengthening Chak-darah 
and making it a base for further operations against the Afghan 
tribes. But the raja and the Hakim contended that their task was 
not to occupy the country but to harry it and so they should return 
to the royal camp at Attock. They also opposed Zain Khan’s sug¬ 
gestion to return by the Malakhand Pass, the road they had come 
by, and decided to withdraw by the difficult route through the Kara- 
kar and Malandarai Passes. The Mughuls were subjected to much 
opposition and harassment by the Yusufzais and Mandars during 
their retreat through the Karakar Pass but the opposition became 
virulent when they reached the Malandarai Pass further south. The 
furious attack of the Yusufzais broke the morale and discipline of 
the Mughul force and the retreat became a disastrous rout. Eight 
thousand men, about half of the army, perished, including Raja Bir¬ 
bal. Zain Khan, after a stubborn rear-guard fight in which he suf¬ 
fered defeat, managed to escape, and with Hakim Abu-’l-Fath led 
‘the shattered remnant of the army’ into the royal camp at Attock 
(24 February, 1586). Akbar was so overwhelmed with grief at 
the death of Raja Birbal that he took no food for two days and nights. 
It should however be noted that Akbar himself was primarily res¬ 
ponsible for the disaster in appointing a wit and a physician to such 
a difficult command. 

Akbar however sent Todar Mai with a large army to retrieve 
the disaster. Todar Mai erected strong forts in the Yusufzai terri- 


149 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


tory and devastated it. Raja Man Singh had inflicted several de¬ 
feats on the Raushanais on his way to Kabul but towards the end 
of 1586, led by Jalal-ud-dm, they formed a confederacy with the 
Yusufzais, the Mohmands, the Khalils and other tribes, invested 
Peshawar and completely closed the Khyber route. Man Singh de¬ 
feated Jalal-ud-dm near ‘All Masjid in the Khyber Pass and he fled 
towards Bangash. But throughout the year 1587 the Afghan tribes 
were active under Jalal-ud-dm who was joined by the Afridis and 
the Orakzais as well. 

The transfer of Man Singh to Bihar late in 1587 and the ap¬ 
pointment of Zain Khan as warden of the Western Marches marked 
the beginning of a more vigorous policy. Akbar was determined 
to uproot ‘the thornbrake of the Tarikis’ and despatched several 
batches of troops from different centres in order to capture Jalal- 
ud-dm. In 1588 Zain Khan led strenuous campaigns into Swat and 
Bajaur. He entered Bajaur by an unknown route, surprised Jalal- 
ud-dm who made a narrow escape, erected forts at different places 
and after desultory fighting for eight months forced the Afghans 
to submit. He then entered Swat by a secret route, surprised the 
Afghans as they were celebrating the Qurban-i-‘id (31 October, 
1588) and strengthened his position by erecting forts at Chak-darah, 
Malakhand and other places. Meanwhile Sadiq Khan, who had been 
despatched to Tirah, won over the Afridis and the Orakzais who 
undertook to preserve peace in the Khyber. Jalal-ud-dm fled to 
Turan as he had lost all influence over the Afghans. Altogether 
Zain Khan’s campaigns of 1588 maintained peace in the frontier for 
the next three years and in October, 1589, Akbar could make a peace¬ 
ful journey from Attock to Kabul. 

Early in 1592 the frontier trouble revived when Jalal-ud-dm 
returned from Turan, stirred up strife in Tirah and won back the 
Afridis and the Orakzais. The failure of Qasim Khan to chastise 
them encouraged the Raushanais and the Yusufzais to raise their 
heads again and they were joined by the hitherto friendly Gagiyana 
and Muhammadzai tribes, who invaded Peshawar. Zain Khan sur¬ 
prised and dispersed them and drove the Yusufzais and the Rau¬ 
shanais from Bajaur, where they had escaped, to Kafiristan. Next 
year he marched into the Kafir country, inflicted a crushing defeat 
upon the Afghans in which 400 were killed and 7,000 taken pri¬ 
soners, took the fort of Ganshal and received the submission of their 
leaders. 

The campaigns of 1592-93 ensured peace for just three years. 
In May, 1596, there was recrudescence of the Raushanais who made 


150 


AKBAR 


the Khyber route unsafe. Qullj Khan’s failure to suppress them 
led to the reappointment of Zain Khan to Kabul early next year. 
The frontier troubles continued even after the death of Jalal-ud-dln 
in 1600. As late as 1602 Takhta Beg had to suppress a ‘rebellion’ 
of the Afridls, Pani, Orakzai and Surl tribes in Tirah under Ahdad 
who became the leader of the Raushanais after Jalal-ud-dln’s death. 
In reality, the Afghan tribes remained unconquered and the great 
campaigns of Man Singh and Zain Khan could not uproot ‘the thorn- 
brake of the Tariikls’, though they subdued them for a time. The 
Mughul sword could neither crush the martial instincts of the Af¬ 
ghans nor solve the problem of their over-population. 

Akbar’s policy was to build up a scientific frontier for the 
Mughul empire. This required the maintenance of imperial control 
over Kabul and Qandahar, the two gateways to Hindusthan as well 
as over the tribes inhabiting the north-west frontier region. Kabul 
was annexed to the Mughul empire after Mlrza Hakim’s death in 
1585, but the frontier problem became grave and menacing on ac¬ 
count of the ascendancy of ‘Abdullah Khan Uzbeg of Bukhara who 
occupied Badakhshan in 1584 and incited the frontier tribes to rise 
against Akbar. The series of vigorous campaigns against these 
tribes, the annexation of Baluchistan and the acquisition of Qanda* 
hlar in 1595 enabled Akbar to keep the frontier altogether secure 
against foreign aggression from Persia and particularly from the 
Uzbegs of Central Asia. 

After the conquest of Kashmir, Akbar naturally turned towards 
the conquest of Sind in the west and Orissa in the east, the two 
kingdoms in Hindusthan which still remained independent. The con¬ 
quest of Sind and Baluchistan was imperative as a base of opera¬ 
tions for the recovery of Qandahlar which was in Persian hands. 
As early as 1574 the fortress of Bhakkar had been surrendered to 
the Mughuls. Towards the end of 1586 Sadiq Khan, governor of 
Multan, besieged Sehwan but Jani Beg, ruler of Sind, offered sub¬ 
mission by sending tribute to Akbar at Lahore. Jaril Beg however 
renounced his allegiance and asserted independence. In 1590 Khan 
Khanan ‘Abdur-RahJJm was appointed to the government of Mul¬ 
tan with direction to conquer Sind. The Khan Khanan invaded 
the country and besieged Sehwan. Jam Beg had meanwhile ad¬ 
vanced against the Mughuls with a big army, war-boats and a park 
of artillery and he fortified the Pass of Nasarpur. The Khan Kha¬ 
nan accordingly raised the siege and marched by land and water to 
meet the enemy. In October, 1591, he inflicted a severe defeat on 
Jam Beg and then returned to complete the siege of Sehwan. As 
JanS Beg advanced to help the hard-pressed garrison, he was op- 


151 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


posed and defeated by the Khan Khanan on the way. But he con¬ 
tinued to resist from a new stronghold some forty miles away. The 
Khan Khanan attacked him there and forced him to make peace 
by surrendering Tatta and Sehwan and agreeing to pay homage to 
Akbar at court. In 1593 he came to the Mughul court at Lahore, 
He was kindly received and was appointed governor of Multan and 
afterwards of Sind. He accepted the Divine Faith of the emperor. 

In the east the great pro-consul of Bihar, after settling the pro¬ 
vince, led the campaign in April, 1590, for the conquest of Orissa and 
reached Jahanabad (modern Arambagh in Hughli district) by way of 
Bhagalpur and Burdwan. Qutlu Khan LohanI, the Afghan ruler 
of North Orissa, despatched a large force to Raipur in the Bankura 
district. The Afghans surprised and badly defeated the Mughul ad¬ 
vance-guard under Man Singh’s son, the inexperienced Jagat Singh. 
But the sudden death of Qutlu Khan shortly after disheartened the 
Afghans. His minister Khvaja Tsa raised his young son Nasir Khan 
to the throne and he made peace with the Mughuls on condition 
that the khutba was to be recited and coins were to be struck in 
Akbar’s name and Purl, including the temple of Jagannath, was to be 
made reserved lands under the emperor. On 15 August the boy-king 
paid homage to Man Singh. 

But after the death of the regent the treaty of 1590 was repu¬ 
diated by the Afghans who captured the temple of Jagannath and 
took Puri. In November, 1591, Man Singh marched again by land 
and river and was joined by Sa‘id Khan, governor of Bengal. At 
Benapur, one day’s march from Jaleswar, a severe and contested 
battle was fought on 18 April, 1592. 30 The Mughuls ultimately 
gained the victory and Man Singh made his triumphant entry into 
Jaleswar where the khutba was recited and coins stamped in Ak- 
bar’s name. The Afghans retreated southwards and continued to 
resist. Though Sa‘id Khan left him, Man Singh marched into Orissa, 
took Cuttack, secured the surrender of the fort of Aul by Qutlu 
Khan’s officer and received the submission of the Tila raja at Kal- 
kalghatl But Ramchandra Dev, the raja of Khurdha, the greatest 
of the Orissa chiefs, still held at Sarangarh. Man Singh raided 
the Khurdha territory and compelled Ramchandra to submit. A 
Mughul force despatched by him recovered Jaleswar which had 
meanwhile been captured by the Afghans. Sarangarh capitulated 
in June but it was not until January, 1593, and after the despatch 
of an expedition under Jagat Singh that Ramchandra Dev per¬ 
sonally waited on Man Singh. The conquest of Orissa was now 
completed but, as in Bengal, what the Mughuls could establish was 
military occupation rather than effective rule. 


152 


AKBAR 


Meanwhile Kashmir had become the scene of serious disturbances. 
During his first visit to that province in 1589 Akbar had made 
necessary arrangements for its administration. The revenue admi¬ 
nistration of the province was the root of the trouble: the high 
assessment of Akbar caused grave discontent. The malcontents elected 
as their leader Yadgar, the cousin of the governor Mirza Yusuf Khan, 
who asserted independent authority and coined money in his 
own name. In July, 1592, Akbar left Lahore for Kashmir and 
halted at Bhimbar where he received the head of Yadgar who had 
been captured and executed. On 14 October he entered Srinagar. 
On the resignation of Mirza Yusuf Khan due to difficulties in re¬ 
venue administration, the entire province was converted into re¬ 
served lands ( Khcittsa ). About five years later, in 1597, Akbar 
made his third and last visit to Kashmir. 

In 1595 Akbar’s conquest of the northern portion of the Indian 
sub-continent (excluding Assam) was completed by the annexa¬ 
tion of Baluchistan. In December, 1594, Mir M‘asum, the historian, 
led the campaign. The zamtnddrs of Gandava offered their sub¬ 
mission and in February, 1595, the Mughuls besieged the fort of Sibi, 
held by the Parni Afghans and shortly after forced the garrison to 
surrender the fort. The country up to the border of Qandahar, 
Cutch and Makran came into the possession of the Mughuls. Two 
months later occurred the bloodless conquest of Qandahar. 

V. FOREIGN POLICY 

Qandahar was the Alsace of medieval Asia, the bone of conten¬ 
tion between India and Iran in the sixteenth and seventeenth cen¬ 
turies. The Safavi monarchs regarded Qandahar as an appanage of 
Khurasan and considered Mughul occupation as nothing but usurpa¬ 
tion. At Akbar’s accession it was governed by Bairam Khan’s agent 
Shah Muhammad Qilatl. In 1558 a large Persian force led by Sultan 
Husain Mirza invaded Qandahar and took possession of it. For the 
next thirty-six years it was to remain in Persian hands. On account 
of his preoccupation in India and the troubles in Kabul and the 
frontier, Akbar could not make any attempt at the recovery of 
Qandahar. By the year 1590 he had become the paramount so¬ 
vereign of Northern India, Kabul had been annexed to his empire 
and the Raushanais had been subdued for the time being. The 
Uzbegs had become supreme in Khurasan and were threatening the 
Safavi kingdom. It was the time to strike a blow and recover 
Qandahar. Akbar apprehended as well the capture of Qandahar by 
the Uzbegs in which case Kabul and the Punjab would be insecure. 
Accordingly in 1590 he sent an army under ‘Abdur-Rahlm to recover 


153 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Qandahar, but the Khan Khanan turned to the conquest of Sind, 
probably as a prelude to the conquest of Qandahar. This postponed 
the Qandahar expedition and circumstances made any expedition 
unnecessary. Muzaffar Husain Mir^a, who held the government of 
Qandahar, feared the prospect of an Uzbeg invasion and might also 
have learnt of Akbar’s plan to recover Qandahar. Shah ‘Abbas was 
then in no position to send him reinforcements. Muzaffar Husain, 
therefore, refusing the offer of help by ‘Abdullah Khan who had 
sent him an envoy, surrendered the fort on 18 April, 1595, to Akbar’s 
officer Shah Beg Khan and left for the Miughul court. ‘A 
populous country came into possession without a battle’, as Abu-’l- 
Fazl states. In July Zamln Dawar and Garmsir were also taken by 
Shahi Beg Khan, but they were recovered by the Persians in 1603. 

In spite of Qandahar, round which the Mughul-Safavl diplomacy 
centred, there was almost regular diplomatic intercourse between 
Agra and Qazvin or Isfahan. Under Akbar the Mughul-Safavi re¬ 
lationship, which had been that of client and patron, entered upon 
a new phase. Akbar’s toleration of the Shiahs and the Sunnis alike 
toned down the religious animosity of the Safavl monarchs who were 
zealous champions of Shiahism, while the building up and consolida¬ 
tion of the great Mughul empire under him raised the prestige of the 
dynasty abroad, and both Shah ‘Abbas and ‘Abdullah Khan Uzbeg 
sought his alliance against each other. 

Early in the reign Bairam Khan had sent Shah GhazI Sultian as 
envoy to Shah Tahmasp. He saw the necessity of establishing cor¬ 
dial relationship with the Safavl court, especially now when the boy- 
king was beset with a crop of difficulties in Hindusthan and required 
the Shah’s moral support. Shah Tahmasp received the envoy with 
honour and in 1562 sent his cousin Sayyid Beg on embassy to 
Akbar with a letter offering condolences for the death of Humayun 
and congratulations on his accession and emphasizing the necessity of 
cementing the bond of friendship between the two kingdoms. In 
1564 Akbar received another envoy from Shah Tahmasp who came 
with a letter and rarities of Iran. Early in November, 1572, during 
his march from Sirohi to Piatan, Akbar received Yar ‘All Beg, envoy 
from Sultan Muhammad Khudabanda, Shah Tahmasp’s eldest son 
and governor of Khurasan, who probably sought the support of Akbar 
in the coming war of succession in Persia. The death of Shah Tah¬ 
masp in 1576 was the signal for the outbreak of civil war and 
anarchy, followed by a succession of weak rulers, during 
which diplomatic intercourse between the Mughul empire 
and Persia was stopped. But under Shah ‘Abbas (1587-1629) 
a closer contact was established between Agra and Isfahan. Shah 


154 


AKBAR 


Tahmasp would look on Akbar as the son of Humayun who had 
sought shelter at his court and during his lifetime Akbar’s supre¬ 
macy over Hindusthan had not been fully established. Shah ‘Abbas 
found Akbar the paramount sovereign of almost all Hindusthan and 
naturally sought his alliance, hard-pressed as he was in the west by 
the Ottoman Turks and in the east by the Uzbegs under their power¬ 
ful king ‘Abdullah Khan who overran and captured Khurasan. In 
1591 Shah ‘Abbas sent his envoy Yadgar Sultan Rumlu who arrived 
at the Mughul court on 16 May with choice presents and a suppli¬ 
catory letter to Akbar, asking for his military help and at least his 
moral support. Akbar could not agree to send an auxiliary force 
for the recovery of Khurasan from the Uzbegs, as some of his nobles 
suggested, though he would have thereby cleared his father’s as well 
as grandfather’s debt to the Safavi dynasty. For he did not consi¬ 
der it politic to go against the powerful Uzbeg king with whom he 
was in alliance and whose hostility would mean grave menace to 
the frontier of the Mughul empire. Yadgar Sultan remained at Ak¬ 
bar’s court for three years and a half. On 2 December, 1594, Akbar 
gave him leave and sent with him Zlya-ul-mulk Qazvlnl and Abu 
Nasir Khvafi as envoys to the Shah with curiosities of Hindusthan 
and a letter full of instructions and written in a most patronising spirit 
which reminds one of the letters that Shah Tahmasp had addressed 
to the Emperor H'umayun. Akbar’s envoys were given a splendid 
reception at Qazvln by Shah ‘Abbas. They remained in Persia for 
a few years until 1597-8 when they obtained leave and the Shah 
sent Mlnuchihr Beg with a letter and choice presents to the Mughul 
court. The capture of Qandahar by the Mughuls in 1595 did not 
sever diplomatic connection. The envoy arrived at the Mughul court 
in November, 1598. In his letter the Shah referred to his activities 
against the Uzbegs in which he expected Akbar’s good wishes and 
support. Next year Shah ‘Abbas sent from Herat Mlrza ‘All Beg 
on embassy to Akbar with a letter informing him of his victory 
in Khurasan after the death of ‘Abdullah Khan. ‘All Beg arrived 
at court on 11 March, 1599, and both he and Mmuchihr Beg re¬ 
mained at court until 4 April, 1601, when they obtained leave. 
Akbar sent with them his own envoy Ma'sum Khan Bhakkari and 
they arrived in Persia in 1602. Ma‘sum Khan remained at the 
Safavi court for more than a year and returned in 1604. 

As a kingdom contiguous to Kabul, Badakhshan was of im¬ 
portance to the Mughul empire under Akbar as a buffer State be¬ 
tween it and the Uzbeg kingdom rapidly increasing under ‘Abdullah 
Khan. Mlrza Sulaiman of Badakhshan, who had been recognized 
by Babur in 1530, gave a lot of trouble to his grandson by his re- 


155 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


peated attempts on Kabul, but the growing power of the Uzbegs 
compelled him and his grandson to seek the alliance of Akbar and 
take shelter at his court. In 1561 he sent an envoy to Akbar ask¬ 
ing for his help against the Uzbegs who had killed his son Mirza 
Ibrahim. In 1575 Sulaiman, expelled by his rebellious grandson 
Mirza Shah Rukh, sought Akbar’s protection. Akbar treated him 
kindly and offered him the government of Bengal which he refused 
as he expected the emperor would help him recover his kingdom. 
In disappointment Sulaiman left for Mecca next year. Mirza Shah 
Rukh sent to Akbar two envoys who arrived at his court on 9 July, 
1577, and next year Akbar gave them leave and sent with them his 
own envoys to Badakhshan. Badakhshan ceased to be a buffer 
State when, in 1584, it was annexed by the Uzbegs and Mirza Shiah 
Rukh sought refuge at Akbar’s court. ‘Abdullah Khan objected to 
Akbar’s giving him protection and this caused not a little anxiety 
to the Uzbeg king. In 1587 Mirza Sulaiman, who had gone to Bada¬ 
khshan a second time, was forced to leave for India and sought 
shelter at the Mughul court. 

No other factor moulded Akbar’s trans-Indian policy so much 
as the growing power of the Uzbegs in Transoxiana. It affected his 
activities in India as well to a considerable extent. It was the bogey 
of an Uzbeg invasion which was mainly responsible for Akbar’s long 
stay in the Punjab from 1585. It encouraged the frontier tribes 
to raise their heads against the authority of Akbar; in fact, they 
were subsidized by ‘Abdullah Khan who twice received at his court 
Jalal-ud-din, the leader of the Raushanais. To a certain extent it 
served as a brake on the progress of Mughul arms in the Deccan 
inasmuch as it prevented Akbar’s leading the campaign personally 
even when mutual jealousies of commanders brought about a dead¬ 
lock there. The bitter hostility between Shah ‘Abbas and ‘Abdullah 
Khan strengthened the position of Akbar who was approached by 
both for help. ‘Abdullah Khan always sought to gain the support 
of Akbar and Akbar was equally anxious to be on friendly terms 
with ‘Abdullah; the two feared each other and therefore the grand¬ 
son of Babur and the scion of Shaibani Khan remained allies. 

In 1572 ‘Abdullah Khan sent his first envoy, HajI Altamash, 
with presents and a letter to Akbar. The object was to gain the 
support of Akbar against other princes of Turan. This first em¬ 
bassy was rather coldly received by the emperor who dismissed the 
envoy afterwards without sending his own to ‘Abdullah. Accord¬ 
ing to Abu-’l-Fazl, Akbar disliked the maintenance of diplomatic 
relations with ‘Abdullah as he intended to conquer his ancestral 
territory in Central Asia. Possibly Akbar, who was then too much 


156 


AKBAR 


engaged in his own affairs in Hindusthan, did not want to incur 
the suspicion of Shah Tahmasp. 

Five years later in 1577 arrived the second embassy from 
Bukhara. It was the period of civil war, anarchy, and weak succes¬ 
sion in Persia after' Shah Tahmasp’s death and ‘Abdullah suggested 
an invasion of that country. Akbar sent his envoy Mlrza Fuladi with 
a reply to ‘Abdullah stating that he could not agree with him in re¬ 
garding ‘difference in law and religion’ as casus belli and go against 
the Safavis with whom he was in alliance. Here was a great oppor¬ 
tunity for Akbar to recover Qandahar, but Akbar wanted to keep the 
balance and prevent the Uzbegs from growing too powerful: a feeble 
Persia would be a menace to the Mughul empire. 

In 1585 after the annexation of Balkh and Badakhshan by 
‘Abdullah and the absorption of Kabul into the Mughul empire, 
the territories of ‘Abdullah and Akbar became contiguous and the 
situation became more critical. The Uzbeg king, alarmed by Akbar’s 
campaigns in the frontier and his continued stay on the bank of 
the Indus as well as Mlrza Shah Rukh’s presence in India, sent Mir 
Quraish who arrived at the Mughul court on 11 March, 1586. 
Akbar’s support or at least his neutrality was badly needed by ‘Ab¬ 
dullah in his campaign against Khurasan. On 2 September Akbar 
gave Mir Quraish leave and despatched Hakim Humam with a letter 
to the Uzbeg court. Ultimately an agreement was reached between 
the two. It seems Akbar approved ‘Abdullah’s invasion of Khura¬ 
san and ‘Abdullah promised not to support or subsidize the Afghan 
tribes of the frontier. 303 

About three years later Hakim Humam returned in 1589 with 
a letter from ‘Abdullah in which he thanked Akbar for his moral 
support in his recent conquest of Khurasan; and he sent his envoy 
Ahmad ‘All Ataliq who however died in India. On 4 January, 
1591, Mamavl Husain arrived at the Mughul court on embassy from 
Bukhara. He too died in India and ‘Abdullah Khan became anxi¬ 
ous at the unusual delay in the return of his envoys. On 14 June, 
1596, Akbar sent his ambassadors Khvaja Ashraf N’aqshbandl and 
Shaikh Husain of Lakhnau with a letter to ‘Abdullah in which he 
regretted the death of ‘Abdullah’s two envoys and assured him of 
his friendship and informed him that he did not help Shah ‘Abbas, 
who had sent his envoy Yadgar Sultan asking for his help, on ac¬ 
count of his consideration for ‘Abdullah and that for the same rea¬ 
son he did not support the rebellion in Badakhshan and grant Shah 
Rukh any fief in Kabul or Kashmir. ‘Abdullah Khan received 
Akbar’s envoys with respect and on 30 July, 1597, sent them back 


157 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


with his own envoy Mir Quraish. Akbar’s envoys returned to court 
on 29 April, 1598, but Mir Quraish returned home from the way on 
learning of the death of his master. With the death of ‘Abdullah 
Khan in February, 1598, Akbar was relieved of the Uzbeg menace, 
for he had nothing to fear from his son ‘Abdul-Mumin. The nobles 
advised Akbar to invade ‘Abdullah’s territory but he did not agree. 
Akbar had never any serious intention of conquering Badakhshan 
and Transoxiana, the home of his ancestors. He followed an Indian 
policy and thoroughly abandoned the Central Asian outlook of his 
grandfather and even of his father. 

Diplomatic intercourse between Turkey and India could not 
be regular on account of the geographical situation of the two coun¬ 
tries. The Turkish admiral SidI ‘All Ra’is was present at Delhi 
at the time of Humayun’s tragic end and Akbar’s accession. SlcLi 
‘Ali was no accredited envoy, but Bairam Khan availed of the op¬ 
portunity of despatching a letter in the name of Akbar in 1556-57 to 
Sulaiman the Magnificent through the admiral. In the letter Akbar 
addresses the sultan as the ‘Caliph on earth sent by God’ and states 
that, though there had been no diplomatic connection between the 
sultan of Turkey and the Mughul emperor, there had always been 
the desire to maintain such relations and that is why he is despatch¬ 
ing this letter to the sultan ‘to bind the chains of union and love’ 
through the admiral, though he had no commission from his master, 
and he hopes that the sultan will also respond to his wishes and 
maintain communication with the Mughul court. It does not ap¬ 
pear that the sultan of Turkey responded, for he had no interest in 
any alliance with the Mughul emperor. Akbar also, as he established 
his supremacy over India and as the Turkish power declined after 
the death of Sulaiman (1566), did not regard Turkish support as of 
importance. On the contrary, he viewed with jealousy that the 
khutba was recited in Mecca and Medina in the name of the sultan 
of Turkey and threw a challenge to him when in 1579 he assumed 
the titles of Imdm and Khalifa- Akbar expressed his desire to Rudolf 
Aquaviva to form an alliance with the king of Portugal against the 
sultan 30b and he asked ‘Abdullah Khan of Bukhara to enter into a 
coalition against the Ottoman Turks while he promised Shah ‘Abbas 
help against them (1586). 30c In reality Akbar considered the Sultan- 
Caliph of Turkey as his great rival. 30d 

Of the European powers Akbar had diplomatic relations with 
the Portuguese who had already established their authority on the 
western coast of India with Goa as their capital. In 1572 during his 
visit to Cambay he met some Portuguese merchants who came to 
pay their respects. Next year during his siege of Surat he came 


158 


AKBAR 


into contact with the Portuguese who had come as the ally of the 
garrison but cleverly posed themselves as friends and sent their 
envoy Antonio Cabral to Akbar who, however, received them kindly. 
According to the Portuguese version Akbar had also sent his envoy 
to the Portuguese viceroy and a treaty, satisfactory to both parties, 
was concluded. Akbar wanted to be on friendly terms with the 
Portuguese who controlled the pilgrim traffic to Mecca by their 
domination of the Arabian Sea which had virtually become the 
Portuguese lake. In 1578 the Portuguese viceroy of Goa 
sent the same Antonio Cabral as ambassador to the Mughul 
emperor and Akbar’s discussion with him on religious mat¬ 
ters led ultimately to the despatch of the first Jesuit mis¬ 
sion to his court in 1580. Akbar sent his envoy HajI ‘Abdullah 
and the Portuguese Government responded by the despatch of this 
mission which has already been referred to. The mission terminat¬ 
ed in February, 1583, when Father Rudolf left the Mughul court. 
Seven years later Akbar despatched a letter to the viceroy of Goa 
through the Greek sub-deacon Leo Grimon, asking for a second mis¬ 
sion to his court. It was well received at Lahore in 1591 but the 
Fathers realized the impossibility of converting Akbar in spite of his 
professed sympathy for Christianity, and shortly afterwards it came 
to an abrupt conclusion. In 1594 Akbar invited a third mission from 
the viceroy of Goa who sent it, in spite of the reluctance of the pro¬ 
vincial authority to risk a third attempt, on account of the possibi¬ 
lity of good results of a political character. The mission consisting 
of Father Jerome Xavier, a grand-nephew of St. Francis, Father 
Emmanuel Pinheiro and Brother Benedict de Goes arrived at Lahore 
on 5 May, 1595, and, with varying personnel, remained at the Mughul 
court till Akbar’s death in 1605. Akbar showed the same reverence 
for the Christian faith and permitted the Fathers to preach the 
Gospel and even convert people. But he was least inclined to em¬ 
brace Christianity and gave more attention to political and military 
affairs than to religious discussions. Though this caused not a little 
disappointment to the Fathers, the viceroy of Goa received in 1598 
instruction from the king of Spain to maintain the mission at the 
Mughul court. Akbar also tried to utilize the services of Xavier 
and Benedict de Goes to obtain during the siege of Asirgarh guns 
and munitions from the Portuguese at Chaul which of course they 
refused as it was un-Christian and as they were in alliance with the 
ruler of Khandesh. From the Deccan Akbar also despatched in 
March, 1600, an embassy to Goa purely with a view to gaining poli¬ 
tical alliance. The Portuguese alliance with the sultans of the Dec- 
can caused grave concern to the emperor and he wanted to check 
their influence by the establishment of Mughul authority in the 


159 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Deccan. At one time he even thought of securing the help of the 
Deccan sultanates against them. In reality Akbar considered the 
Portuguese as his most powerful enemy in India as he states in his 
letter to ‘Abdullah Khan 30e but he considered it politic to maintain 
friendly relations with them. 

Akbar had no proper diplomatic relations with England, though 
some Englishmen visited his court. Elizabethan England had al¬ 
ready begun to take interest in Indian trade and in 1585 a party 
of three Englishmen, John Newbery, a London merchant and mem¬ 
ber of the Levant Company, Ralph Fitch, another London merchant, 
and William Leedes, a jeweller, arrived at Fathpur Slkrl. Newbery 
carried with him a letter from Queen Elizabeth, written in February, 
1583, in which she addresses Akbar as ‘the most invincible and most 
mighty Prince, King of Cambaie’ and recommends to him Newbery 
and his companions favourable reception, friendly treatment and 
suitable privileges. 31 The object of their visit was commercial. They 
were England’s pioneers in India. Of them Fitch has left a valuable 
account of his travels and to him Agra and Fathpur Slkrl appeared 
much larger and more populous than Elizabethan London. Leedes 
was taken into the royal service at Fathpur Slkrl. In 1603 another 
Englishman, John Mildenhall, also a merchant, arrived at Agra with 
a letter from Queen Elizabeth. He presented Akbar twenty-nine 
horses and some jewels and asked of him friendship with Queen 
Elizabeth, permission for the newly founded East India Company 
to trade in his kingdom and his neutrality in the event of English 
and Portuguese ships fighting on his coasts. But the Portuguese 
Fathers at the Mughul court prejudiced the mind of Akbar against 
the English whom they described as ‘a complete nation of thieves.’ 
Ultimately, according to his own version, Mildenhall was able to 
exact from Akbar a favourable treaty but there is no doubt that 
he could not gain any concession from the emperor. The negotia¬ 
tions opened by Newbery and Mildenhall, however, led ultimately 
to the despatch of a duly accredited embassy to Jahangir. 

VI. CONQUESTS IN THE DECCAN 

Akbar had his eye on the Deccan long before he sent regular 
expeditions for the expansion of the Mughul empire into the South 
which ultimately proved to be the fata morgana under his great- 
grandson, leading to his own ruin and the ruin of his empire. Akbar’s 
ambition for supremacy over the whole Indian sub-continent de¬ 
manded it; the policy of the previous Muslim rulers like ‘Ala-ud-dln 
Khalji pointed to it; and the Portuguese influence at the courts of the 
Deccan sultanates made it imperative on the emperor who needed no 


160 


AKBAR 


casus belli. Akbar had always reckoned the Portuguese as a power, 
controlling important parts of India’s seaboard and growing as a 
menace to the Mughul empire, and he considered it essential to 
counteract their influence at the cabinets of the Deccan sultanates. 
Chronic jealousy and frequent wars between these States offered 
Akbar the favourable ground for the fulfilment of his imperial am¬ 
bition. Of the five offshoots of the BahmanI empire, Ahmadnagar, 
Bijapur and Golconda concerned Akbar. Berar had been annexed 
by Ahmadnagar in 1574 and Bldar was too insignificant to attract 
attention. Besides, there was the kingdom of Khandesh which was 
the outpost of Mughul invasion into the South. 

As early as 1564 Akbar had sent from Mandu an envoy to Mu¬ 
barak Shah II of Khandesh, demanding the hand of his daughter. 
Mubarak sent his daughter and agreed to surrender Bijagarh and 
Hindiya and recognize Akbar’s sovereignty by reciting his name 
in the khutba. During his campaign in Gujarat in 1573 Akbar des¬ 
patched envoys to the courts of Khandesh and Ahmadnagar and four 
years later, in 1577, the emperor received letters and an envoy from 
the Nizam Shahl court in response to an embassy which he had sent. 
About this time, in February, 1577, Akbar despatched an expedition 
under Shihab-ud-dln Ahmad Khan against the new ruler of Khan¬ 
desh, Raja ‘All Khan, who reversed the policy of his predecessors, 
Mubarak II (1535-66) and Muhammad II (1566-76) by assuming 
the title of Shah and refusing to pay tribute. The expedition, how¬ 
ever, was withdrawn shortly after as Raja ‘All Khan paid tribute. 

It was not until 1585 that Akbar secured some pretext for in¬ 
terference into the Deccan affairs. The dictatorial rule of Salabat 
Khan, the minister of Murtaza Nizam Shah of Ahmadnagar, dis¬ 
gusted the nobles, some of whom fled to Akbar’s court and sought 
his help. In 1585 Akbar ordered Khan 'Azam, governor of Malwa, 
to invade Berar but it was not until the next year that he could ac¬ 
tually carry out the royal order. He invaded Berar, sacked its 
capital, Ellichpur, but had to retreat to Nandurbar after fighting an 
indecisive battle at Chandur 313 on account of the combined opposi¬ 
tion of the troops of Raja ‘All Khan and the Nizam Shah. He bank¬ 
ed on the help of the Khan Khanan, governor of Gujarat, which 
he failed to secure, and the expedition came to a barren end. 

The Deccan enjoyed a respite for about three years after which 
circumstances in Ahmadnagar invited Akbar’s aggression. On 
14 June, 1588, Murtaza Nizam Shah I was murdered by his son 
Husain who succeeded him but was himself deposed and murdered 
on 1 April, 1589, by the nobles who raised to the throne Isma'il, the 

161 

M.E.—11 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


son of Burhan-ud-dln, the younger brother of Murtaza Nizam 
Shah, now a refugee at Akbar’s court. This aroused the ambition 
of Burhan-ud-din to secure the throne of Ahmadnagar and offered 
Akbar the pretext for interference into its affairs. Akbar sent him 
to Malwa with instructions to Khan A‘zam and Raja ‘AH Khan of 
Khandesh to help him secure the Ahmadnagar throne. Burhan, how¬ 
ever, refused Mughul assistance to avoid inconvenient and humi¬ 
liating obligations and invaded Berar with his own troops, but he 
was defeated and retreated to Khandesh. His second attempt, in 
which Raja ‘All Khan substantially helped him and secured for him 
the help of Ibrahim ‘Adil Shiah II, proved successful. Isma‘Il was 
taken captive after the victory of Burhan and Raja ‘All at the battle 
of Rohankhed. 32 Burhan deposed him and sat on the throne of 
Ahmadnagar as Burhan Nizam Shah II (May, 1591). Burhan, whom 
Akbar regarded as his protege, far from proving his obedient vassal, 
asserted his independence. 

Akbar was outwitted and so, in August, 1591, he sent ambassa¬ 
dors to the courts of Khandesh, Ahmadnagar, Bijapur and Golconda. 
In 1593 Faizi and the other envoys returned from the Deccan. None 
of the sultans agreed to acknowledge Akbar’s sovereignty, though 
Raja ‘All Khan sent his daughter for marriage with Prince Salim 
and the sultans of Bijapur and Golconda were good enough to pre¬ 
sent rich gifts to the emperor. Burhan did not even accord Akbar’s 
envoy Faizi an honourable treatment. It was high time that Akbar 
should send an expedition and he appointed the Khan Khanan and 
Sultan Murad to this command, assisted by Mirza Shah Rukh and 
Shahbaz Khan. Dissensions between the imperial leaders, however, 
delayed operation. Murad wanted the officers of Malwa to join him 
in Gujarat, his province, and march from there to the Deccan, while 
the Khan Khanan wanted to proceed from Malwa, where he was 
then stationed, and refused to act as a mere follower of the prince. 

Meanwhile the course of events in Ahmadnagar offered Akbar 
the casas belli which he had long sought for. On the death of 
Burhan Nizam Shah II in April, 1595, his elder son Ibrahim succeed¬ 
ed him but a few months after he was slain in a battle. Ibrahim’s 
infant son Bahadur was imprisoned by Miyan Manjhu and the Dec- 
canis; they raised to the throne a youth named Ahmad who was 
represented as the son of Muhammad Khudabanda, sixth son of Bur¬ 
han Nizam Shah I (1509-1553). But Chand Sultan, daughter of 
Husain Ni^am Shah I and widow of ‘All ‘Adil Shah I of Bijapur, 
championed the cause of the lawful heir, Bahadur. The African nobles, 
who supported another candidate, besieged Miyan Manjhu in Ahmad¬ 
nagar who sought the help of Sultan Murad, governor of Gujariat. 

16 2 


AKBAR 


The prince, who had been preparing for a campaign in the 
Deccan, marched without delay and at Chandur, 33 some sixty miles 
from Ahmadnagar, where he was joined by the Khan Khanan, Raja 
‘All Khan also joined the imperial force, though rather reluctantly, 
because his real sympathies were with the Deccan kingdom. The 
Mughul army arrived before Ahmadnagar on 26 December, 1595, 
and, instead of coming as allies, they came as invaders, as Firishta 
justly comments, and besieged the city. 

Miyan Manjhu, who regretted the appeal he had made to the 
Mughuls, retired from Ahmadnagar, and Chand Sultan took the 
helm of affairs in her own hand. The jealousy and dissension be¬ 
tween the Mughul commanders, the heroic defence of the fort by 
the ‘noble queen’ and the encouragement the garrison received from 
Raja ‘All Khan, who sent secret messages to them, made the pro¬ 
gress of the siege slow. In response to the call of Chand Sultan, 
the nobles rallied round her. Ikhlas Khan marched from Daula- 
tabad with 10,000 horse but in the vicinity of Paithan on the Goda¬ 
vari the Mughuls defeated him. Abhang Khan marched from the 
southern frontier with 7,000 horse but was badly defeated by the 
Khan Khanan’s troops with heavy loss. In the doom of Ahmad¬ 
nagar the sultans of Bijapur and Golconda read their own and they 
sent a big army which was advancing from the Bijapur frontier. 
The Mughuls, therefore, had recourse to digging mines with a view 
to destroying the defences but treachery helped the garrison who, 
being informed in time, destroyed the mines by countermining. 
Meanwhile the confederate army of Bijapur and Golconda was ap¬ 
proaching the city and scarcity of provisions prevailed in the Mu¬ 
ghul camp. Sultan Murad accordingly offered terms of peace to 
Chand Sultan: the Mughuls would raise the siege of Ahmadnagar 
provided Berar was ceded to them. Reluctantly Chand Sultan 
agreed and peace was concluded on 23 March, 1596. 34 The Mu¬ 
ghuls raised the siege of Ahmadnagar and retired to Berar and the 
first act in the drama of Akbar’s Deccan campaign ended. 

The peace thus concluded proved a mere truce. There were 
causes of complaint on both sides, but the terms of peace were ac¬ 
tually violated, against Chand Sultan’s advice, by the rulers of 
Ahmadnagar who, encouraged by the approach of the Bijapur and 
Golconda army, whose help they had sought, made an attempt to 
expel the Mughul troops from Berar. The Khan Khanan moved 
with an army of 15,000 horse against the Deccanis, and at Ashti 
near Sonpet a hardly-contested battle took place on 8 and 9 
February, 1597. The battle began late in the afternoon. Suhail 
Khan, the commander of the Bijapur troops, made an artillery at- 


163 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


tack with such vehemence that the two wings of the Mughul army 
were defeated and put to flight and Raja ‘All Khan of Khlandesh, 
who commanded the Mughul left, was slain with his officers and 
500 of his men. The Khan Khanan and Shah Rukh Mirza who 
commanded the centre ably stood their ground, pushed back the 
troops of Ahmadnagar and captured the Bijapur artillery. Next 
morning the Khan Khanan with 7,000 men, who had assembled at 
night, inflicted a severe defeat upon the Bijapur troops who, with 
Suhail Khan wounded, fled. 

The victory of the Khan Khanan was not however followed 
by any remarkable progress of the Mughul arms in the Deccan, 
particularly because of the dissension between the two commanders 
which led to the recall of the hero of Ashti to court. In 1598 the 
Mughuls gained some minor successes; they took Gawil, Narnala, 
Kherla and other forts in Berar. Next year Akbar sent to the Deccan 
Abu-’l-Fazl who arrived at Burhanpur in May but failed to persuade 
Bahadur, son and successor of Raja ‘All Khan of Khandesh, to join 
the imperial army. On 12 May, 1599, Prince Muriad died of deli¬ 
rium tremens and his younger brother Prince Daniyal was ap¬ 
pointed to the Deccan command, but his movement was so leisurely 
that he did not reach Burhanpur until 1 January, 1600. Taking 
advantage of this situation, the Ahmadnagar troops besieged the 
Mughul commandant at the fort of Bir. 

Akbar, who was now freed from the bogey of Uzbeg invasion 
because of the death of ‘Abdullah Khan in February, 1598, left Agra 
on 29 September, 1599, with 80,000 horse and despatched the Khan 
Khanan to join Daniyal in the Deccan. Dissension in Ahmadnagar 
favoured the Mughul cause. Chand Sultan was opposed by 
Abhang Khan and she opened negotiations with Abu-’l-Fazl by 
which she agreed to surrender Ahmadnagar if the Mughuls would 
remove Abhang Khan. Abhang replied by despatching an army 
which invaded Berar and advanced as far as Ellichpur, but was 
ultimately defeated by the Mughuls. 

The arrival of Prince Daniyal at Burhanpur in January, 1600, 
added fresh complication to the intricate situation. Bahadur re¬ 
fused to wait on him and shut himself up in the fort of Aslrgarh 
and the enraged prince summoned the officers of Berar to reply to 
Bahadur’s insolence. Akbar, who was now in Maiwa on his way to 
the Deccan, sent orders to the prince to march towards Ahmad¬ 
nagar and he himself hastened towards Burhanpur to deal with the 
defiant Bahadur. On 8 April Akbar appeared before Burhanpur 
and the very next day he despatched Khan A‘zam to besiege the fort 
of Aslrgarh. 


164 


AKBAR 


Daniyal and the Khan Khanan accordingly marched towards 
Ahmadnagar. Abhang Khan proceeded to oppose them but ulti¬ 
mately retreated to Junnar. On 21 April the Mughuls besieged the 
fort without opposition. Chand Sultan, who advised peace with 
the Mughuls by surrender of the fort, was put to death by a 
riotous faction which was opposed to her policy. With her fall the 
star of Ahmadnagar sank. The defences of the fort were destroy¬ 
ed by mines and the Mughuls stormed it on 28 August. The fall 
of Ahmadnagar alarmed Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah II of Bijapur who sent 
an envoy to Akbar to conciliate him and agreed to give his daughter 
in marriage to Prince Daniyal. 

Bahadur, who had enough provisions in the fort of Asirgarh to 
stand a siege, opened negotiations with Akbar just to gain time so 
that the Mughuls would be compelled to raise the siege on account 
of scarcity of provisions, but Akbar saw through the design and 
demanded unconditional surrender. On 21 June a Mughul force 
captured the Sapan hill from which the enemy harassed the besie¬ 
gers and a second overture for peace was also rejected in Septem¬ 
ber. But the progress of the siege was remarkably slow and Abu- 
’1-Fazl was sent to infuse fresh vigour into the besiegers. The 
garrison was, however, reduced to great straits on account of the 
congestion of men, animals and stores and a pestilence broke out 
which took a huge toll of lives. This miserable plight of the be¬ 
sieged enabled the Mughuls to capture on 9 December the fort 
of Maligarh, situated to the north-west of the main fort and on the 
lower slopes of the hill. These circumstances compelled Bahadur 
to agree to Akbar’s proposal to meet him at his camp for negotia¬ 
tion on condition that Khandesh would be restored to him and the 
members of the royal family would be released. On 21 December 
Bahadur came to Akbar’s camp. He had left instruction to the 
garrison not to surrender and consequently he refused to surrender 
the fort. Akbar had tried to secure the help of Portuguese artil¬ 
lery through the Jesuits but failed. He therefore detained Baha¬ 
dur and coerced him to write to the garrison for delivering the 
keys of the fort. Yaqut, the Abyssinian commandant of the fort, 
loyal to Bahadur’s instruction, disregarded his master’s letter from 
Akbar’s camp delivered to him by his son Muqarrab Khan, and, on 
the refusal of every other member of the royal family to sit on 
the throne for its defence, committed suicide. The garrison, large¬ 
ly bribed by Akbar’s officers, lost morale and surrendered the fort 
to the Mughuls on 6 January, 1601. 35 In the siege of Asirgarh 
Akbar stands guilty of an act of treachery; he was not treache- 


165 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


rous by nature but when expediency demanded it, he did not hesi¬ 
tate to use it as a weapon. 36 

Akbar made over the government of Khandesh to Daniyal and 
ultimately Khandesh, Berar and the annexed portion of Ahmad- 
nagar were combined as the viceroyalty of the Deccan under the 
prince. A large portion of Ahmadnagar remained independent 
under Murtaza Nizam Shah II, the son of Shah ‘All, third son of 
Burhan I, as the nominal ruler but with Malik ‘Ambar as the real 
power with whom the Mughuls made peace after minor engage¬ 
ments. 


VII. REVOLT OF SALIM 

Akbar intended to deal with the kingdom of Bijapur, Golconda 
and Bidar but he had to leave the Deccan in April for the North 
where Salim was in active mutiny. On 23 August, 1601, the em¬ 
peror reached Agra. His profligate son, who had disliked his be¬ 
stowing favour on Daniyal, became impatient of the delay in secur¬ 
ing the throne. As early as 1591 36a he had displayed shameless 
eagerness to grasp sovereign power and nine years later, taking ad¬ 
vantage of Akbar’s preoccupation in the Deccan, attempted a 
coup de main. Salim’s revolt was not a protest of orthodox Islam 
against the heterodoxy of Akbar and Abu-’l-Fazl. Salim did not 
champion the cause of Islamic orthodoxy, as Count Von Noer 
states. When Akbar set out for the Deccan, the prince had been 
left in charge of the capital and entrusted with the task of suppres¬ 
sing the Rana of Me war in collaboration with Raja Man Singh. But 
he neither seriously carried out his father’s instructions nor listen¬ 
ed to his brother-in-law who advised him to accompany him to 
Bengal where he was transferred to deal with the rebellion of the 
Afghans. He first made an unsuccessful attempt to seize Agra and 
the Punjab and then crossing the Yamuna on 23 July, 1600, made 
for Allahabad, evading an interview with his grandmother who 
hastened after him to dissuade him from his purpose. On arrival 
at Allahabad he took possession of the treasures of Bihar amount¬ 
ing to 30 lakhs of Rupees and seized the territory from KalpI to 
Hajlpur where he appointed his own officers. He sent an evasive 
reply to his father’s letter from the Deccan. On his return to the 
capital Akbar opened negotiations with his rebel son but Salim 
advanced towards Agra at the head of 30,000 horse and reached 
Etawa. Akbar despatched a letter of remonstrance and threat 
ordering the prince to return to Allahabad and then offered him the 
government of Bengal and Orissa. Salim disregarded the offer but 
returned to Allahabad (May, 1602) where he set up as an indepen- 


166 


AKBAR 


dent monarch. He sent his envoy to Agra to negotiate peace with 
his father who could hardly agree to his extravagant demands. 
Besides he struck coins in his own name and had the audacity to 
send specimens to confirm his sovereign powers. This fresh provo¬ 
cation moved Akbar to action which paternal affection as well as 
policy had so long prevented. He recalled from the Deccan his 
valued counsellor Abu-’l-Fazl who deeply resented the prince’s 
foolish and shameless conduct and assured his sovereign that he 
would bring the ‘king of Allahabad’ bound to court and immediate¬ 
ly left for the capital. Salim, who was jealous of the power and 
influence of the great minister, regarded him as his personal enemy 
and saw his impending doom. He apprehended that Abu-’l-Fazl’s 
influence might cause Akbar to adopt a sterner attitude and even 
to take the extreme step of disinheriting him. He was determin¬ 
ed to destroy Abu-’l-Fazl and commissioned Bir Singh, the rebel 
Bundela chieftain of Orchha, for this purpose. On 19 August 
1602, the loyal bandit intercepted Abu-’l-Fazl between Sarai Bir 
and Antri 37 and with 500 horsemen fell upon the great minister, 
overpowered his insufficient escort and after severing the head 
from his body, sent it to Salim at Allahabad. It is strange to re¬ 
late that this cultured prince received it with barbaric delight and 
treated the savage murder of the greatest savant of Muslim India with 
supreme contempt. Stranger still, even in his autobiography, which 
must have been written later and in calmer moments, he refers to 
the incident—tragic beyond measure—with almost brutal cynicism. 

Akbar became furious and heart-broken. He had lost Raja 
Birbal, the brilliant wit and poet, in 1586 due to his own mis¬ 
take and in 1589 he had been deprived of two of his valued ser¬ 
vants: Todar Mai, the great financier and Raja Bhagwan Das, the 

valiant commander. In 1593 his faithful counsellor Shaikh Muba¬ 
rak died and two lyears later he lost his valued Poet Laureate 
Faizi; but the loss of Abu-’l-Fazl, his devoted counsellor and con¬ 
stant friend, overpowered him with grief and rage. For three clays 
he abstained himself from appearing in public and he cried like a 
helpless child. The emperor ordered that the culprit should be 
hunted down and his head brought to court. Bir Singh was hotly 
pursued and almost captured in the fortress of Erachh 38 but he 
managed to escape. This heightened the indignation of Akbar who 
deputed Asad Beg to investigate into the matter and Asad Beg re¬ 
ported great negligence on the part of the officers concerned. 

Salima Sultan Begam, the gifted widow of Bairam Khan and 
Akbar’s cousin and wife, now offered her good offices to reconcile 
Salim to his father. She went to Allahabad and, succeeding in her 


167 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


mission, returned with the prince who was received by his grand¬ 
mother one stage from Agra and led into his father’s presence. 
Salim presented 12,000 gold mohurs and 770 elephants to Akbar 
who forgave his profligate son deserving capital punishment, re¬ 
ceived him kindly by a warm embrace and even designated him 
heir apparent. In October, 1603, Salim was deputed to lead an ex¬ 
pedition against the Rana of Mewar but he expressed his reluctance 
and was permitted to return to Allahabad. At Allahabad Salim 
gave himself up to opium and wine and committed the worst bar¬ 
barities; he had the news-writer who reported his misdeeds flayed 
alive in his presence and one of his associates was castrated and 
another beaten to death. The other son of the emperor, Daniyal, 
who had just married a daughter of the ‘Adil Shah of Bijapur, 
drank himself to death at Burhanpur in April, 1604. 39 Akbar him¬ 
self set out for Allahabad to punish his recalcitrant son, but he had 
to return to Agra due to the serious illness of his mother who died 
on 10 September. Akbar deeply mourned her loss and discon¬ 
tinued his movement against Salim who, by the persuasion of Mir 
Sadr Jahan as well as due to the necessity for remaining at court 
to counteract the intrigues of Khusrav’s partisans, agreed to sub¬ 
mit and on 16 November arrived at court with rich presents for 
his father. Akbar welcomed him at the public audience but after¬ 
wards reproached him for his misconduct and imprisoned him in a 
room for ten days during which he was deprived of opium and 
wine. Thus ends the rebellion of Salim whom Akbar could pro¬ 
bably never forgive in all sincerity as the blood of Abu-’l-Fazl 
flowed between the grieved father and the unrepentant son. 

Meanwhile at court there was a strong party led by Khan 
A c zam and Raja Man Singh who favoured the succession of Salim’s 
son Khusrav and induced Akbar to set aside the claim of his father. 
Khusrav was Khan A‘zam’s son-in-law and Raja Man Singh’s 
nephew. Besides, Salim’s misconduct had created an unfavourable 
opinion of him as heir to the throne. 

VIII. DEATH OF AKBAR — HIS PERSONALITY 

On 3 October, 1605, Akbar fell ill with dysentery and the 
efforts of his best physician Hakim ‘All failed to cure him. Khan 
A‘zam and Raja Man Singh now became alert and conspired to seize 
Salim when he would next visit his dying father, but the prince 
was informed in time and was able to return safely from the court. 
The right of primogeniture had become customary in the TImurid 
family and the two leaders were outvoted in a conference of the 
nobles, the majority of whom decided in favour of Salim. The 


168 


AKBAR 


Sayyids of Barha supported his cause and the Rajputs of Raja Ram 
Das, the Kachhwaha, guarded the treasury in his interest. 

On 21 October, when at last Salim visited his dying father, 
he could not speak; he made a sign asking his son to place the im¬ 
perial turban on his head and gird himself with Humayun’s sword. 
At midnight on 25-26 October the great monarch passed away, 
and next morning his body was borne in state to the garden of 
Bihishtabad (Sikandra), some six miles from Agra, where he had 
commenced to build his own mausoleum. 

“Happy the writer who shall tell the history of Catherine II”, 
exclaimed Voltaire. A similar remark might be made with greater 
justice in regard to Akbar who is ‘one of the hinges of history’ and 
was great in an age of great rulers: Elizabeth of England, Henry 
IV of France, Sulaiman the Magnificent of Turkey and Shah ‘Abbas 
the Great of Persia were his contemporaries. We have contem¬ 
porary portraits of the emperor: one from the pen of the Jesuit 
Father Monserrate and one from that of his son Jahangir and 
several from the brush of his court painters. Akbar was a man of 
medium height with broad shoulders, dark sparkling eyes, open 
forehead, long arms and wheat-coloured complexion. He was 
strongly built, neither thin nor stout. His eyebrows were narrow, 
eyelids heavy. His nose was of middle size and his nostrils were 
wide. Below his left nose was a mole of the size of a pea. His 
head drooped slightly over his right shoulder. His voice was loud, 
his conversation witty and animated. Normally he was dignified: 
when he laughed, he was distorted; in his wrath he was majestic. 
Altogether he was kingly and was easily recognized as the king in 
any assemblage of men. 

The titanic and complex personality of the great Mughul is not 
easy to portray. Akbar was by nature humane and gentle, though 
occasionally he could be violent and cruel as when he ordered the 
general massacre of the vanquished garrison of Chitor and put a 
luckless lamp-lighter to death for the crime of having fallen asleep 
close to the royal couch. Chivalrous and just to all men, funda¬ 
mentally sincere and straightforward, charitable and generous to a 
fallen foe, he could be perfidious and unscrupulous when expedi¬ 
ency demanded it, as we find him in his treatment of Yusuf Shah 
of Kashmir and Bahadur Shiah of Khandesh. Genial and sociable, 
possessed of a magnetic personality and winning manners, he had 
‘super-abundant capacity for sympathy’ and genius for gaining the 
love and affection of his people and the respect and admiration of 
his enemy. Moderate in his diet, he took but one full meal a 


169 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


day. A temperate drinker, he was fond of fruit; he disliked and 
ultimately abstained from flesh food. Possessed of radiant energy, 
he was essentially a man of action. Equally efficient in riding, polo 
and swordsmanship, he was an unerring shot and had practical 
knowledge of the mechanical arts. A true Timurid in his daunt¬ 
less personal courage, he would expose himself in battles and sieges 
and would not hesitate to risk his life by attacking a mighty tiger 
or by hand-to-hand challenge of the enemy as in the battle of Sar- 
nal. He possessed the essential qualities of a general: capacity for 
strategy and practical knowledge of war to a remarkable degree 
as well as swiftness of military movements that was perfectly Ale¬ 
xandrine. His mastery of speed and surprise was revealed in his 
wonderful blitzkrieg in Gujarat. The siege of Chitor revealed him 
as an exact marksman. The Kabul campaign showed his mastery 
of detail and that of Bengal, where he defeated the Afghans dur¬ 
ing the full rains, proved his contempt of time-honoured custom. 
His Central Asian policy, by which he maintained the balance by 
playing off ‘Abdullah Khan of Bukhara against Shah ‘Abbas of 
Persia, befriending both but helping neither, is well worthy of the 
Roi Soleil and testifies to his mastery in diplomacy. A man of 
soaring and boundless ambition, he was a self-confessed annexation¬ 
ist, an antithesis of the great Asoka whom he resembles in so 
many respects. He was an indefatigable worker at the trade of a 
king and would only sleep for three hours at night. His mind 
was as active as his body. Sincerely religious and God-fearing, he 
was a rationalist and a dreamer, a mystic and a seeker after truth: 
he covered under his inexhaustible energy a soul melancholy. Of 
his two inscriptions on the walls of the portico of the Buland Dar- 
wdza, one records the date of his proud conquest of Kh&ndesh and 
the Deccan and the other reminds all of the transitoriness of world¬ 
ly things. He had an infectious enthusiasm for religious and philo¬ 
sophical discussions. He could neither read nor write, but he was 
not ignorant as BadaunI would have us believe. Monserrate, who 
was impressed by his splendid versatility, testifies that in spite of 
his illiteracy, he was yet most learned ( doctissimus eruditissi - 
musque). 40 He was a man of many interests and varied tastes. 
He had books read to him on poetry, history, philosophy and theo¬ 
logy and he had a prodigious memory. He took interest in music 
and to him the art of painting was a means to the realization of 
the greatness and glory of God. He not only laid the real founda¬ 
tion of the Mughul empire and conferred on the subjects of his 
far-flung dominion the blessings of Pax Muglauliana, but he was 
also the founder of Mughul polity and he made his capital the veri¬ 
table Mecca of culture and civilization rivalling, if not surpassing, 


170 


AKBAR 


in grandeur Herat of Sultan Husain MirzJa Baiqara, the grande 
monarque of Central Asia. Architecture and gardening, calli¬ 
graphy and painting, music and the minor arts, history and poetry, 
theology and philosophy, all were represented at his sumptuous 
court. He laid the foundation of the Mughul school of painting and 
the Mughul style of architecture. Persian as well as Hindi litera¬ 
ture had a glorious revival under his generous patronage. Kausari, 
the court poet of Shah ‘Abbas the Great, even regrets that the 
centre of Persian literature had shifted from Persia to Hindusthan. 
Even Sanskritic studies did receive his positive encouragement. 40 " 1 
Indeed Akbar took an important part in the evolution of Mughul 
civilization by the happy fusion and harmonious blending of Per¬ 
sian and Indian cultures; he himself was the very symbol of that 
synthesis. 

Yet it has to be confessed that Akbar’s knowledge, acquired 
through ears, could neither be methodical nor co-ordinated. He was 
a man of original ideas and bold conceptions. His administrative 
and military reforms reveal his constructive ability and organiza¬ 
tional power. In his social reforms—the abolition of forced sati , 41 
encouragement of widow remarriage and prohibition of child mar¬ 
riage—he anticipated the ideas of modern times. He believed in the 
divinity of kingship in regarding royalty as a ‘light emanating from 
God’ and by his character and work he raised the prestige of 
monarchy. He was a statesman par excellence with a masculine 
intellect, profound knowledge of human nature, judgment of pro¬ 
blems and a vision of things afar: he could hear the beating of 
drums coming from a distant mart. He was the first Muslim ruler, 
Sher Shah excepted, who accepted the responsibilities of govern¬ 
ment with the welfare of the governed as its objective. He gave 
a new orientation to Indo-Islamic history. Few monarchs have 
come nearer to the ideal of a father of his people. As the apostle 
of sulh-i-kull (universal toleration) he stands unique. In his boy¬ 
hood there were the fires of Smithfield in England, his contem¬ 
porary was Philip II of Spain and he was followed a century later 
by the monarch of the Dragonnades. While the Duke of Alva by 
the stroke of his pen was massacring millions of people for their 
resistance to the authority of Rome, Abu-’l-Fazl was enunciating 
that ‘persecution defeats its own purpose.’ Like the Buland Dar - 
waza that he built at Fathpur Sikri, Akbar towers far above his 
contemporary sovereigns and, with all his vices, he remains not 
only as one of the grandest monarchs known to history but ‘one of 
the few royal figures that approach the stature of great men.’ 


171 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


1. Badauni, Tr. by Ranking, Vol. I, p. 2. 

la. Vambery, The Travels and Adventures of the Turkish Admiral Ali Rai‘s, pp. 
56-58. 

lb. Hodivala, Historical Studies in Mughal Numismatics, pp. 265-66; ‘Arif Qan- 
daharl, Tarikh-i-Akbari, pp. 40-41. 

2. There is a picture by the famous artist Khvaja ‘Abdus-Samad illustrating the 
incident, at the Bodleian Library, Oxford. Reproduced in Percy Brown, Indian 
Painting under the Mughals , p. 55. 

3. Indian Historical Quarterly, June 1952, pp. 147-156. 

4. This conclusion is not based on the statements of later chroniclers like Ahmad 
Yadgar and Van den Broecke as Vincent Smith has done in J.R.A.S., 1916, 
pp. 527-34, but on the evidence of two really contemporary authorities: 
Bayazld Biyat and ‘Arif Qandaharl, supplemented by other chroniclers. For a 
full discussion see Dacca University Studies, November 1935, pp. 67-101. 

5. Town in Kashmir State 32° 38’, 75° 24’; Thornton, Gazetteer of India, London, 
1886. 

6. Her mother was a daughter of Babur. See the article on Salima Begam in 
J.A.S.B., 1906, and A.S. Beveridge, Humayun-ndma, pp. 276-78. 

7. The conflicting accounts in the chronicles make it difficult to say whether he 
was a saint or a charlatan. 

7a. Tab. Akbari, Eng. Transl. II, p. 112; Tarikh-i-Alfi, I. O.Ms., ff. 423-4. 

7b. Vide Tab. Akbari. Eng. Transl. II., p. 238. The message runs thus; ‘As I 
have come to such distance without consulting you, my attendants have be¬ 
come uneasy (lit. fallen into suspicion). It is best and proper if you will 
soothe them so that they may serve with composure of mind.’ 

8. Vincent Smith is wrong in his statement that Bairam Khan died as a young 
man of thirty-six or thirty-seven, Akbar the Great Mogul , p. 46, n. 2. See 
Proceedings of the Indian History Congress, 1949, pp. 191-195. 

9. Two chronicles assert that Bairam Khan proceeded to the Punjab with a view 
to going to Mecca by way of Qandahar and Mashhad, holy for the Shiahs, the 
road to Gujarat being controlled by Mai Dev, raja of Jodhpur, who was 
hostile to Bairam, Ma e dan-i~akhbdr-i-Ahmadi. f. 183 b and Khdfi Khan, 
Vol. I, pp. 146-47. 

10. See Journal of Indian History, Vol. I, 1921, pp. 327-44. Also Ma‘dan-i-akhbd / r-i- 
Ahmadi, f. 177 a and Zubdat-ut-Tawdrikh, I O.Ms., f. 103 b. 

11. In Jubbulpur district. 23° 10' N., 79° 57' E. 

12. In Narsinghpur district. 22° 46' N., 78° 59' E. 

13. See Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, 1904, ‘A Forgotten City.’ 

14. Vide Chapter II. 

15. For the Shaibamds see Lane-Poole, The Mohammadan Dynasties, pp. 270-72. 

16. Cambridge Shorter History of India, p. 346. 

17. Firishta suggests that they wanted to retire to Malwa with a view to joining 
the rebellious MIrzas or forming an alliance with the sultans of the Deccan, 
Briggs, Vol. II, p. 227; Text, Vol. II, p. 256. 

18. The site of the battle named by Abu-’l-Fazl as ‘Sakrawal’ and Nizam-ud-dm 
and Badauni as ‘Mankarwal’ cannot be properly identified. 

19. He remained there until March 1572, when through the intercession of Mun‘im 
Khan he obtained pardon and was granted Lakhnau as his fief where he died 
shortly after. ‘Abdullah Khan who had escaped from Gujarat and joined 
Khan Zaman in Jaunpur had already died. 

20. See Chapter III. 

20a. Imperial Gazetteer of India, Provincial Series, Rajputana, p. 132. 

21. Major Price and Beveridge ( Akbar-ndma, Eng. Trans. Vol. II, p. 464) and 
following them Vincent Smith also gave the incorrect date, 20 October. 

22. Akbar~ndma, Eng. Trans. Vol. II, p. 333; Moreland, Agrarian System of Mos¬ 
lem India, p. 85. 


172 


AKBAR 


22a. Haig reads Nagaur as Bagor as he considers that Akbar should not have pro¬ 
ceeded in a north-westerly direction from Ajmer when his objective lay to the 
south-west. But besides the MSS. of the Akbar-nama, Nizam-ud-dln, BadaunI, 
Firishta and ‘Abdul-BaqI state that Akbar left Ajmer for Nagaur. 

22b. Tab. Akbarl s Eng. Trans. II, p. 403. 

23. Moreland has rightly objected to the translation of khalisa as 'crown lands’, 
Agrarian System of Moslem India, p. 29, n. 1. 

23a. A town in Patna district. 

23b. Tod. Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan, Ed. by Crooke, I, p. 394. 

23c. Akbar-nama, Eng. Trans. II, p. 93. 

23d. Ibid, III, p. 332. 

23e. Aln-i-Akbari, Trans. by Jarrett, III, p. 394; Badduni, Trans. by Lowe, 
II, p. 213; Akbar-nama, Eng. Trans., Ill, p. 397. 

24. See J.R.A.S., 1924, pp. 591-608, where Buckler emphasizes the importance 
of the 'declaration’ in relation to the outer Islamic world. There is no reason 
to believe, as Buckler does, that the early Mughul emperors acknowledged the 
sovereignty of the Safavl Shahs or that the latter asserted the right of over¬ 
lordship over the former. On this point see Tripathi, Some Aspects of Muslim 
Administration, pp. 156-58, and S.Ray, Humdyun in Persia, pp. 58-60. See 
also Hollister, The Shi‘a of India, pp. 133-34, London, 1953. 

25. The date as given by Luis de Guzman is here accepted. See Maclagan, The 
Jesuits and the Great Mogul, p. 42. 

26. Macauliffe, The Sikh Religion, Vol. II, pp. 97, 105-9. 

27. Lowe, Muntakhab-ut-Tawarlkh, Vol. II, pp. 263-64. 

27a. Ibid., p. 308; Maclagan, The Jesuits and the Great Mogul, p. 62. 

27b. Freeman, History and Conquests of the Saracens, pp. 199-200. 

27c. Von Noer, Ha veil, Yusuf Ali and following them M. L. Roy Chowdhury; Sri 
Ram Sharma and A. L. Srivastava rather do not consider it a religion. 

28. Goldziher, Mohammed and Islam, p. 330. 

28a. Maclagan, The Jesuits and the Great Mogul, p. 34. The Jesuit sources are 
Peruschi, du Jarric and Informatione. 

28b. Maclagan, op. cit., p. 34; Monserrate, Commentarius (Memoirs of the Asiatic 
Society of Bengal, iii, 1914), fol. 42a. 

28c. R. D. Banerji, History of Orissa, Vol. II, p. 3. 

28d. See Akbar-nama, Eng. Ill, p. 431. ‘[Akbar].. .had ordered for the encourage¬ 
ment of the army that the pay of the soldiers should be increased by 100 per 
cent, in Bengal and 50 per cent, in Bihar. The Khwaja [Shah Mansur]... did 
not understand the situation and took upon himself the responsibility of issuing 
an order to the effect that in Bengal the increase should be 50 per cent 
and in Bihar, 20 per cent. Muzaffar was bound by the order and made out the 
accounts from the beginning of the year, and so instituted heavy demands’. 
As pointed out by Beveridge in Akbar-nama, III, footnote, p. 431, Mansur re¬ 
duced the pay and apparently Muzaffar made the reduction take effect from the 
beginning of the year and so demanded repayment of the excess. Therefore 
it comes to this that ‘Muzaffar decreased the pay of the troops in Bengal by 
50 per cent, and in Bihar by 30 per cent’. The pay was already increased and 
Muzaffar reduced it and demanded repayment. Shah Mansur was responsible 
for this measure, but in Bengal Muzaffar executed it. For tactlessness and 
severity, see J. N. Sarkar— History of Bengal, II, published by Dacca University, 
p. 196; Badduni, Eng. Trans., II, pp. 288-89. 

29. Cf. J.A.S.B., 1915, pp. 201-04; Tab. Akbari, Eng. Trans., II; pp. 545-7, 553-4; 
Badduni, Trans, by Lowe, II, pp. 298-303; Akbar-nama, Eng. Trans., Ill, pp. 
501-505. Mcuasir-ul-Umara, Vol. I, pp. 656-7. 

29a. Akbar-nama, Eng. Trans., III., pp. 541-2; Badduni, Eng. Trans, by Lowe, II, 
p. 303; Tab. Akbari, Eng. Trans., II, p. 551. 

30. History of Bengal, Vol. II, p. 209, has 10 April, 1592 which seems incorrect. 
The battle took place on 31 Farwardm or 6 Rajab, 1000 A.H., which yields 


173 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


18 April, 1592. The error has been probably due to calculation based on 
Beveridge’s conversion of 5 Jumada II, 1000, into 11 March, 1592 at p. 927, 
A.N., iii.; it should be 19 march. 

30a.‘Abdur Rahim, Mughal Relations with Central Asia, Islamic Culture, Janu¬ 
ary 1937, pp. 81-90; R.C. Verma, Foreign Policy of the Great Mughals, pp. 58-59. 

30b. Hoyland and Banerjee, Commentaries of Fr. Monserrate, p. 172. 

30c. Akbar-nama, Eng. Trans., Ill, p. 758. 

30d. For rivalry and jealousy over the Caliphate issue, Cf. Arnold, The Caliphate. 

30e. Akbar-nama, Eng. Trans., Ill, pp. 757-8. 

31. The letter is reproduced in J. C. Locke, The First Englishmen in India, Lon¬ 
don, 1930, pp. 31-32. It is the earliest communication between the Govern¬ 

ments of the two countries. 

31a. In Ellichpur district. 

32. 20° 37' N. and 76° 11' E. 

33. 20° 19' N. and 74° 15' E. 

34. Burhan-i-Madsir, Eng. Trans, in Indian Antiquary, November 1923, p. 345. 

35. The above date is given by Abu-’l-Fazl who himself was present at the gate 
of the fort. According to the inscription on the front wall of the Jami‘ Mas- 
jid in the fort, the date was 26 January, 1601. 

36. The siege of Aslrgarh has been a controversial point in Akbar’s history. 

The Jesuit version of the incident is at variance with that of the Muslim 

chronicles. After careful examination Payne has come to the definite con¬ 
clusion that the ‘Jesuit references to the Deccan campaigns are vague and inac¬ 
curate.’ The exhaustive researches of Payne have conclusively overthrown 
V. A. Smith’s charge against Abu-1-Fazl that he was guilty of deliberate 
perversion of the truth. According to Du Jarric, Muqarrab Khan, the com¬ 
mandant’s son, was killed by Akbar when he reported his father’s refusal 
to surrender the fort, while according to the Muslim chronicles he com¬ 
mitted suicide to avoid the critical situation. For a detailed discussion see 
Payne, Akbar and the Jesuits, pp. 248-258; Akbar-nama, Eng. Trans., Vol. Ill, 
pp. 1168-69; Indian Antiquary, 1918, pp. 180-83; and V. A. Smith, Akbar, 
pp. 272-86 and 297-300. V. A. Smith unjustly accused Abu-’l-Fazl without 
consulting the Akbar-nama; Abu-’l-Fazl, indeed, does not conceal the fact 
of Akbar’s treachery and his recourse to bribery. 

36a. Badauni, Lowe, II, p. 390. 

37. Sara! Bir is about 12 miles from Narwar while Antrl is about 6 miles away 
from it, Blochmann, Ain-i-Akbari, Vol. I, XLVIII. Abu-’l-Fazl’s tomb is at 
Antrl. 

38. On the Betwa in JhansI district. 

39. Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri, Rogers and Beveridge, Vol. I, pp. 34-35, and V. A. Smith, 
Akbar, pp. 331-32. The supplement to the Akbar-nama gives the date as March, 
1605. 

40. Mongolicae Legationis Commentarius by Father Anthony Monserrate, S. J., 
edited by Rev. H. Hosten, S. J., in Memoirs of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, 
iii, No. 9, Calcutta, 1914, p. 643. 

40ai. J. B. Chaudhuri, Muslim patronage to Sanskrit learning, pp. 86-88. 

41. Akbar saved the widow of Jai Mai, a cousin of Raja Bhagwan Das, from sati 
forced on her by her son whom he punished by imprisonment. 


174 


CHAPTER VI 


JAHANGIR 

Jahangir was born on Wednesday, 9 September, 1569, 1 at 
Fathpur Slkrl. A child of many prayers, 2 he was named Muham¬ 
mad Sultan Salim, though Akbar always, whether drunk or sober, 
addressed him as ‘Shaikhu Baba.’ His early education was en¬ 
trusted to a famous Muslim divine, Maulana Mir Kalan HarvI, and 
later to Shaikh Ahmad, the prince’s foster-father, and to Qutb-ud- 
dln Muhammad Khan Atga. In 1582, Akbar put him in charge of 
the famous ‘Abdur Rahim Khan-Khanan, son of Bairam Khan. 
Jahangir acquired proficiency in Persian and Turkish and became 
an excellent calligraphist. He also showed considerable interest in 
history, geography, botany, zoology and art. As was customary 
with the Tlmurid princes of those days, Prince Salim was placed 
in nominal charge of large detachments of the army in the import¬ 
ant Kabul campaign of 1581, when he was only twelve years of 
age. In the following year, he was placed in nominal charge of the 
departments of justice and public celebrations. 

At the age of fifteen, Salim was married to Man Bai, daughter 
of Raja Bhagawan Das of Amber. She died in 1604, to the utter 
grief of Salim, who recalls her “perfect intelligence” and “her excel¬ 
lences and goodness” with affection in his Memoirs. 3 

Salim’s relations with his father, who had always doted on 
him, were estranged when he came of age. His indecent eager¬ 
ness to grasp power, his jealousy of Abu-’l-Fazl and Akbar’s dislike 
of his excesses were primarily responsible for this. Reference has 
already been made in the preceding Chapter to Salim’s open revolt 
against his father, the murder of Abu-’l-Fazl at his instigation, 
court-conspiracy against him in favour of Khusrav’s succession, 
Salim’s reconciliation with Akbar and accession after the latter’s 
death. On his accession, Salim assumed the name Jahangir (Holder 
of the World) and the title of Nur-ud-dln (Light of the Faith). 

Jahangir ascended the throne in the fort of Agra on 3 Nov¬ 
ember, 1605, at the age of thirty-six. His triumph over Khusrav 
and his partisans was not marred by any acts of retaliation. 
Friends and political opponents were all alike recipients of favours. 
BIr Singh Bundela, the murderer of Abu-’l-Fazl, was raised to the 
dignity of a commander of 3000. The sons and relatives of his 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


patron saint, Shaikh Salim ChishtI, were given ranks and offices 
beyond their hopes and abilities, and this caused much heart-burn¬ 
ing among the older officers. “Jahangir”, says Asad Beg, “began to 
win the hearts of all the people and officers, and to rearrange the 
withered world.” 

One of Jahangir’s earliest orders, which he mentions with par¬ 
donable pride in his Memoirs, was the setting up of a chain of 
justice made of pure gold, thirty gaz long, with sixty bells upon it. 
One end was attached to a battlement of the fort of Agra and the 
other to a stone column on the bank of the river. Anyone who 
failed to secure justice might pull the end outside the fort in order 
to draw the attention of the Emperor so that the latter might re¬ 
dress his grievances. Later European writers speak of it as a 
piece of “silly make-believe” and doubt if it were ever used by a 
person in distress. • This criticism is not fair. The chain was a 
symbol of Jahangir’s determination to dispense justice fairly and 
firmly without fear or favour, and whatever his shortcomings may 
have been—and they were many—he remained true to his ideal of 
a justice-loving ruler. Asad Beg judiciously remarks: “For the 

consolation of the hearts of his people, he suspended the chain of 
justice and removed the rust of oppression from their hearts”. The 
chain of justice was an emblem of his accessibility and of his de¬ 
sire to redress wrongs. 

Another of his important acts was the issuing of the Twelve 
Ordinances for the better government of the country. It is best to 
let Jahangir speak for himself. 

“I also gave twelve orders to be observed as rules of conduct 
(dasturu-l-amal) in all my dominions— 

“1. Forbidding the levy of cesses under the names of tamghd 
and mlr bahrl (river tolls), and other burdens which the jdglrddrs 
of every province and district had imposed for their own profit. 

“2. On roads where thefts and robberies took place, which 
roads might be at a little distance from habitations, the jdglrddrs of 
the neighbourhood should build sard’is (public rest-houses), mos¬ 
ques, and dig wells, which might stimulate population, and people 
might settle down in those sard’is. If these should be near a Khdlisa 
estate (under direct State management), the administrator (muta- 
saddi) of that place should execute the work. 

“3. The bales of merchants should not be opened on the roads 
without informing them and obtaining their leave. 


176 


JAHANGIR 

“4. In my dominions if anyone, whether unbeliever or Musal- 
man, should die, his property and effects should be left for his 
heirs, and no one should interfere with them. If he should have 
no heir, they should appoint inspectors and separate guardians to 
guard the property, so that its value might be expended in lawful 
expenditure, such as the building of mosques and sard’is, the repair 
of broken bridges, and the digging of tanks and wells. 

“5. They should not make wine or rice-spirit ( darbahra ) or 
any kind of intoxicating drug, or sell them; although I myself drink 
wine, and from the age of 18 years up till now, when I am 38, have 
persisted in it. When I first took a liking to drinking I sometimes 
took as many as twenty cups of double-distilled spirit; when by de¬ 
grees it acquired a great influence over me I endeavoured to lessen 
the quantity, and in the period of seven years I have brought my¬ 
self from fifteen cups to five or six. My times for drinking were 
varied; sometimes when three or four sidereal hours of the day re¬ 
mained I would begin to drink, and sometimes at night and partly 
by day. This went on till I was 30 years old. After that I took 
to drinking always at night. Now I drink only to digest my food. 

“6. They should not take possession of any person’s house. 

“7. I forbade cutting off the nose or ears of any person, and 
I myself made a vow by the throne of God that I would not ble¬ 
mish anyone by this punishment. 

“8. I gave an order that the officials of the Crown lands and 
the jagirddrs should not forcibly take the ryots’ lands and cultivate 
them on their own account. 

“9. A government collector or a jagirdar should not without 
permission intermarry with the people of the pargcffld in which he 
might be. 

“10. They should found hospitals in the great cities, and ap¬ 
point physicians for the healing of the sick; whatever the expendi¬ 
ture might be, it should be given from the Khdlisa establishment. 

“11. In accordance with the regulations of my revered father, 
I ordered that each year from the 18th of Rabtfu-l-awwal which is my 
birthday, for a number of days corresponding to the years of my 
life, they should not slaughter animals (for food). Two days in 
each week were also forbidden, one of them Thursday, the day of 
my accession, and the other Sunday, the day of my father’s birth. 
(He held this day in great esteem on this account, and because it 
was dedicated to the sun and also because it was the day on which 

177 

M.E.—12 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Creation began. Therefore it was one of the days on which there 
was no killing in his dominions). 

“12. I gave a general order that the offices and jag its of my 
father’s servants should remain as they were. Later, the mansabs 
(ranks or offices) were increased according to each one’s circum¬ 
stances by not less than 20 per cent, to 300 or 400 per cent. The 
subsistence money of the ahadls was increased by 50 per cent., and 
I raised the pay of all domestics by 20 per cent. I increased the 
allowances of all the veiled ladies of my father’s harem from 20 
per cent, to 100 per cent, according to their condition and relation¬ 
ship. By one stroke of the pen I confirmed the subsistence lands 
of the holders of aimas (charity lands) within the dominions, who 
form the army of prayer, according to the deeds in their posses¬ 
sion. I gave an order to Mlran Sadr Jahan, who is one of the 
genuine Sayyids of India, and who for a long time held the high 
office of Sadr (ecclesiastical officer) under my father, that he 
should every day produce before me deserving people (worthy of 
charity). I released all criminals who had been confined and im¬ 
prisoned for a long time in the forts and prisons.” 4 

A careful analysis of these ordinances shows Jahangir’s genuine 
desire to ensure to his subjects freedom of person and security of 
life and property, and his solicitude for their material and moral 
welfare. The fact that these regulations did not in effect serve the 
purpose they were intended for, at least to the degree desired by 
Jahangir, does not detract from his honest and sincere desire to 
promote the happiness and prosperity of his subjects without dis¬ 
tinction of class or creed. The regulations are “remarkable for the 
humanity, justice and political sagacity which pervades them.” 

The reign which opened with such promise was marred by the 
rebellion of Jahangir’s son, Khusrav. The attempt to place Khus- 
rav on the throne failed; father and son were reconciled and Jahan¬ 
gir, either from policy or large-heartedness, restored his son to his 
former favour. Khusrav, whom Jerry describes as a “gentleman of 
a very lovely presence and fine courage” and of great personal 
charm and well-educated, was immature and inexperienced. The 
affection bestowed upon him by his father and grandfather and the 
people of the court and the camp had made him wilful and restive. 
The fact that he had nearly succeeded in displacing his father had 
roused his ambition and filled him with a grievance. Jahangir did 
all that was possible to set Khusrav’s mind at rest, but at the same 
time maintained a careful watch over his movements. Khusrav 
petulant and peevish, constantly brooding over the loss of a position 


178 


JAHANGIR 


for which he had neither the claim nor the talents, and encouraged 
by his companions who kept his resentment alive for their personal 
ends, escaped from Agra on 6 April, 1606. He made his way to 
the Punjab, raising troops on the way. The anxiety of Jahangir, 
when he heard of this, was genuine. “My distress arose”, he says, 
“from the thought that my son without any cause or reason had be¬ 
come my enemy, and that if I did not exert myself to capture him, 
dissatisfied and turbulent men would support him, or he would of 
his own accord go off to the Uzbeks or Kizilbashes (Persians) and 
thus dishonour would fall upon my throne.” 43 

Jahangir followed Khusrav in person. Khusrav had neither the 
capacity to organise a successful revolt nor moral and material sup¬ 
port of any influential party in the State. The people seem to have 
liked and loved him as a prince but had no desire to have him as 
their ruler. 

When the prince reached Lahore, the governor closed the gates 
against him and resisted all the attempts of the rabble Khusrav 
had collected. Hearing that imperial reinforcements were coming, 
Khusrav raised the siege and tried to cross the Chenab. His army, 
ill led, ill equipped and ill organized, was defeated at Bhairowal. 
The prince tried to make a dash for Kabul, but the whole country 
was up against him. He was captured and conducted to Lahore, 
where he was presented before Jahangir in fetters. 

Khusrav, trembling and weeping, wanted to fall on the feet 
of Jahangir, who sternly ordered him to stand in his place, and put 
him in confinement. He further directed a double row of stakes to 
be set up from the garden to the city and several hundred of the 
rebels were impaled thereon. Two leading rebels were punished 
more severely. Hasan Beg was sewn up in the fresh hide of an ox 
and ‘Abdur-Rahim in that of an ass. Others were let off with 
lighter punishments. 

Arjun, the fifth Guru of the Sikhs, an innocent helper of 
Khusrav, was unwittingly drawn into the whirlpool of this palace 
intrigue. Khusrav on his way to Lahore had stayed at Taran 
Taran and was well received by the Guru who felt compassion for 
him and gave him Rs. 5,000. The Guru was at first fined by the 
Government, but as he refused to pay the fine, he was sentenced 
to death. The death of the Guru sowed the seeds of hatred be¬ 
tween the Sikhs and the Muslims which the passage of time did not 
diminish. The execution of the Guru was not an act of religious 
persecution, but it was politically unwise and the Mughuls paid a 
heavy penalty for it. 5 


179 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Prince Khusrav was later ordered to be blinded, after an in¬ 
surrection was attempted in his favour. But Jahangir afterwards 
relented and, under the treatment of a Persian physician, Khusrav 
regained the sight of one eye. 

Akbar had succeeded during his lifetime in coercing or cajol¬ 
ing the proud Rajput rulers into acknowledging the supremacy of 
the Mughuls. Rajput soldiers and statesmen had distinguished 
themselves by their reckless and romantic courage on many battle¬ 
fields, and by their wisdom and knowledge of the country and its 
people in the council-chamber. But the Rajput State of Mewar 
held aloof and continued to wage an unequal fight against superior 
Mughul organization and resources. The failure of Mughul mili¬ 
tary operations against Mewar towards the end of Akbar’s reign 
was in a large measure due to the half-hearted way in which 
Jahangir as Prince Salim had conducted the operations; his rebellion 
later called a halt to any further advance. 

The first military expedition undertaken by Jahangir was 
against Rana Amar Singh of Mewar. An army of 20,000 horse was 
despatched under the command of Prince Parviz and Asaf Khan 
(Ja‘far Beg). A battle was fought at Dewar but its issue was 
doubtful as both sides claimed victory. The rebellion of Khusrav, 
which occurred during the course of this war, necessitated the with¬ 
drawal of the army. 

A second expedition was sent in 1608 under the command of 
Mahabat Khan, but in spite of some initial success the Mughuls 
made no effective headway against the Rajputs. In 1609 Mahabat 
Khan was replaced by ‘Abdullah Khan, “a valiant soldier, a rash 
commander and a cruel and rebellious sort of man.” The war 
dragged on till ‘Abdullah Khan was sent as governor of Gujarat and 
the command given to Raja Basu. Jahangir was thoroughly dis¬ 
satisfied with the halting way in which the operations were being 
conducted and appointed Khan A‘zam ‘Aziz Kuka and Prince Khur- 
ram to the command of the forces operating against Mewar. As was 
inevitable, Khurram and ‘Aziz Kuka quarrelled and the latter had 
to be recalled. The command then devolved on Prince Khurram 
who now carried on the operations in right earnest. Bit by bit, 
the country was devastated and the Rana’s supplies were cut off, 
while the net closed round him. The spirit of Rana Amar Singh 
was broken and he submitted in desperate straits. Jahangir ac¬ 
cepted the submission, graciously received Rana Amar Singh’s son, 
and restored Mewar, including Chitor, to the Rana but on the ex¬ 
press condition that Chitor was neither to be repaired nor re-forti- 


180 


JAHANGIR 


fied. Jahangir was rightly very jubilant over the successful con¬ 
clusion of the long campaign which had taxed the resources of the 
empire to the utmost. His treatment of the fallen foe was both 
magnanimous and wise. Now that the hereditary enemy of the 
Mughul family had rendered submission, Jahangir could afford to 
be generous. He complacently closes his account of the campaign 
with the following remarks: “My lofty mind was always desirous, 
as far as possible, not to destroy the old families.” 

Akbar had to put an end to his personal conduct of the Deccan 
campaign after the siege of Aslrgarh in 1601 on account of Salim’s 
rebellion. After Akbar’s return the campaigns were carried on in¬ 
differently and further advance and consolidation were rendered 
impossible by the senseless factiousness of Mughul officers. When 
Jahangir turned to the Deccan after his armies had been relieved 
from the Mewar campaign, he found himself faced with the famous 
Malik ‘Ambar, one of the ablest soldiers, administrators and states¬ 
men the Deccan has produced. 

Malik ‘Ambar was an Abyssinian by birth. He had served for 
a long time under the Nizam Shahl rulers and by sheer ability and 
force of character had risen to the highest position in the kingdom. 
After the fall of Ahmadnagar he retired to Khirki with a scion of 
the reigning family, Murtaza Nizam Shah. His loyalty to the 
Nizam Shahl dynasty was equalled by his intense dislike of the 
Mughuls, and he devoted his energy to the difficult task of rebuild¬ 
ing the shattered administration of the Nizam Shah! kingdom. He 
raised a strong and well-disciplined army and organized the reve¬ 
nue system on the model of Raja Todar Mai’s settlement in the 
north. He was the first Deccan statesman to conceive the possibility 
of raising a people’s army out of the Maratha peasantry and to the 
“traditional mode of warfare (of the Mughuls) he opened a new 
system of tactics which was remarkably successful during his life¬ 
time.” 

Malik ‘Ambar started by recovering some of the territories lost 
to the Mughuls in the time of Akbar. In 1608 Jahangir sent the 
Khan Khanan to the Deccan. The Khan having failed to compose 
the differences amongst the Mughul officers, Prince Parvlz was ap¬ 
pointed governor of Khandesh and Berar (1609). He had neither 
the talent nor the energy and inclination for strenuous military 
pursuits. Thomas Roe, who visited him there, has left a graphic 
account of the pomp and ceremony of the court of Parvlz. The 
Prince delighted in show but was slow in action. The campaign, 
which now assumed a defensive character, dragged on without much 


181 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


success from 1609 to 1615. The Khan Khanan, Khan Jahan Lodi, 
Khan Zaman, Man Singh and ‘Abdullah Khan were tried in turn. 
They failed and frittered away their energies in senseless recrimi¬ 
nation against each other to the advantage of the enemy. The Khan 
Khanan was again put in charge of the operations in 1612, and won 
some successes, but he was ultimately relieved of his command by 
Prince Khurram whose military fame, owing to the brilliant con¬ 
clusion of the Mewar expedition, was then at its height. 

Prince Khurram reached Burhanpur in 1617 and Jahangir 
moved to Mandu at the same time. The presence of the Mughul 
prince in the Deccan with a superbly equipped army filled the Dec- 
canis with dismay. The long and disastrous war had sapped the 
material resources of the Nizam Shah! kingdom, and when Khurram 
proposed peace on the payment of tribute and the restoration of 
the lost territory, the offer was readily accepted by ‘Ambar as well as 
the Bijapur ruler. The territory of Balaghat was ceded to the Mu- 
ghuls and the keys of the forts of Ahmadnagar and other strong¬ 
holds were delivered. Khurram appointed his own officers to the 
recovered territory and retired to Mandu amidst great rejoicings 
and festivities. But all that Khurram had succeeded in doing was 
to patch up a peace with the recalcitrant forces of the Deccan king¬ 
doms. “Nothing could”, writes Beni Prasad, “conceal the stern rea¬ 
lity that the expenditure of millions of rupees and thousands of lives 
had not advanced the Mughal frontier a single mile beyond the 
limits of 1605.” 5a 

How temporary the peace was became evident when by 1620 
the astute Malik ‘Ambar won back all that he had lost by the pre¬ 
vious treaty. In 1621, the relations between Bijapur and Ahmad¬ 
nagar became strained and both kingdoms sought the Mughul al¬ 
liance. The Mughuls closed in with the offer of Bijapur, and Malik 
‘Ambar proceeded to harass the territories of that State. His death 
in 1626 at the age of eighty (lunar year) sealed the fate of Ahmad¬ 
nagar and opened up the Deccan to Mughul designs. Mu‘tamid 
Khan, otherwise very hostile to Malik ‘Ambar, has testified to his 
great qualities in the following oft-quoted words: “This ‘Ambar 
was a slave, but an able man. In warfare, in command, in sound 
judgement, and in administration he had no rival or equal. He well 
understood the predatory ( Kazzdki ) warfare, which in the language 
of the Dakhin is called bargi-giri. He kept down the turbulent 
spirits of that country, and maintained his exalted position to the end 
of his life, and closed his career in honour. History records no other 
instance of an Abyssinian slave arriving at such eminence.” 6 


182 


JAHANGIR 


One of the important military achievements of the Mughul 
armies under Jahangir was the capture of Kangra. The fort of 
Kangra, perched on the crest of a lofty hill, had long defied all earlier 
attempts against it. Tradition declares that it had been attacked no 
less than fifty-four times. 

In 1615, Murtaza Khan and Suraj Mai were commissioned to 
capture the fort. Suraj Mai was accused of hampering the opera¬ 
tions and recalled. On the death of Murtaza Khan, Suraj Mai was 
again placed in command, but this time he broke into open revolt, 
allied himself with the hill chiefs, and plundered the imperial ter¬ 
ritory. Raja Bikramajit was next sent into the valley and he suc¬ 
ceeded in recovering the lost imperial prestige. The Raja of 
Chamba, who had helped Suraj Mai, submitted and Suraj Mai’s 
property was confiscated and given over to Jagat Singh. The siege 
of Kangra now began in right earnest, and, after a stout resistance 
of fourteen months, the garrison surrendered on 16 November, 1620. 
Jahangir visited the fort a year later with some Muslim divines, and 
to celebrate the occasion a mosque was built in the fortress. 63 

In 1611 Raja Kalyan, son of Raja Todar Mai, subdued Kharda 
in Orissa. The Raja submitted but rebelled in 1617, and his ter¬ 
ritory was finally annexed to the empire. In 1615, Khokhar was 
captured with its valuable diamond mines. In 1617, the Jam of 
Navanagar and Bahara, two Cutch chiefs, were subdued, and three 
years later Kishtwar, to the south of Kashmir, submitted to the 
Mughuls. 

The Afghans had not been fully reconciled to the loss of their 
political power in India at the hands of the Mughuls. Though a 
rising of the Afghans on an all-India scale was out of the question, 
ambitious Afghan officers were constantly chafing against the Mu¬ 
ghul yoke. In 1599, ‘Usmain Khan had rebelled In Bengal, and 
though Man Singh put down the rising, the Afghans continued to 
give trouble in the earlier years of Jahangir’s reign. Frequent 
changes of provincial governors, the distance of Bengal from the 
capital, and the fact that Jahangir’s attention was diverted to more 
serious and larger issues nearer home were responsible for the easy 
and indifferent manner in which the Afghan rebels were treated. 
But on 1 April, 1612, Jahangir was informed of the victory against 
the Afghans and the death of the leader ‘Usman, “the last of the 
brave Afghans.” 

Bengal, one of the most difficult provinces of India to conquer 
and consolidate, had taxed to the utmost the military power of Ak- 
bar because of its distance from Delhi and the power of the irrecon- 


183 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


cilable Afghan nobility, who, on being uprooted from the Gangetic 
plain, had found refuge there. In order to consolidate the newly 
conquered province Akbar had entered into a friendly alliance with 
Nara Narayan, the ruler of Cooch Behar, on the north-east of Bengal, 
in 1579. The domestic troubles of Cooch Behar led to its division 
into two States and weakened it considerably. Also the original 
friendly alliance soon became an instrument of imperial expansion 
in that region, and by 1596, Cooch Behar had become politically 
subject to the Mughuls. With the appointment of ‘Ala-ud-din Is¬ 
lam Khan as the governor of Bengal, a change came over the attitude 
of the Mughuls towards their erstwhile ally, the ruler of Cooch 
Behar, who was reduced to the position of a tributary vassal in 1609. 

Lakshml Narayan of Cooch Behar* having lost his independence, 
turned to avenge his humiliation by inciting the Mughul governor 
against his turbulent cousin, King Parikshit of Kamrup. The Mu¬ 
ghul governor was not slow in taking advantage of his invitation 
and in 1613, after a nine months’ campaign, he succeeded in con¬ 
quering Kamrfup. Direct contact of the Mughuls with the Ahom 
kings of Assam began after the fall of the kingdom of Kamrup. Im¬ 
perialistic designs, border disputes and the desire of the Mughuls 
for active trade relations with Assam, which the latter did not 
encourage, ultimately led to the invasion of Assam. 

At the end of the rainy season of 1615, a large Mughul force 
was sent under Sayyid Abu Bakr. The army moved to Kohata, 
the frontier town on the Bar Nadi, and halted there for reinforce¬ 
ments. The struggle opened with an attack on Kajali, the Ahom 
frontier post on the south-west, and the defeat of the Assamese. 
The Mughuls moved up to Saurdhara but, in spite of initial victo¬ 
ries, they could not retain the initiative. The Mughul army met 
with a serious defeat and the campaign closed ignominiously. The 
Ahom king retaliated by creating trouble in Kamrup and made the 
consolidation of the rule of the Mughuls difficult by inciting the 
local chiefs against them. 

One of the most fascinating figures of Mughul India, around 
whom fact and fiction have woven a web of romance, was the famous 
Nur Jahan, whom Jahangir married in 1611 and who survived him 
by eighteen years. Mirza Ghiyas Beg, the father of Nur Jahan, be¬ 
longed to a noble family of Tehran, and his father had served as 
governor of Yazd under Shah Tahmasp. The family fell on evil 
days after the death of Ghiyas’s father, and Ghiyas Beg migrated 
to India in search of employment and fortune. On his way to India, 
near Qandahar, under very distressing circumstances, his daughter, 


184 


JAHANGIR 


.Mihr-un-nisa, was born in 1577. Mlrza Ghiyas travelled to India and 
was presented by Malik Mas‘ud to Akbar at Fathpur Slkrl. Being a 
talented and experienced man, he soon rose in the estimation of the 
Emperor and was appointed dlwdn or superintendent of the house¬ 
hold. ‘‘He was considered’", says Mu‘tamid Khan, “exceedingly 
clever and skilful, both in writing and in transacting business. He 
had studied the old poets and had a nice appreciation of the mean¬ 
ing of words; . . . his generosity and beneficence to the poor was such 
that no one ever turned from his door disappointed. In taking 
bribes, however, he was very bold and daring.” 6b 

At the age of eighteen Mihr-un-nisa was married to ‘All Quli 
Beg Istajlu, better known as Sher Afgan (the tiger thrower), who 
had first served under Shah Ismafil II and had then come to India 
and taken service under Akbar. In the reign of Jahangir, ‘All Quli 
Beg received a suitable mansab , was styled Sher Afgan and given 
a jagir in Bengal. It was reported to Jahangir that Sher Afgan 
was insubordinate and disposed to rebellion. Qutb-ud-dln, who was 
sent to Bengal as governor in 1606, confirmed the reports of Sher 
Afgan’s disloyal intentions and was instructed to send him to the 
court. But Sher Afgan slew Qutb-ud-dln during an interview and 
was killed by the followers of Qutb-ud-dln. Mihr-un-nisa was sent 
to the capital and entrusted to the care of Jahangir’s mother. Ja¬ 
hangir has been accused of complicity in the murder of Sher Afgan, 
but there is no evidence in contemporary records to substantiate 
the charge. “A careful perusal of contemporary chronicles”, writes 
Dr. Ishwari Prasad, “leaves upon our minds the impression that the 
circumstances of Sher Afgan’s death are of a highly suspicious na¬ 
ture, although there is no conclusive evidence to prove that the 
emperor was guilty of the crime.” 7 Four years after the death of 
her former husband, Mihr-un-nisa was married to Jahangir. She 
received the title of Nur Mahall and later on of Nur Jahan, by which 
title she is most popularly known. The young widow, whose charm 
of personality was indescribable, and who had profound attachment 
to Jahangir, soon gained ascendancy at the court. Her success raised 
her ambitions, and as her husband’s mental and physical powers 
declined, her influence and her active participation in State affairs 
increased. Mu‘tamid Khan’s plain account is both authentic and 
reliable: “All her relations and connexions were raised to honour 
and wealth. No grant of land was conferred upon any woman 
except under her seal. In addition to giving her the titles that 
other kings bestow, the Emperor granted Nur Jahan the rights of 
sovereignty and government. Sometimes she would sit in the bal¬ 
cony of her palace, while the nobles would present themselves, and 


185 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


listen to her dictates. Coin was struck in her name, with this super¬ 
scription: ‘By order of the King Jahangir, gold has a hundred splen¬ 
dours added to it by receiving the impression of the name of Nur 
Jahan, the Queen Begam.’ On all farmans also receiving the Im¬ 
perial signature, the name of ‘Nur Jahan, the Queen Begam’, was 
jointly attached. At last, her authority reached such a pass that the 
king was such only in name. Repeatedly he gave out that he had 
bestowed the sovereignty on Nur Jahan Begam and would say, “I 
require nothing beyond a sir of wine and half a sir of meat.” It 
is impossible to describe the beauty and wisdom of the Queen. In 
any matter that was presented to her, if a difficulty arose, she im¬ 
mediately solved it. Whoever threw himself upon her protection 
was preserved from tyranny and oppression; and if ever she leaiffit 
that any orphan girl was destitute and friendless, she would bring 
about her marriage, and give her a wedding portion. It is probable 
that during her reign no less than 500 orphan girls were thus mar¬ 
ried and portioned.” 8 

One immediate effect of Nur Jahan’s influence was the rapid 
promotion her brother (Asaf Khan) and father (Ftimiad-ud-daula) re¬ 
ceived. But both of them amply deserved the confidence which the 
emperor reposed in them by reason of their outstanding personal 
abilities. Even without Nur Jahan to help them, they would have 
pushed their way up. But Nur Jahan accelerated their promotion 
and the Mughuls gained greatly by the ability and the devotion of 
these two highly gifted and talented officers. In 1612, Arjumand 
Banu Begam, better known as Mumtaz Mahall, daughter of Asaf 
Khan, was married to Prince Khurram. “This marriage”, says Beni 
Prasad, “symbolised the alliance of Nur Jahan, Ftimad-ud-daula, 
and Asaf Khan with the heir-apparent. For the next ten years this 
clique of four supremely capable persons practically ruled the em¬ 
pire. What has been called Nur Jahan’s sway was really the sway 
of these four personages.” 

Nur Jahan’s political career may be divided into two periods. 
From 1611 to 1622, she exercised on the whole a sobering and bene¬ 
ficent influence in politics. Her parents, who had seen the vicis¬ 
situdes of life, had a restraining influence on her. During this period, 
she worked in close collaboration with Prince Khurram whose cause 
she furthered. In 1620, Ladli Begam, Nur Jahan’s daughter by her 
former husband, was betrothed to prince Shahryar. This introduced 
an unbalancing factor in her relationship with Khurram. The latter 
had won a position for himself in the court and the camp; he no 
longer stood in need of the support of Nur Jahan, and in fact resented 
her interference. From 1622 Prince Khurram and Nur Jahan drifted 


186 


JAHANGIR 


apart. Jahangir fell more and more under the exclusive influence 
of Nur Jahan and the older nobility fretted and fumed at the power 
and influence of her family. Mahabat Khan had the courage to re¬ 
present to the emperor: “Has His Majesty read in any of the his¬ 
tories of ancient sovereigns that there was a king so subject to the 
will of his wife?” “But the influence of Nur Jahan,” the author of 
Intekhab-i-Jahangir Shah, regretfully declares, “had wrought so 
much upon his mind that if 200 men like Mahabat Khan had ad¬ 
vised him simultaneously to the same effect, their words would have 
made no permanent impression upon him.” Mahabat Khan favoured 
the cause of Prince Khurram who was feared as a rival by Nur 
Jahan and Prince Khusrav alike. Prince Khurram succeeded in 
getting the custody of this ill-fated prince, took him to the Deccan, 
and in January, 1622, Jahangir was informed from Burhanpur that 
Khusrav had died of colic. According to De Laet, Khusrav was 
murdered in his bedroom by one Raza, at the instance of Prince 
Khurram. Khusrav was hurriedly buried in Burhanpur, but later 
his mortal remains were transferred to Allahabad, and buried in a 
garden which came to be known as Khusrav-bagh. 

Jahangir’s health was rapidly deteriorating and Nur Jahan and 
Khurram both looked about for allies. Khurram refused to be di¬ 
verted to the Qandahar campaign; he wished to be near the scene 
of action in case of his father’s death. He seized some of the jagirs 
of Nur Jahan and Prince Shahryar and, when his father reprimanded 
him and warned him of the consequences of his impudence, he turned 
a deaf ear. “He persisted in his perverse course”, Jahangir writes, 
“and, preferring the way of disobedience to the path of duty, 
took a decided step on the road to perdition by marching upon 
Agra.” Khurram hoped to capture Agra before it could be put in 
a state of preparation, but in this he did not succeed. He reached 
Fathpur and plundered the country. The rebels marched towards 
Delhi but were defeated near Balochpur in 1623. The Prince re¬ 
tired to Malwa and thence to the Deccan. 

Failing to get help from Malik ‘Ambar, Khurram occupied Bi¬ 
har and captured Rohtas. But at Allahabad he found the imperial 
officers alert and went back to the Deccan. Finally, despairing of 
success, he wrote to his father begging forgiveness for his conduct. 
Jahangir accepted Khurram’s submission on condition of his sur¬ 
rendering the forts of Rohtas and Aslr and giving his two sons, 
Dara and Aurangzlb, as hostages. Khurram complied and proceed¬ 
ed to Nasik. The rebellion of Khurram had seriously affected the 
prestige of the empire, hampered the military operations for 


187 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


the recovery of Qandahar and wasted the resources of the State in 
men and money. 

The humiliation of Khurram gave secret joy to Nur Jahan, but 
the prominent part played by Mahabat Khan in liquidating Khur- 
ram’s rebellion and Mahabat’s alliance with Prince Parvlz was not 
to her liking. With the object of separating them, Mahabat Khan 
was ordered either to proceed to Bengal or to repair to the court. 
Various charges were brought against him. He was said to have 
realized large sums of money due to the State and also from the 
jagirs; he had not sent to the court the elephants obtained in Ben¬ 
gal; and, finally, he was guilty of contumacy in betrothing his 
daughter to the son of Khvaja Umar Naqshbandi, without the pre¬ 
vious permission of the emperor, who visited his wrath on the 
young man by openly disgracing him and seizing all that Mahabat 
Khan had given him. 

Mahabat Khan obeyed the royal summons and came north from 
the Deccan with 4000 brave Rajputs personally attached to him. 
Jahangir was then on his way to Kabul and was encamped on the 
banks of the Jhelum. Asaf Khan, who was with the emperor, cros¬ 
sed over to the other side with the troops, women and children, 
but before the emperor could go across, Mahabat Khan captured 
the bridge and stationed 2000 of his Rajputs there, while he him¬ 
self proceeded to the royal camp and placed the emperor practi¬ 
cally under arrest. When Nur Jahan heard of it, she collected her 
officers, bitterly reproached her brother and attempted to cross the 
river. The attempt failed though Nur Jahan later succeeded in 
joining her husband in captivity. Asaf Khan fled and shut himself 
in the fort of Attock and later on submitted to Mahabat. Nur Jahan 
was now left entirely to her own resources, but she did not lose her 
nerves and continued “to work against Mahabat both in private and 
in public.” Mahabat Khan throughout behaved with courtesy to¬ 
wards the emperor. He had no backing except of his Rajputs and 
there was no prince of the royal blood in his hands at the time to 
serve as a trump card. Jahangir on the return journey from Kabul 
succeeded in going over to Rohtas and Mahabat Khan, whose tem¬ 
porary chagrin had forced him into the disloyal course, submitted. 9 
He was ordered to release Asaf Khan and to proceed against Prince 
Khurram, who had retired into Sindh and was again on the war- 
path. Mahabat went and joined the Prince who later left for Nasik. 
Jahangir’s health was now completely shattered and while return¬ 
ing to Lahore he died on 7 November, 1627. 

National and personal considerations had induced Akbar 
to cultivate relations of friendship with the Portuguese. But he 


188 


JAHANGIR 


does not appear to have gained much advantage from the courtesy 
shown to the Jesuit Fathers or the concessions granted to the Portu¬ 
guese. At one time Akbar wrote to 'Abdullah Khan Uzbeg that 
he intended to drive the Portuguese into the sea. After the capture 
of Aslrgarh, Akbar’s enthusiasm for them appears to have cooled 
but relations were not estranged. Jahangir desired to maintain 
friendly relations with them and he sent an embassy to Goa in 
1607, and another in 1610. He was, however, thoroughly annoyed 
with the Portuguese when in 1613 they seized four imperial vessels 
near Surat. Failing to get satisfaction, Muqarrab Khan, the go¬ 
vernor of Surat was ordered to chastise the Portuguese. The Mughul 
commander wisely and skilfully managed to come to terms with 
Downton, the English sea-captain, so as to remedy his own naval 
impotence—the weakest point in the Mughul armour. This enabled 
the Mughul commander to inflict a naval defeat on the Portuguese. 
The privileges granted to the Portuguese were withdrawn, the 
churches at Agra and Lahore were forcibly closed and the Portu¬ 
guese living in the empire were arrested, wherever they could be 
found. The Jesuits, however, succeeded in restoring harmony in 
1615. 

Jahangir came into contact with the Jesuits during the lifetime 
of his father. He always treated the Jesuit Fathers with great cour¬ 
tesy and consideration and they held high hopes of his conversion 
to Christianity. But Jahangir was too good a Muslim and too proud 
a Mughul to accept baptism. It has been alleged that Jahangir’s 
conciliatory attitude was due to the hopes of Portuguese assistance 
in case his peaceful succession to the throne was contested. That 
he sided with the Fathers in their debates with the Muslim divines 
was due to the delight it gave him to see the mullahs, always rigid 
and self-opinionated, worsted in polemical disputes. The venera¬ 
tion he showed to the pictures of Jesus and Mary was due to his 
personal passion for works of art and to the average Muslim’s res¬ 
pect for Christ. He followed the policy of his father in contributing 
large sums for the erection of churches and showing general tole¬ 
ration for the Christian faith. At Agra about twenty baptisms took 
place in 1616, and he permitted the baptism of the sons of his bro¬ 
ther, Prince Daniyal, who after four years abjured the Christian 
faith. Father Xavier died in 1617, and Pinheiro in 1618. They 
were succeeded by Father R. Corsi and Joseph de Castro. The Jesuit 
mission now assumed the character and functions of an embassy 
aiming at outplaying the English and furthering the interests 
of the Portuguese at the court. But the Portuguese power 1 was al¬ 
ready on the decline. They had lost the opportunity of establishing 
their authority and influence in the east owing to their arrogant con- 


189 



THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


tempt for oriental people, while their pride and religious intole¬ 
rance made them feared and despised. 

Captain Hawkins arrived at Surat in August 1608, with a letter 
from James I, King of England, and a present of 25,000 gold pieces. 
In spite of the opposition of the Jesuit Fathers, Hawkins was well 
received by Jahangir. He could speak Turkish and Persian and was 
in a better position to win over the Mughul emperor. His mission, 
however, was a failure and he left in 1611. Paul Canning appeared 
at the court in 1612 and was followed in 1615 by William Edwards. 
Both of them met with the same difficulties which Hawkins had to 
face. The most important and the best known English plenipoten¬ 
tiary who came to Jahangir’s court was Sir Thomas Roe, “a gentle¬ 
man of good education, a polished courtier, and a trained diploma¬ 
tist.” Well-qualified for the task assigned to him, which was the 
negotiation of a treaty giving security to English trade, Roe remain¬ 
ed in India for three years but did not succeed in achieving his ob¬ 
ject. His account of his mission and that of his Chaplain, Terry, 
constitute a very important source of information about the man¬ 
ners of the court and of the social and political conditions of the 
time. 

Babur brought to India “an unfulfilled ambition” for conquer¬ 
ing the ancestral lands of the Tlmurids, and this ambition, coupled 
with the exigencies of the external defence, found expression in 
the Mughul policy towards the Persian empire and the Central Asian 
Princes. The danger of Uzbeg expansion towards India impelled 
the Mughuls to co-operate with the Persian empire, and frustrated 
the attempts of the Ottoman Sultans to draw them into a religious 
alliance of Sunni powers against the Shiahs of Persia. The Mu¬ 
ghuls, further, were estranged from the Uzbegs on account of the 
latter’s traditional hostility to the House of Timur and their con¬ 
stant propaganda against the Mughuls among the tribesmen of the 
north-west. 

The relations of the Persians and the Mughuls were usually 
friendly. There were, however, two grounds of conflict—Qandahar 
was coveted by both owing to its strategic and commercial import¬ 
ance, and the Shiah States of the Deccan, with whom the Mughuls 
were often at war, were on good terms with Persia. 

Jahangir’s reign opened with an unsuccessful attempt by the 
Persians to occupy Qandahar. That the attack was not wholly 
unexpected is evident from Jahangir’s remark: “It occurred to me 
that the death of His Majesty Akbar and the unreasonable outbreak 
of Khusrav might put an edge on their design, and that they might 


JAHANGiR 


attack Qandahar.” A semblance of friendship was maintained 
after this incident, as the Shah alleged that he had no knowledge 
of the affair and sent his officers to apologise for the indiscretion of 
his frontier governors. In April, 1611, the Shah sent a formal em¬ 
bassy and a letter which closed with the prayer “that the tree of 
hereditary friendship and assiduousness and the garden of intimacy 
and regard may acquire great splendour and greenness.” Jahangir 
sent an embassy in return in 1613, and several more embassies 
were exchanged. It is very difficult to determine the nature of 
the Shah’s diplomacy. He was very much interested in preserving 
the independence of his allies in the Deccan and he looked with 
jealousy at the rapid extension and growing prosperity of the Mug- 
hul empire. The Deccan rebellion of 1621 might have been con¬ 
nected with the Shah’s attack on Qandahar a few months later, 
but Dr. Beni Prasad thinks this unlikely. The Shah could only 
assist his Deccan allies by creating diversions on the north-west 
frontier and by occupying Qandahar. He had received ambassa¬ 
dors from Kish and Makran and hoped some day to extend the 
boundary of his empire to the right bank of the Indus. It is a 
significant fact that the Nizam Shahi envoy, Jaish Khlan, was with 
the Shah during the siege of Qandahar. Certain entries in Jahangir’s 
Memoirs leave no doubt that he was aware of these intrigues. 
Although Jahangir talks a great deal about strengthening the forti¬ 
fications of Qandahar, little could be done owing to the attitude of 
Prince Khurram, and Qandahar fell after a feeble resistance in 1622. 
It has been suggested by Dr. Beni Prasad that Prince Khurram was 
in secret intrigue with the Shah. Khurram knew that with the loss 
of Qandahar Jahangir would be busy in suppressing the wave of 
unrest in Afghanistan and amongst the frontier tribes, and that this 
would leave him a comparatively open field in the south. This, of 
course, may be a mere conjecture; it is supported only by the evi¬ 
dence of one letter which Prince Khurram sent to the Shiah to 
seek his assistance. The Shah, who was anxious to maintain good 
relations with the Mughuls after the Qandahar affair, openly declin¬ 
ed to help Khurram and advised him to make peace with his father. 

Jahangir was too indolent to follow an ambitious foreign policy 
in Central Asia. He did not maintain the usual relations with the 
rulers of Mawarun Nahr (Trans-Oxonia) probably on account of 
his desire to be more closely allied to Persia. 

In 1621, the mother of the king of Bukhara sent a letter to 
Nur Jahan who replied to it and sent some Indian rarities as pre¬ 
sents. Shortly afterwards, a formal embassy arrived. During 


191 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


these years relations with Persia had become strained and Jahangir 
could only look to the Uzbeg ruler for support, who in turn hoped 
to humble Persia with the help of the Mughuls. But Jahangir’s 
death made further progress of the alliance impossible. 

Akbar’s religious policy caused considerable stir amongst Mus¬ 
lims of all shades of opinion. Some saw in his new religion an at¬ 
tempt to deprive the Muslims of the dominant position they en¬ 
joyed in Indian society, while others thought it was a potential threat 
to the integrity of their creed and the solidarity of their millat (reli¬ 
gious community). In particular, the orthodox scholars (ulema) 
and the pietists saw in it a great danger to their religion. The 
ulema, consequently, protested against Akbar’s regulations, the most 
important among them being Mulla Yazdi, a Shiah divine, and 
Shaikh Ahmad of Sirhind, popularly known as the Mujaddid Alf-i- 
Sani. At the time of Jahangir’s accession Shaikh Farid, otherwise 
known as Nawab Murtaza Khan, played a very important part in 
making him promise to uphold the shar’iyat. In a letter written 
by the Shaikh of Sirhind to Nawab Murtaza Khan, the Shaikh con¬ 
gratulated him on the death of one (Akbar) who was antagonistic 
to Islam and the accession to the throne of the emperor of Islam 
(Jahangir). In the same letter he exhorted the Musalmans to as¬ 
sist the new emperor and to help him in making the laws of the 
shar’iyat current in the country and in strengthening Islam. This 
help was to be rendered by all means available, by words and by 
actions. Similarly in another letter to the Khan-i-A‘zam, the 
Shaikh, in a pathetic manner, draws his attention to the evil and un- 
Islamic practices introduced in Islam and expresses the fear that 
though at present the emperor is not hostile to Islam yet he may 
revert to the policy of his forefathers. It was in an atmosphere 
charged with such hopes and fears that Jahangir ascended the throne. 
In addition to the fear of internal disintegration, the infiltration of 
a large number of Shiahs had alarmed the pietists. During this 
period, therefore, not only was an attempt made by the orthodox to 
re-establish the laws of shar’iyat but also to fight the Shiah heresy. 

Jahangir, in spite of the promises that he had made, remained 
tolerant in religious matters like his father. In his Memoirs he 
says that an “audacious speculator” suggested to him the reimpo¬ 
sition of the jizya. Jahangir repudiated this suggestion and punish¬ 
ed the speculator. In the subsidiary regulations issued some time 
after his accession, he ordered his officials not to enforce Islam on 
anyone. Like his father; he was fond of religious discourses, though 
he did not give as much time to them as Akbar had done. Roe and 
Terry testify to the fact that he accorded equal welcome to Chris- 


192 


JAHANGIR 


tians, Jews and Muslims. Hindu festivals like RakhI, Dasahra etc. 
were celebrated as in old days. The tula dan (weighing of the 
emperor against gold) was also observed. 

Certain cases are cited as evidence of Jahangir’s orthodoxy and 
fanaticism born of the fear and suspicion of the times. For exam¬ 
ple, it is asserted that Jahangir allowed daily allowances to new 
converts. When he learnt that in certain localities Muslim girls 
were converted to Hinduism and married to Hindus, he put a stop 
to it and punished the guilty. From this it is inferred that Jahangir 
attempted to stand forth as a protector of the true faith. In this 
he was only following an old custom, for Muslim law does not per¬ 
mit the marriage of Muslim girls to non-Muslims. The protection 
of the Muslim minority obviously was a source of strength and vita¬ 
lity to the Mughuls. That he declared the forcible conversion of 
Hindus to be illegal 93 shows that he stood forth equally as their de¬ 
fender. 

New temples and Christian churches were freely built during 
his time, though now and then, during a campaign, religious places 
suffered at the hands of zealous or fanatical soldiers, Hindu pil¬ 
grims freely visited their shrines. Coryat puts the number of per¬ 
sons visiting Hardwar at 4,00,000 while Roe puts it at 5,00,000. 
Jahangir' was particularly tolerant towards the Christians. 

Jahangir’s attitude towards the Sikhs has been a matter of con¬ 
troversy. A careful perusal of contemporary evidence shows that 
the Sikh religious leaders suffered because they interfered with 
politics, which was a dangerous game and might have constituted a 
menace to the State unless suppressed in time. There is no evi¬ 
dence to show that he persecuted the Sikhs as such. The following 
remark of Dr. Beni Prasad deserves attention: “The melancholy 
transaction (punishment of Guru Arjun) has been represented by 
Sikh tradition as the first of the long series of religious persecutions 
which the Khalsa suffered from the Mughal emperors. In reality, 
it is nothing of the kind. Without minimizing the gravity of Jahan¬ 
gir’s mistake, it is only fair to recognize that the whole affair amounts 
to a single execution due primarily to political reasons. No other 
Sikhs were molested. No interdict was laid on the Sikh faith. 
Guru Arjun himself would have ended his days in peace if he had 
not espoused the cause of a rebel.” 9b 

It should be borne in mind that it was the explicit policy of 
Akbar to compose religious differences and Jahangir followed this 
policy consistently 90 without interfering with the Muslim creed. His 
attitude towards the Sikhs was part of the same policy. He con- 

193 

M.E.—13 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


fined Shaikh Ahmad of Sirhind in the Gwalior prison, first, because 
the Shaikh was accused of considering himself equal to the Pious 
Caliphs and, secondly, because he refused to perform the sijda 
(prostration) to the Emperor. Jahangir later on realized his mis¬ 
take and released the Shaikh and made amends for the punish¬ 
ment meted out to him. Similar treatment was meted out to 
Shaikh Ibrahim Baba. In both cases the punishments were due to 
the jealousy and the fear excited by these Muslim divines 
amongst the less important members of their profession and the in¬ 
fluence which they wielded on their devoted Afghan and other 
Muslim disciples. Dr. Beni Prasad is wrong in asserting that Ahmad 
Sirhindi repented or promised loyalty. 10 It was Jahangir who 
realized his mistake. 

Jahangir is accused of having persecuted the Jains of Gujarat. 
This was mainly due to the fact that their leader, Man Singh, had 
sided with Khusrav and had prophesied the fall of the Mughul 
empire. Moreover, the Jains were accused of having put up 
temples and other buildings which were reported to have become 
centres of disturbances. Their religious leaders were also accused 
of immoral practices. 

When Jahangir visited Ajmer in the eighth year of his reign, 
the temple of Bhagwat was destroyed. Dr. Beni Prasad says that 
this was done from disgust, and also out of deference to Muslim 
sentiment. The Mughul emperors were never superstitious and 
had a high aesthetic sense. But whenever any practice was cal¬ 
culated to play on the simplicity or credulity of the poor folk, they 
put a stop to it. 

The admission of Hindus to the higher public service con¬ 
tinued Of forty-seven Mansabdars above the rank of 3,000, six 
were Hindus (i.e. 12 per cent). Governors and Dlwans were still 
appointed from amongst the Hindus. Jahangir shared the zeal of 
his father for the reformation of Indian society. The public sale 
of intoxicants like bhang and wine, and the castration of children in 
Bengal and Assam were prohibited. The total suppression of 
gambling was ordered and Sati was prohibited. 

There is considerable difference of opinion about Jahangir’s 
personal religion. Some regarded him as atheist and others, as 
eclectic. Some regarded him as a Christian, though superstitious, 
and some, a member of the Dm-i-IlaM. He could not have been 
all these things together, or, as Professor Sharma remarks, “even 
by turns.” Jahangir believed in Islam, but not in mere dogma. 
He was fond of Suflstic and Vedantic philosophy. The Jesuit and 


194 


JAHANGIR 


Christian accounts are confused, being saturated with narrow-mind¬ 
edness and fanaticism. It was impossible for the European visitors 
of the time, who were accustomed to persecution at home, to com¬ 
prehend the spirit and content of Mughul toleration. Contem¬ 
porary religious Muslim literature gives Jahangir a good testimony. 
Blochmann’s verdict that superstition was his real religion is belied 
by the whole attitude of Jahangir in life. 11 

Jahangir, in spite of his shortcomings, strove honestly to main¬ 
tain the integrity of his empire and to follow the principles of 
toleration and justice enunciated by his father. His love of ease 
and indulgence in drink are well known. Capricious, wilful and 
occasionally cruel and superstitious, he had redeeming virtues. 
These were a high sense of justice, loyalty and affection for his 
family and friends, generosity, recognition of merit, and energy and 
firmness when the occasion demanded it; and they made 
up for his defects of character and early training. His hold on 
the government, except in the last years of his life when his health 
broke down, never relaxed. Neither Nur Jahan nor the other 
cliques really dominated over him so far as the principles of 
foreign and domestic policy were concerned. 12 In a fit of wrath, he 
was sometimes guilty of acts of cruelty, but as a rule he was 
affable, humane and just. According to Jerry, his character ap¬ 
peared “to be composed of extremes; for sometimes he was barba¬ 
rously cruel, and at other times, he would seem to be exceedingly 
pure and gentle”. Under his enlightened patronage there was an 
all round progress in industry and commerce, while painting, lite¬ 
rature and architecture also flourished during his reign. “The poli¬ 
tical side of Jahangir’s history is interesting enough, but its best 
virtue lies in its artistic development.” 

1. For slight divergence of views on the date, cf. Beni Prasad, History of Ja¬ 
hangir, Second Edition, 1930, p. I, f.n. 1. 

The conversion of dates in Hijra Era to those of Christian Era is done 
in two ways, with a difference of about ten days. The dates adopted here 
are those given in CHI. The author of this Chapter, like Beni Prasad, follow¬ 
ed the other system, but it has been changed (Editor). 

2. For details, cf. Prasad, op. cit. pp. 3-8. 

3. For a detailed account of this marriage and the other marriages of Jahangir, 
cf. ibid, pp. 29 ff. 

4. Tuzuk-i-Jahdnglri, Tr. by A. Rogers, ed. by H. Beveridge, 2nd Ed. pp. 7-10. 

4a. HIED, VI, p. 273. 

5. This version is not probably the true one, but is somewhat coloured by the 
legend that later grew up in the Sikh community, and has been narrated at 
length in the Transformation of Sikhism (pp. 31-34) by G. C. Narang. Beni 
Prasad’s account seems to be more reasonable. He says: “The Emperor was 
at first disposed to take a lenient view of the affair, but he fell at last into 
the snares of Arjun’s enemies. The Guru was sentenced to death and to 
confiscation of his property including his hermitage.” (op. cit. p. 149). (For 
a more detailed and somewhat different account, cf. Chapter XI—Editor). 


195 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


5a. Op. cit. p. 282. 

6. The statements in this chapter attributed to Mu'tamid Khan are to be found 
in his work Iqbal-ndma (translated in HIED, VI, pp. 393-498). For the passage 
quoted, see pp. 428-9. 

6a. Jahangir ‘'formally desecrated the temple by sacrificing a cow/' CHI. IV, 
p. 169. The incident is described by Beni Prasad with full reference to 
authorities (op. cit. p. 313). Jahangir himself gloats over it in his memoir, 
Rogers and Beveridge, II, p. 223 (Editor). 

6b. HIED, VI, p. 404. 

7. The account given above is very sketchy. A romantic legend grew up round 
this affair which has been fairly summed up by Beni Prasad (op. cit. p. 176). 
He has discarded the legend and reconstructed the true history which agrees 
with the view given here, but adds more details (pp. 174-80). The suspicion 
hinted by Ishwari Prasad, in the passage quoted, is based, among others on 
the fact that Mihr-un-nisa, after the tragic death of her husband, was taken 
to the harem of Jahangir, and not sent to live with her father who was in 
the capital, and held high office. For a full discussion of the historical value 
of the romantic story, cf. pp. 180-82 of Beni Prasad’s book (Editor). 

8. Cf. HIED, VI, pp. 399, 405; Beni Prasad, op. cit. p. 183-96, 

9., The account is materially different from that given by Beni Prasad, op. cit., 
pp. 387-410 (Editor). 

9a. No evidence is cited in support of it, and it is belied by the author’s own 
statement, a few lines above, that Jahangir ‘‘allowed daily allowances to new 
converts.” The author further states, a few lines above, that the emperor 
not only stopped but punished the conversion of the Muslim girls to Hinduism 
and their marriage with the Hindus. It is excused by the author on the 
ground that in this he was merely following the Muslim custom. But did 
the emperor show the same attitude to the conversion of Hindu girls to 
Islam and their marriage with the Muslims which equally violated the Hindu 
custom? (Editor). 

9b. Beni Prasad, op. cit., pp. 149-151. 

9c. It is difficult to accept this statement. Reference may be made to foot-notes 
6a and 9a above (Editor) . 

10. Op. cit., p. 433, f.n. 4. 

11. In the chapter, as originally written, some views were attributed to Beni 
Prasad which might wound the religious susceptibilities of the Muslim com¬ 
munity. I have omitted it, because the author did not cite any authority, and 
the words he probably had in view do not, in my opinion, bear the interpre¬ 
tation he put upon them. The following passage contains Beni Prasad’s view 
about the personal religion of Jahangir (Editor). 

“The latitudinarianism revealed by the Jesuit records is fully borne out 
by Jahangir’s diary. He often appeals to God, but never mentions the name 
of the Prophet. If he observed the Shab-i-barat or Id, he celebrated the 
Hindu festivals, Diwali, Dasahra, Rakshabandhan and Shivaratri with the re¬ 
gularity, eagerness, and splendour of a Hindu court. He rejoiced with all his 
heart at the Persian vernal festival of Nauroz which the orthodox Aurangzeb 
promptly abolished. He dates his diary generally according to the Persian 
solar era. He violated orthodox tradition in ordering a translation of the 
Quran. He scandalized all good Muslims by presenting hogs to Christians. 
His heresy gave rise to the rumour that he was an atheist at heart.” (op. 
cit. pp. 41-2). 

12. This is contradicted by the statement of Mu‘tamid Khan which the author 
quotes on pp. 185-6 and regards as both authentic and reliable (Editor). 


196 


CHAPTER VII 


SHAH JAHAN 

Shah Jahan was born on Thursday, 15 January, 1592, at Lahore. 
He was brought up by Akbar’s childless wife Ruqaiah Begam. In¬ 
telligent, quick-witted and gifted with an excellent memory, he 
nevertheless showed very early his predilection for the profession 
of arms rather than the pursuit of knowledge. In 1606 when he 
was fourteen years of age, he was left in charge of the capital 
with a Council of Regency while his father went to the Punjab in 
pursuit of his rebellious son, Khusrav. During the lifetime of his 
father, he won his laurels as a successful organiser of victories in 
the Me war, Deccan and Kangra campaigns. Up to 1622 he work¬ 
ed in close collaboration with Nur Jahan, but then he fell out of 
favour, broke into rebellion and, though reconciled to his father, 
was sent to the Deccan where he received the news of his father’s 
death. 

Nur Jahan intended to place her favourite, Shahryar, on the 
throne either out of sheer spite for Shah Jahan, for whom she had 
developed an intense dislike, or because Shahryar promised to be a 
pliant tool who would allow her to keep the direction of affairs in 
her hands. Asaf Khan would not agree to this; he was equally in¬ 
terested in his own son-in-law, Shah Jahan, who was certainly the 
ablest, the most experienced and the most popular of all the sons 
and grandsons of Jahangir. 

Since Shahryar had proceeded to Lahore at the time of Jahan¬ 
gir’s death, Asaf Khan, as a stop-gap arrangement, proclaimed 
Dawar Bakhsh, son of Khusrav, as emperor, and the khutba was 
read in Dawar’s name near Bhimbar. Shahryar assumed the royal 
title at Lahore; he seized upon the royal treasures which were 
there and secured troops and supporters by lavish expenditure of 
seventy lakhs of rupees within one week. When Dawar Bakhsh 
arrived near Lahore, he was met by the army of Shahryar. 
Shahryar was defeated; he fled into the city and was captured and 
blinded. Tahmurs and Hoshang, sons of Prince Daniyal, were also 
captured and put in confinement to preclude the possibility of a 
rising in their favour. Asaf Khan in the meantime had sent 
Banarsi, a trusted runner, to Shah Jahan and summoned him to 
the capital. When Shah Jahan was informed of the defeat of 
Shahryar, he wrote to Asaf Khan to “send out of the world” his 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


rivals Dawar Bakhsh, Shahryar, Gurshasp, Tahmurs and Hoshang. 
The order was faithfully carried out. 1 

Shah Jahan ascended the throne on 24 February, 1628, and 
assumed the title of Abu-’l Muzaffar Shahbuddin Muhammad 
Sahib-i Kiran-i Sani. The coronation was celebrated by the usual 
round of lavish festivities and distribution of offices, titles and 
stipends. The reign which opened with the execution of Shah 
Jahan’s brothers and nephews was destined to close in circum¬ 
stances, similarly tragic, finally ending in the death and disgrace of 
Shah Jahan’s sons and grandsons. Muhammad Salih Kambu, the 
author of ‘ Amal-i-Salih, justifies the execution of the princes in the 
following callous and unemotional manner: “It is entirely lawful 
for the great sovereigns to rid this mortal world of the existence 
of their brothers and other relations, whose total annihilation is 
conducive to the common good. . . ., and leaders, spiritual and tem¬ 
poral, justify the total eradication of rival claimants to the fortu¬ 
nate throne on grounds of expediency and the common welfare.’’ 

In the first year of his reign Shah Jahan had to face the rebel¬ 
lion of Jujhar Singh, son of Raja Bir Singh Deo, the Bundela chief 
who had risen to prominence in the reign of Jahangir and on whom 
that emperor had showered favours for the murder of Abu-’l-Fazl. 
The wealth and position which Bir Singh Deo had secured “without 
labour and without trouble” and the fact that he had his jagir in 
his own country, had made him restless and ambitious. His son 
Jujhar visited Shah Jahan at Agra and was confirmed in the rank 
of 4000 zat and 4000 sawar. But suspecting that an inquiry would be 
made into the unauthorised gains of his father, Jujhar secretly left 
Agra, and proceeding to Orcha, his stronghold, broke into open re¬ 
bellion. Mahabat Khan was sent against him and Jujhar, realising 
the futility of fighting against the imperial forces, submitted. He 
was pardoned and sent off on service to the Deccan. Jujhar, how¬ 
ever, had no intention of serving as a vassal of the Mughuls; he 
soon after attacked Bhlm Narain of Garha and compelled him. to 
surrender the fort of Chauragarh. Later on he put Bhim Narain 
to death and took possession of the fort with all the valuables it 
contained. On the complaint of Bhlm Narain’s son, the emperor 
sent Jujhar an order to surrender to the imperial officer the terri¬ 
tory he had acquired along with ten lakhs of rupees out of the 
spoils secured by him. Before this order could reach him, Jujhar 
had removed his family from Orcha to the fort of Dhamoni and 
had also directed his son, Bikramajit, to escape with his troops 
from the Balaghat, where he had gone in service with the Mughul 
army. 


198 


SHAH JAHAN 


Prince Aurangzlb was put in nominal command of the army of 
20,000 troops which was commissioned to reduce the rebels. 
Jujhar fled from Dhamoni to Chauragarh after blowing up the build¬ 
ings round the fort and garrisoning it with a small force of his 
followers. He was closely pursued by the Mughul army and, 
losing all hope of successfully holding his ground against the im¬ 
perial forces, he put most of the women to death and fled into the 
jungle, where he and his son were killed by the Gonds. A close 
search was made after Jujhar’s death for the treasures which he 
had buried in the forest or thrown into the wells; and in a very 
short time two million eight hundred thousand rupees of treasure 
were unearthed. “In all about ten million rupees were credited 
to the royal exchequer.” Besides these gains the chief zamindar 
of Gondwana consented to pay five lakhs of rupees in cash and 
goods to the imperial commanders. The fort of Jhansi was cap¬ 
tured soon after. 

Though the rebellion of Jujhar, the Bundela chief, was sup¬ 
pressed, in 1639 Champat Rai of Mahoba began to make incursions 
into the Mughul territory and this made the road to the Deccan 
very insecure. ‘Abdullah Khan was sent against him. Champat 
Rai defied the Mughul forces for a long time. ‘Abdullah Khan was 
replaced by Bahadur Khan, and finally, through the intercession of 
Pahar Singh, son of Bir Singh Deo, Champat Rai offered his sub¬ 
mission. 

Raja Basu of Mau Nurpur had served Jahangir faithfully and 
had received favours at his hands. His successor, Jagat Singh, had 
been similarly honoured and had been confirmed in his dignities 
by Shah Jahan. Jagat Singh served with distinction in Bangash 
and Kabul, but his son, Rajrup, began to show a refractory atti¬ 
tude. Jagat Singh, at his own request, was permitted to return 
home to bring his son back to the path of fealty. But Jagat Singh 
all along had been in sympathy with his son, and once back in the 
security of his own tribe, Jagat preferred rebellion to loyalty. A 
strong force was sent against him in 1641. He offered terms which 
were refused, and one of his forts being captured and another be¬ 
sieged, he was forced to submit. Dr. Banarsi Prasad Saksena has 
instituted a comparison between the rising of Bir Singh Bundela 
and Jagat Singh; this is neither fair to Jagat Singh nor true to 
facts. Jagat Singh deserved well of the Mughuls because of his 
past services, and important officers interceded with the emperor 
on his behalf. Bir Singh was an upstart who had attained to his 
rank as a reward for the murder of Abu-T-Fazl, and public opinion 
was generally against him. It was not mere cupidity but political 


199 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


and military considerations which impelled Shah Jahan to extirpate 
the house of Bir Singh, though the treatment meted out to the sur¬ 
vivors cannot be justified. 2 

The rebellion of Khan Jahan Lodi gave much more trouble to 
Shah Jahan than the Bundela rising. Khan Jahan had been sent to 
replace Mahabat Khan during the latter’s absence in the north to¬ 
wards the close of Jahangir’s reign. When Khan Jahian took over 
charge of the Deccan, he placated the Nizam Shah by surrendering 
the Balaghat to him for three hundred thousand rupees. On 
Jahangir’s death he wavered between Nur Jahan and Shah Jahan, 
and by his discourtesy to the messenger sent by Shah Jahan to 
secure his adherence, he gave the new emperor serious cause for 
resentment. Khan Jahan next moved from Burhanpur to Mandu 
and captured that fort; but he was deserted by his Rajput officers 
and made his submission to the emperor, who graciously pardoned 
him, confirmed him in the governorship of Berar and Khandesh, 
and commissioned him to proceed to the Deccan to recover the lost 
territories. But Khan Jahan prevaricated and was removed to 
Malwa. When later on Khan Jahan appeared at the court and re¬ 
ceived a very cold reception, he felt slighted and was also alarm¬ 
ed about his safety. Fearing that he would be arrested and dis¬ 
graced, and conscious of his own guilty conduct in the Deccan, he 
secretly escaped from Agra. His party was overtaken by the im¬ 
perial forces near Dholpur. The Afghans put up a stout fight, but 
they were outnumbered, lost courage, and fled from the field. Khan 
Jahan abandoned his entire camp and treasure, and crossing the 
Chambal with his two sons and four Afghan companions, he went 
to Gondwana and then, passing through Berar, entered the king¬ 
dom of Ahmadnagar. On reaching Daulatabad, he was well re¬ 
ceived by Murtaza II (Nizam Shah) who assigned him the pargana 
of Bir and advanced him money for his expenses. The presence of 
Khan Jahan in the Deccan gave new hope to Murtaza II and raised 
the fears of the Mughuls. Shah Jahian was fully alive to the danger, 
and, to avoid jealous conflicts between the imperial officers, he 
crossed the Narmada and decided to supervise the operations per¬ 
sonally. During the campaign that followed, the Afghans suffered 
heavily, though Mughul losses were equally great. Khan Jahan 
was driven from Bir. He fell back on Shivgaon and then pushed on 
to Daulatabad. The imperial armies ravaged the Nizam Khfan’s ter- 
ritory. Famine stalked the land and Murtaza, disillusioned about 
Khan Jahan, gave him the cold shoulder. Khan Jahian left Daula¬ 
tabad with the intention of proceeding to the Punjab, but the im¬ 
perial officers were vigilant and pursued him ruthlessly till he was 


200 


SHAH JAHAN 


driven out of Malwa, and after very heavy losses fled towards the 
north-east and, after a hard fight, was compelled to fly to Kalin- 
jar. He reached the river Sindh in utter misery, but, like a brave 
Afghan, he preferred death on the battlefield to rotting in prison 
or dangling from a scaffold. He turned back upon his pursuers 
and was overpowered and cut to pieces. His head was sent by 
'Abdullah Khan to the court. For sixteen months Khan Jahan had 
held out to save his honour and his dignity. "His miscalculated 
action”, says Dr. Saksena, "not only brought ruin on himself, but 
accelerated the downfall of the declining, almost moribund, king¬ 
dom of Ahmadnagar.” 

The Portuguese had secured the grant of the site of Hooghly 
in 1537 2a and soon raised a flourishing and well-defended port at the 
entrance of the commercial highway of Bengal. Helped by the dis¬ 
turbed political condition of Bengal and the weakness and cupidity 
of the Mughul governors, they "became a rich and affluent com¬ 
munity, enjoying almost independent jurisdiction.” They secured 
the seas in league with the pirates of Chittagong and plundered 
and devastated the neighbouring towns; and "often penetrating 
forty or fifty leagues up the country, they carried away the entire 
population of villages on market days and on occasions when the 
inhabitants were assembled for celebration of marriages or some 
festival. With piracy and brigandage they combined religious 
fanaticism of the worst sort, and came to be universally feared and 
despised.” 

The Portuguese had been left alone by Jahangir. Shah Jahan, 
however, started a ruthless campaign against them. Not only had 
they not helped him when he had gone to Bengal as a rebel prince; 
they had cooperated with Parviz, and Manvel Tavers had played 
him false by seizing his boats and carrying away some of his 
female slaves. As Shah Jahan’s attention was occupied elsewhere, 
the retribution was delayed till 1632. 

The struggle with the Portuguese was precipitated by two 
events. The first was the plunder of a village near Dacca in East 
Bengal (now called East Pakistan or Bangla Desh) and assault on 
a Mughul lady by a Portuguese from the Magh territory in Eastern 
Bengal. The second was the complaint made to Qasim Khan, the 
Governor of Dacca, by a Portuguese merchant at Satgaon named 
Afonso. The latter "who had made a claim to certain land in 
Hooghly, applied to Qasim Khan in 1632 and held out the promise 
of a rich booty if the settlement were taken, which would be an 
easy task.” Qasim Khan now formally proposed that the Portu- 


201 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


guese should be suppressed and Shah Jahan sanctioned an expedi¬ 
tion against them. Qasim Khan planned the campaign carefully and 
with 600 boats, 1400 horsemen, 90 elephants and a large force of in¬ 
fantry blocked the passage to Hooghly, both by land and sea. An 
attempt to bring about an amicable settlement through the Fathers 
of the Society of Jesus failed. The Portuguese were unwilling to 
carry out the demands of the Mughul commander and decided to 
fight. The Mughuls failed to capture the fort by assault and the 
Portuguese held out till the arrival of Afonso, the Portuguese; but 
with the coming of Mughul reinforcements, further resistance be¬ 
came impossible and the Portuguese left Hooghly in a body by boats 
and the place was occupied by the Mughul forces. The Portuguese 
suffered heavy losses. Ten thousand persons lost their lives and 
14,400 Indians from Hooghly and the neighbouring parganas were 
set free. Severe punishment was meted out to those taken as prison¬ 
ers; some were executed, others were imprisoned, and the rest 
were given the choice between death and conversion. Shah Jahan’s 
treatment was severe, but the Portuguese richly deserved their fate. 
Shah Jahan has been accused of religious fanaticism, but he had 
cogent political, military, humanitarian and economic reasons for 
the policy he followed in extirpating the Portuguese pirates in 
Bengal. The innocent inhabitants of Bengal had suffered no end of 
miseries at their hands. Bernier gives a bad certificate both to 
Portuguese priests and laymen. 3 

Among the minor annexations of this period, “Little Tibet” may 
be mentioned. Jahangir’s attempt to conquer it had failed. The 
ruler of “Little Tibet” had afforded asylum to the Chaks, the ori¬ 
ginal rulers of Kashmir. In 1634 Abdal, the ruler of Little Tibet, 
agreed to acknowledge the supremacy of the Mughuls and have the 
khutba read in Shah Jahan’s name. Four years later, he repudia¬ 
ted the treaty. When an army was sent against him, he submit¬ 
ted and paid an indemnity of one million rupees. 

At the time of Shah Jahan’s accession Cooch Behar was ruled 
by Blr Narfayan, son of Parlkshit, and Kamrup was in the nominal 
charge of a Mughul officer, Shaikh Zahid. The Ahom ruler of 
Assam had continued to give offence to the empire by sheltering 
its runaway officers and subjects and by his interference in the 
domestic affairs of Kamrup. Blr Narayan began the fray. Aided 
by the Ahom king, he attacked Kamrup, occupied Hajo, its capital, 
and drove out the Mughuls. Then Islam Khan, the new governor, 
drove away Blr Narayan and regained the lost territory. The im¬ 
perial forces then pushed into Assam, occupied the strong Ahom 
outpost of Kajli, and advanced successfully up to Samdhara. Here 


202 


SHAH JAHAN 


the Mughuls met with a stout resistance. They were pushed back 
from the fort and defeated with heavy losses at Duminsila in Nov¬ 
ember, 1639. The fort of Kajli was lost. But both parties were 
anxious for peace and a treaty of friendship was concluded. 

The petty chiefs of Jharkhand were very head-strong and re¬ 
bellious, and Shah Jahan ordered ‘Abdullah Khan to reduce their 
ring-leaders one by one. Pratap, the zamiiidar of Ujjainiya near 
Buxar, was the first to be dealt with. His fort of Bhojpur was re¬ 
duced after a siege of six months and he was captured and exe¬ 
cuted. Next, Bohra Lachman of Ratanpur was forced to surrender. 

Raja Pratap of Palamau had become haughty and behaved dis¬ 
respectfully towards Shayista Khan, the new governor. When 
Shayista Khan reported the matter to the court, the emperor order¬ 
ed him to drive away Pratap and to “clear the country of the filth 
of his existence’’. In October, 1646, a large army was sent to 
Palamau; Pratap submitted after some desultory fighting, paid an 
indemnity, and was granted a mansdb. 

Bhagirath Bhil and Marvi Gond rebelled one after another. 
Both chiefs were defeated and their fortresses were occupied. An 
attempt was made in 1635 to subdue Garhwal, but the imperial 
army met with a heavy disaster. In 1654, another attempt was 
made as a result of which the Raja of Kumaun submitted, and in 
1659 Medhi Singh, son of the Raja of Sirinagar (Dehradun district) 
came and offered his submission. The tribes on the north-west 
frontier, in spite of the presence of Abdal and later on of his son, 
‘Abdul Qadir, were generally peaceful. 

Towards the end of Jahangir’s reign diplomatic relations with 
Persia had been broken owing to the occupation of Qandahar by 
the Persians; but the Shah seems to have been anxious to revive 
them. After Jahangir’s death, Shah Jahan sent an embassy to 
Shah Safi of Persia to offer condolence on the death of Shah ‘Abbas. 
Shah Jahan in his letter reminded him of the old friendship between 
the two dynasties and stated that the late Shah had treated him 
in the “days of his vicissitudes” as an uncle should treat a nephew. 
But in spite of the embassies, which were exchanged in a spirit of 
cordiality, Shah Jahan had his eyes on Qandahar and was actively 
plotting to profit by the unrest that followed the death of Shah 
‘Abbas and the youth and inexperience of the new Shah. 

The death of Shah ‘Abbas had, in fact, revived the hopes of 
vengeance which all anti-Persian rulers had been cherishing. An 
attempt was once more made to form an anti-Persian league, but 
Shah Jahan, like Akbar, flirted both with Persia and her enemies. 


203 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


He was anxious to get back Qandahar, which had considerable 
strategic importance for the Sindh frontier of the Mughul empire 
and was the meeting ground of trade-routes. It was said that 
14,000 caravans passed through Qandahar every year. He may also 
have considered himself honour-bound to recapture a place which 
had been lost through his negligence and ambition. Equally keen 
was his old hereditary ambition to occupy the ancestral lands of 
the Mughuls. In the beginning Shah Jahan wished to get back 
Qandahar by diplomatic efforts and to conserve his resources for 
the recovery of Transoxiana, with Persian co-operation if possible, 
and without it if necessary. It was not till he was disappointed in 
this direction that he openly approached Persia’s enemies with the 
proposal for an alliance. The Shah’s differences with the governor 
of Qandahar gave Shah Jahlan the wished-for opportunity. 

‘Ali Mardan Khan, the Persian governor of Qandahar, had been 
in arrears with his revenues; he had naturally sought to taken ad¬ 
vantage of the disturbed state of the country. He was summoned 
by the Shah to appear at the court, but avoided doing so. On be¬ 
ing dismissed from office, ‘All Mardan sought the assistance from 
the Governor of Kabul and the commander of Ghazni. In 1638 he 
surrendered Qandahar to the Mughuls and received from Shah 
Jahan, as a reward for his treachery, one lakh of tankas for him¬ 
self and two lakhs for his brother and the officers of his army. 
Elaborate preparations were now made by Shah Jahan to hold the 
fort against the Persians. Bust and Zamindaar were also sub¬ 
dued. The Shah was too busy at the time in the west to take any 
effective measures for the recapture of Qandahar. In a letter to 
the Shah sent in 1638, Shah Jahan justified the occupation of Qan¬ 
dahar, apologised for any misunderstandings that may have been 
caused by his action, and advised the Shah to forget the incident. 
No diplomatic intercourse took place between the two empires till 
after the death of Shah Safi. 

Shah Jahan later on sent an embassy to secure Persia’s neutra¬ 
lity for his projected Central Asian campaign. There was a strong 
anti-Mughul party at the Persian court, but the Shah also feared 
the Sunni powers of Central Asia and preferred to remain a silent 
observer. When Nazr Muhammad Khan escaped to Persia, Shah 
Jahan wrote to Shah ‘Abbas II explaining the causes which had led 
to the Mughul campaign and expressed the hope of ultimately con¬ 
quering Samarqand and Bukhara. 

In December, 1648, the Shah turned towards Qandahar. Mughul 
prestige was then very low owing to the disastrous failure of the 


SHAH JAHAN 


Mughul military venture in Central Asia. The Shah also succeeded 
in securing Turkish neutrality during his eastern campaign. The 
Persian expedition started in winter as the Shah was aware of the 
unpopularity of a winter campaign amongst the Indian troops. The 
fort of Qandahar was occupied by the Persians in February, 1649. 
Shah Jahan sent three different expeditions against Qandahar in 
1649, 1652 and 1653 but the Mughuls could not recapture the fort. 

No diplomatic relations were maintained with Persia during the 
rest of Shah Jahan’s reign. At the outbreak of the war of succes¬ 
sion in 1658, Murad and Dara tried to enlist the support of the Shah, 
who actually moved his troops to Qandahar. But the success of Au- 
rangzib was so rapid that the Shah had to withdraw his troops. The 
following comments on the Qandahar expeditions by Sir Jadu- 
nath Sarkar are worthy of note: “These three futile sieges cost the 
Indian treasury over ten crores of rupees and ruined the Mughul 
prestige in the eyes of all Asia. The Persian king could rightly boast 
that the rulers of Delhi knew how to steal a fort by means of gold, 
but not how to conquer it by strength of arms. Throughout the 
rest of the reign, the rumour of a projected invasion from Persia used 
to throw the court of Delhi into the greatest alarm.” Mughul fai¬ 
lure against Qandahar is a sad commentary on the degeneration 
that had set in the Mughul army. Spoilt by a life of ease and 
luxury, and with its discipline undermined by the pettiness and 
the factious spirit of its commanders, the Mughul army had lost 
both strength and morale. Another cause of failure was the in¬ 
efficient and ineffective artillery of the Mughuls. Above all, the 
meddling of Shah Jahan and a divided command made the success¬ 
ful pursuit of the campaign an impossibility. 4 

Shah Jahan’s reign began with an unfortunate incident which 
openly disturbed Mughul relations with the rulers of Transoxiana, 
that had been amicable since the treaty of friendship between 
'Abdullah and Akbar. Nazr Muhammad Khan, the restless brother 
of Imam Quli of Bukhara, who was governor of Balkh, attacked the 
province of Kabul. The Mughul troops offered a stout resistance, 
and on the approach of reinforcements Nazr Muhammad had to beat 
a hasty retreat. Imam Quli hastened to offer apologies for his bro¬ 
ther’s conduct in a letter to Shah Jahan. The latter sent Turbat 
Khan to Balkh in 1633 with a letter expressing regrets on the Khan’s 
having delivered an unwarranted attack on a Sunni power. Shah 
Jahan, however, thanked him for the offer of help against the Per¬ 
sians. The letter, was full of the sectarian bias which Shah Jahan 
was trying to exploit in support of his designs against Persia. 


205 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Shortly after ‘All Mardan’s surrender of Qandahar, Shah Jahan 
sent Prince Shuja‘ and Khan Dauran with a large body of troops 
to Kabul as a precautionary measure against a Persian attack. These 
movements frightened Nazr Muhammad Khan and he appealed for 
help to his brother, Imam QulL Central Asian historians insist that 
Shah Jahan intended to capture Balkh as he was aware of the hosti¬ 
lity between the two brothers, but Indian historians deny this charge. 
Shah Jahan, on receiving a protest from Imam Quli, wrote back to 
assure him of his peaceful intentions. “I had only come to Kabul 
for hunting”, he wrote, “but if my brothers do not like it, I will 
go back.” 

Imam Quli, who had lost his eyesight, abdicated, and Nazr Mu¬ 
hammad proceeded to Bukhara. But the people of Bukhara detested 
Nazr and a rebellion and a civil war followed. Shah Jahan, taking 
advantage of this, captured Kahmard in 1645. Nazr, who was hard- 
pressed by the rebels, applied to Shah Jahan for help. Prince Murad 
was sent to Balkh with a large army. The campaign opened well 
and Qunduz was captured in June, 1646. From there the imperial 
armies proceeded to Balkh. Nazr was alarmed; he snut himself 
up in the fort of Balkh and refused to meet Murad. But he ulti¬ 
mately fled to Persia and Balkh fell into the hands of the Mughuls. 

Neither Murad nor the Indian troops took kindly to their new 
surroundings. Murad proved inefficient and was recalled by Shah 
Jahan. Governing these provinces was, in fact, more difficult than 
conquering them; and the task was rendered still more difficult by 
the mutual jealousies of the Mughul commanders, the inveterate 
and sullen hostility of the people to the new and foreign regime, 
the unpopularity of ‘All Mar dan and the presence of the Hindus. 
Nazr returned with some Persian troops and concluded peace with 
Aurangzib who had replaced Murad. The Mughuls had to retire 
to India in October, 1647, and the army suffered heavily on the 
homeward march. 

Thus ended the wild dream of the Mughul emperors for the re¬ 
conquest of their Central Asian homeland. It had brought nothing 
but disaster, famine and death both to the Indians and the Turanians. 
The losses of the empire could not be calculated in men and money 
alone. Its prestige in Central Asian affairs had vanished and the 
myth of its invincibility was shattered. The fear of a Mughul inva¬ 
sion of Turan, which had kept its rulers in wholesome fear, now 
completely disappeared. Shah ‘Abbas, as we have seen, took ad¬ 
vantage of the situation and captured Qandahar. A wave of unrest 
swept through Afghanistan, and the north-west tribesmen could not 


206 


SHAH JAHAN 


be easily kept in hand now. We need not be surprised that with 
the failure of the Balkh campaign and the loss of Qandahar, the 
power of the Mughul emperors began to dwindle in Afghanistan, 
and the tribes got an opportunity to foment dissensions and intri¬ 
gues for their own ends by playing off the Mughuls and the Per¬ 
sians against each other. The Abbdalis allied themselves with the 
Persians and the Ghilzais fell back on the Mughuls for support. This 
perpetual warfare encouraged the inherent lawless tendencies of 
the population, and “broke the thin web of administration, so ably 
cast by Akbar over Afghanistan.” The Central Asian venture also 
coincided with a nationalist revival in Afghanistan, and the country 
gradually slipped into anarchy and confusion, which even the strong 
hand of Aurangzib could not control. The healthy stream of the 
young Afghan recruits to the Mughul army also dried up; here¬ 
after, it could only make drafts for its shock battalion on the Muslim 
man-power of Northern India and the Rajputs. 

This disastrous expedition also had other far-reaching results. 
The famine and plague which it left behind in Central Asia ruined 
the prosperity of the people and weakened the Government. The 
age-long trade and commerce between India and Bukhara and Sa- 
marqand suffered disastrously. The occupation of Qandahar by the 
Persians and the virtual state of war that followed it during the 
reign of Aurangzib diverted trade and commerce from the northern 
passes to the ports of southern and western India to the great ad¬ 
vantage of the Europeans and a corresponding loss to the Mughul 
treasury. 

With Shah Jahan’s accession to the throne, the Deccan policy 
of the Mughuls entered a new phase; it became more vigorous and 
purposeful. Apart from political differences, the Deccan rulers had 
pronounced Shiahite leanings and were suspected of allegiance to 
the Shiah rulers of Persia. The death of Malik ‘Ambar came as a 
blessing to the Mughuls. In 1630 his unworthy son, Fath Khan, 
the minister of Ahmadnagar, informed the Mughuls that in order 
to protect his own life he had placed his master, the Nizam Shah! 
king, in confinement. Shah Jahan in reply instructed him to “rid 
the world of such a worthless and wicked being.” Fath Khan com¬ 
plied with this order and then placed a ten-year old minor prince, 
named Husain Shah, on the throne. Shah Jahan next asked Asaf 
Khan to secure the submission of the Sultan of Bijapur, who had not 
so far acknowledged the imperial authority, and in case of non- 
compliance, to conquer his kingdom. In 1631 Asaf laid siege to 
Bijapur but was compelled to raise it after twenty days for lack 


207 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


of provisions. The open country suffered terribly at the hands of 
the Mughuls. 

The emperor left the Deccan for Agra on 14 April, 1632. Asaf 
was succeeded by Mahabat as the commander of the Deccan expedi¬ 
tion. Mahabat laid siege to the fortress of Daulatabad. Fath Khan 
began to waver in his allegiance to the Mughuls and tried to post¬ 
pone a decision. Finally the Khan Khanan won him over by a 
bribe of ten and a half lakhs and secured the surrender of the Dau¬ 
latabad fort (1633). The nominal young king, Husain Shah, was 
condemned to life-long imprisonment at Gwalior and the Nizam 
Shahl kingdom came to an end. The Mughuls, however, failed to 
take the fortress of Parenda and retreated to Burhanpur on account 
of the rains. 

Shah Jahan’s imperialistic designs could not be satisfied with¬ 
out crushing Bijapur and Golconda. He called upon the rulers of 
these countries to acknowledge his suzerainty, to pay tribute as a 
mark of submission, and to abstain from interfering in the affairs 
of the now defunct kingdom of Ahmadnagar. Shah Jahan himself 
arrived at Daulatabad on 2 March, 1636, and collected an army 
of 50,000 men for attacking Bijapur and Golconda. Alarmed by 
these preparatory movements, 'Abdullah Qutb Shah of Golconda 
formally recognised the suzerainty of Shah Jahan. He promised to 
pay an annual tribute, to strike gold and silver coins in the em¬ 
peror’s name, and to have it read in the khutba (Friday sermon). 

The king of Bijapur did not, however, come down so low and 
would not barter away his independence. Three imperial armies 
marched into his kingdom from three sides. But the Bijapuris 
fought with the valour of despair and ultimately, tired of war, both 
sides opened negotiations for peace, which was concluded on the 
following terms: ‘Adil Shah acknowledged the overlordship of the 
emperor and was allowed to retain his ancestral kingdom. He got 
fifty pargands yielding an annual income of eighty lakhs of rupees 
from the territory of the late Ahmadnagar kingdom. A sum of 
twenty lakhs of rupees in cash and kind was demanded from him as 
annual tribute, and he was required to abstain from molesting the 
kingdom of Golconda, which was now under imperial protection. 
Shahji Bhonsle was not to be allowed to hold any office in the Bija¬ 
pur State unless he surrendered the Nizam Shahl forts which he had 
occupied during the war. 

The emperor set out for Mandu on 21 July, 1636; three days 
later he sent his eighteen-year old son Aurangzib as the Viceroy of 
the Deccan. The Mughul Deccan at this time consisted of the four 


208 


SHAH JAHAN 

provinces of Khandesh, Berar, Telingana and the recently annexed 
Nizam Shahi territory. The four provinces contained sixty-four hill 
forts and their total revenue was five crores of rupees. Thus the 
war of 1635-37 had “enriched the Mughul treasury with tri¬ 
bute amounting to two crores of rupees, and added to the empire 
a territory which, when cultivated, yielded a revenue of one crore.” 

After one year’s successful government during which the terri¬ 
tory of Baglan and Shahji’s forts were acquired, Aurangzib return¬ 
ed to Agra in 1637. In 1644, he was dismissed from his post and 
deprived of his rank and jdglrs by the emperor. In 1653, Aurangzib 
was again sent across the Narmada as the Subadar of the Deccan. 
During the nine years following his dismissal in May, 1644, the ad¬ 
ministration of the Deccan had collapsed; the revenue had fallen to 
such an extent that they were not even sufficient for the normal 
expenditure of the Government, Aurangzib, on his return, was 
therefore faced with a serious financial situation. In order to meet 
the expenses of the administration he drew upon the cash reserves 
in the treasuries of the Deccan. He proposed to Shah Jahan that 
he and his higher officers should be assigned jdglrs in other provin¬ 
ces, and that the cash portion of his salary should be made a charge 
on the flourishing treasuries of Malwa and Surat. Shah Jahan ag¬ 
reed to the first proposal, but did not grant Aurangzlb’s request 
for monetary assistance. The jaglrddrs, whose lands were thus 
taken by Aurangzib, complained to Shah Jahan, who angrily wrote 
back to Aurangzib: “It is unworthy of a Mussalman and an act 
of injustice to take for yourself all the productive villages of a par - 
gana and to assign to others only the less productive lands.” 

After improving the finances to some extent Aurangzib devoted 
himself to promoting agriculture and to ameliorating the condition 
of the peasantry. In his measures in this direction, which have 
made his viceroyalty “memorable for ever in the history of land- 
settlement in the Deccan,” he received valuable assistance from an 
able officer named Murshid Quli Khan, the Diwan of the “Balaghat.” 
Murshid Quli Khan divided the Deccan Province into two parts for 
fiscal purposes. Each part was to have its own Diwan. He extend¬ 
ed the system of Todar Mai to the Deccan and thus revived and 
revitalised the work of Malik ‘Ambar. The normal life of the vil¬ 
lages was restored by bringing together and rehabilitating the scat¬ 
tered ryots. A regular gradation of village and local officers was 
established. Amins were appointed to measure the land and to pre¬ 
pare a record of holdings, distinguishing arable from waste land. 
New muqaddams (headmen) were appointed in the villages to look 
after the interests of the peasants and to help in collecting the re- 

209 

M.E.— 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


venue. Advances in cash were given to the poorer ryots for the 
purchase of agricultural implements. In backward and thinly po¬ 
pulated areas Murshid Qull retained the system of fixed payment 
per plough; while in other places he introduced the system of batai 
(metaqar system) for which there were three rates. The system 
of assessment by jarib was also introduced and came to be known 
during generations as “the dhara of Murshid Qull Khan.” 

After this Aurangzlb decided to crush the independence of Bi- 
japur and Golconda. Their independence was more offensive to 
Mughul imperialism now than half a century earlier; and Aurangzlb, 
young and ambitious, wanted to pursue the imperial plans in the 
Deccan to their logical conclusion. The fact that the Deccan princes 
professed the Shiah creed and looked for patronage to th,e Shah of 
Persia rather than to the emperor of Hindusthan gave him the neces¬ 
sary public support. The tribute from the Sultan of Golconda had 
always been in arrears and Aurangzlb demanded a certain part of 
the Sultan’s kingdom in lieu of the arrears. The emperor also took 
offence at the conquest of Carnatic by the two kingdoms. A plausi¬ 
ble excuse for war was found in the Golconda king’s treatment of 
his officer, Mir Jumla, who sought and secured imperial protection 
with the help of Aurangzlb while his family was detained by the 
Golconda ruler. 

Aurangzlb reported these matters to Shah Jahtan and solicited 
his permission for attacking Golconda. Shah Jahian reluctantly 
sanctioned the invasion in case Muhammad Amin, son of Mir Jumla, 
was still detained by Golconda. Aurangzlb declared war on Gol¬ 
conda without even giving Abu-’l-Hasan Qutb Shah time to consider 
Shah Jahan’s letter. 

Prince Muhammad Sultan, son of Aurangzlb, entered Hydera¬ 
bad in January, 1656. Abu-’l-Hasan shut himself up in the fort of 
Golconda and Aurangzlb laid siege to it, fully determined to reduce 
the fort and to annex the kingdom. Abu-’l-Hasan, in despair, ap¬ 
pealed to Shah Jahan, who adopted a more accommodating attitude 
under the influence of Dlara and Jahanara Begam. Aurangzlb, much 
against his wishes, was ordered to raise the siege and to evacuate 
the occupied territories. He had no alternative but to comply and 
raised the siege of Golconda on 9 April, 1656. A peace was im¬ 
mediately concluded. Prince Muhammad was married by proxy to 
Abu-’l-Hasan’s daughter; Abu-’l-Hasan swore on the Qur’an to obey 
the emperor and received in return a letter of pardon from Shah 
Jahan along with rich robes of honour. Aurangzlb remitted ten 
lakhs out of the twenty-five lakhs of indemnity money, but the Sul- 


210 


SHAH JAHAN 


tan had to cede the district of Ramglr. Mir Jumla was taken into im¬ 
perial service and appointed prime minister in place of Sa‘d-ullah 
Khan. 

The conquest of Bijiapur next engaged Aurangzlb’s attention. 
Muhammad ‘Adil Shah of Bijapur died on 16 November, 1656, and 
was succeeded by his son, a youth of eighteen years. Aurangz'lb 
solicited Shah Jahan’s permission for invading the kingdom on the 
ground that the new king was not the son of the dead ruler but a 
boy of obscure origin. The emperor granted him full powers to 
“settle the affairs of Bijapur in any way he thought fit.” But Shah 
Jahan had merely suggested an invasion of Bijapur while Aurangzib 
was bent upon annexing the whole territory. Sir J. N. Sarkar has 
rightly remarked that the war thus sanctioned was wholly unright¬ 
eous. Bijapur was not a vassal State; and the Mughul emperor had 
no legal right either to confirm or to question the succession of the 
Bijapur king. The true reason for Mughul interference was the 
helplessness of its boy-king and the discord among his officers. 

Mir Jumla and Aurangzib laid siege to Bidar. It was bravely 
defended, but submitted in April, 1657. The city of Kalyani was 
then besieged by the Mughuls in May, 1657. A heroic defence was 
offered by Dilawar Khan, but he was at last compelled to capitulate. 
With Bidar and Kalyani in Mughul hands, the way was open for an 
attack on Bijapur itself. At this favourable moment, when the prize 
was nearly in Aurangzlb’s hands, Shah Jahan sent an order for the 
cessation of hostilities. The Bijapur agents had intrigued at the 
Delhi Court, and Dara, who was jealous of his brother’s success, 
brought about a change in the emperor’s mind. His untimely in¬ 
tervention checked the Mughul advance, and peace was concluded 
in 1657. The Bijapur Sultan surrendered Bidar, Kalyani and Pa- 
renda, and agreed to pay an indemnity of one and a half crores, of 
which Shah Jahan subsequently remitted half a crore. 

The disorders following the illness of Shah Jahan and the war 
of succession saved the Deccan for the time being from the onslaught 
of the Mughuls. For about twenty years after his succession 
Aurangzlb’s attention was concentrated on other affairs and the Dec- 
can Sultanates were left alone to heal, as best they could, the wounds 
of the late war. But their recovery was slow and only partial. 
The rising power of the Marathas and the growing demoralisation 
and corruption of the officers of the two kingdoms made the process 
of recovery difficult. It is hard to say how Aurangzlb’s plan of 
annexing the two States would have affected the growth of Maratha 
power or contributed to the stabilisation of Mughul rule in the Dec- 


211 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


can. That Shah Jahan’s action in calling a halt to Aurangzlb’s mi¬ 
litary campaign was inopportune and unwise, no one will deny. 

Orthodox Muslim religious opinion, which began to take shape 
from the time of Jahangir, as is shown for example by the writings 
of the Mujaddid Alf-i Sani and ‘Abdul Haque Muhaddis-i Dehlavi, 
coloured the attitude of Shah Jahan towards his non-Muslim sub¬ 
jects in general and his personal religious views in particular. As 
an orthodox Muslim he did much to restore the position of the Mu- 
salmans in the body politic. Shah Jahan never gave up the basic 
policy of toleration and forbearance, which had stood the test of 
time. In his reign, some contemporary Muslim writers declare, the 
arrogance and boldness of the Hindus increased and in several places 
mosques were converted into temples and Muslims were converted 
to Hinduism; and there was a challenge even to the representation 
of M.usalmans in the services, particularly in the revenue depart¬ 
ment. This awakened the fears of the Musalmans and Muslim pub¬ 
lic opinion was organised by Muslim divines. Shah Jahan was 
unable to resist the pressure of Muslim opinion or the influence of 
the divines. The rising tide of Marat ha militant movement also 
alarmed Shah Jahan and his officers. In religious matters he was 
more uncompromising than Akbar or Jahangir and his policy was 
comparatively more straight, firm, and bold than that of his prede¬ 
cessors. The deep conflict between the Ahl-i-Shariat or the ortho¬ 
dox and the followers of the mystic philosophy or the Ahle-Tariqat 
was demonstrated towards the end of his life over the question of 
succession, and was typified in the opposite personalities of Dara 
Shukoh and Aurangzib. 5 

Shah Jahan’s education had been carried on under liberal tea¬ 
chers of the Sufi (mystic) school, but later on, he became more or¬ 
thodox and less tolerant. He married no Hindu princess and was 
thus free from what Sharma calls “the mellowing influence” of the 
harem, an influence which had softened the fibre of the Mughuls and 
had made them complaisant and dependent on the Indian elements in 
the population. Shah Jahan, like Firuz Shiah, started his reform of 
Muslim society by eradicating un-Islamic practices. The sijda or 
prostration to the emperor was abolished and the zamiribos (kissing 
the ground) form of salutation was introduced. This, too, was later 
replaced by chahar tasleem (four salutations). This reorganisation 
of the Court ceremonial was intended to give it a Muslim atmos¬ 
phere, and Muslim festivals were more regularly celebrated. Alms 
were distributed during the months of Rajab, Shaaban and Rabi‘u-1- 
awwal. Offerings were sent to Mecca under a Mir Hajj. In his 
letter to the ruler of Golconda, Shah Jahan spoke of himself as the 


212 


SHAH JAHAN 


leader of the Sunnis and the destroyer of all those who did not con¬ 
form to his ideas of Islam. He also suppressed heretical practices 
among the Afghans. But some of the older practices were preserved 
as being expedient and less harmful. The jharoka ceremony was 
continued, the tula, dan was observed, and astrologers were main¬ 
tained at the court. Painting was patronised, but the wearing of 
the imperial likeness in the turban was discontinued. 

It has been affirmed that Shah Jahian ordered that only Mus¬ 
lims were to be recruited to the public services. This is not correct. 
In the tenth year of his reign, the percentage of Hindu Mansabdars 
was 16 as against 12 in the time of Jahangir. It was destined to 
rise still higher, but towards the end of the reign the percentage of 
Hindu Mansabdars , which had at one time touched 38, began to de¬ 
cline, first on account of the Maratha wars and, secondly, owing to 
the clamour of the Musalmans. 

Shah Jahan did not reimpose the jizya but he revived the pil¬ 
grim-tax for a short while. He forbade the completion of certain 
temples and prevented the building of new temples. This policy 
was also reviewed later on. Certain temples were destroyed, but 
this was due to local prejudices and to the fact that some of them 
were utilised against the State. Prohibition of conversion to Hin¬ 
duism and Christianity was justified as a defensive measure; inqui¬ 
ries made in Bhambar, an adjoining area, revealed that 4,000 Mus¬ 
lim women had been converted to Hinduism. Laws against blas¬ 
phemy were made more stringent. On the whole, Shah Jahan was 
more anxious than his predecessors to uphold Muslim religion and 
to exalt Muslim society, but his orthodoxy was neither militant nor 
narrow-minded. He tried to hold the balance between the policy 
initiated by Akbar, on the one hand, and the demands of the fana¬ 
tical and orthodox Muslim divines, on the other. 6 

Shah Jahan’s last years were embittered by the war of succes¬ 
sion among his four sons, and he dragged on his life in captivity for 
seven and a half years after Aurangzlb’s accession. No sons of the 
same father and mother could have been more unlike each other in 
temperament, in outlook on life, in manners and in morals, than 
the four sons of Shah Jahan. None of the great Mughul emperors 
attained to such grandeur and success as Shah Jahan, 7 and none was 
destined to greater humiliation and suffering at the end of his reign. 

Dara, the eldest son, was most favoured by his father. He was 
43 years of age when the war of succession started. Of comely ap¬ 
pearance and dignified deportment, courteous in conversation and 


213 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


extremely liberal, he was steeped in Muslim mysticism and Hindu 
pantheism. His father had bestowed on him the unprecedented 
military rank of 60,000 zat, the command being greater than “even 
the combined commands of all the younger brothers.” He had been 
allowed to rule his province as a viceroy through his agents, and 
the highest honours were showered not only on him but also on his 
sons and adherents. As a consequence, Dana never acquired expe¬ 
rience in the art of administration or of war. He established no 
contacts with the people or the nobility, and in the hour of trial he 
was deserted by the officers who mattered. Both Manucci and Ber¬ 
nier refer to Dam’s irascibility, stubbornness and vanity. He enter¬ 
tained, says Bernier, “too exalted an opinion of himself, and be¬ 
lieved he could accomplish everything by the powers of his own 
mind.” The jealousy of Darn’s brothers and the fear they enter¬ 
tained of him are voiced by the contemporary historian ‘Aqil Khan 
Razi. “Dam Shukoh was appointed by Shah Jahan as his heir 
apparent. His Highness, on account of his arrogance and pride.... 
began to suppose, in fact to believe, that he was, by right and here¬ 
ditary claim, the ruler of the extensive empire of Hindustan. . .and 
he made it his object to put an end to the existence of his brothers, 
who were co-heirs and partners in the kingdom and throne.” 8 Flat¬ 
tery had made him vain; prosperity tended to make him ease-loving, 
and owing to the partiality shown to him by his father he became 
arrogant and over-confident. 

Shah Jahan fell ill with strangury in September, 1657. Des¬ 
pairing of his life, the emperor made his last will and commended 
Dam as his heir apparent to the care of his officers. The news of 
his illness, which was at first kept a secret, reached the three bro¬ 
thers in their respective provinces—Shuja* in Bengal, Aurangzlb in 
the Deccan and Murad in Gujarat. Shah Jahan recovered slightly in 
November, but this made no difference to the march of events. 

Of the three princes, Shuja 4 was the first to crown himself and 
to march towards Delhi from Bengal. Murad followed suit in De¬ 
cember, and formed an alliance with Aurangzlb, who was more 
cautious in his moves. Sulaiman Shukoh, the eldest son of Darn, 
was sent with Raja Jay Singh against Shuja 4 ; two other armies were 
also despatched, one to oppose Aurangzlb, and the other to oust 
Murad from Gujarat. 

Murad was a vain, pleasure-loving, and indolent prince who 
cared more for “the nourishment of the body” than for active life 
of the battlefield or diligent application to duty. He started his 
new career by killing 4 Ali Naql, his revenue minister, and sacking 


214 



SHAH JAHAN 


the city of Surat in order to equip himself for the forthcoming strug¬ 
gle for the throne. After entering into a treaty of alliance with 
Aurangzlb by which Punjab, Afghanistan, Kashmir, Sindh and one- 
third of the war booty were promised to him, Murad started from 
Ahmadabad on 7 March, 1658, and joined Aurangzlb at DIpalpur 
on 24 April. 

Aurangzlb had from the beginning been very cool and cautious, 
and had no intention of rebelling against his father. But the con¬ 
duct of Dara and the hasty action of his other two brothers left him 
no alternative but to enter the arena and make a bid for the supreme 
power. 9 

Jasvant Singh, who had been sent south by Shah Jahan and 
Dara, was encamped at Dharmat, fourteen miles south-west of Uj- 
jain. Here, on 5 May, the rival armies came face to face. In 
the fierce battle that followed, Aurangzlb won a decisive victory 
by his superior generalship and an efficient and scientific combina¬ 
tion of artillery and cavalry. It was the omen of his irresistible 
march to power. 

On the day following the battle the Princes reached Ujjain. 
They then marched on to Gwalior where they arrived in June. 
Here they learnt that Dara had personally moved to Dholpur and 
obtained command over all the ferries of the river Chambal. Aurang- 
zib, with the help of a local zamindar, found a little-used ford at 
Bhanduli, 40 miles east of Dholpur; he crossed the river without any 
opposition and started on the road to Agra. Dara, foiled in his de¬ 
sign of preventing his rivals from crossing the Chambal, had no 
alternative but to fall back. The two armies came face to face 
with one another at Samogarh, eight miles east of Agra fort. Dara 
was advised not to risk a personal defeat by taking charge of the 
army command, but he paid no heed to the advice. The battle com¬ 
menced about noon on 8 June, 1658, in the fearful heat of the Indian 
sun. Dara’s Rajput officers fought with undaunted courage and near¬ 
ly carried the day; but the faulty tactics of Dara, the indiscipline of 
his army, and his bad generalship brought a final and irretrievable 
disaster to the imperial army. Dara lost nearly 10,000 soldiers, in¬ 
numerable horses and elephants, and 19 Muslim and Rajput officers 
of the highest rank. Beaten and humbled, he escaped to Agra 
where he arrived at 9 p. m. and shut himself up in his house. When 
summoned by Shah Jahan to see him, the heart-broken prince de¬ 
clined. “I cannot show my face to your Majesty in my present wretch¬ 
ed plight”, he replied; “permit me to go away with your farewell 
blessing on the long journey that is before me.” 


215 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Daria left Agra for Delhi and the victors soon after arrived and 
encamped in the garden of Nur Manzil outside Agra. Shah Jahan 
opened the gates of the Agra fort after a siege of three days, Aurang- 
zib took possession of it, and then set out in pursuit of Dara. By 
the time he reached Mathura, he found that the pretensions of Mu¬ 
rad had grown so high that, if unpunished, he would jeopardise 
Aurangzib’s chances of success. Murad was arrested and sent to 
Salimgarh; later on, he was confined as' a State-prisoner in the fort 
of Gwalior. After three years’ captivity Murad was tried for the 
murder of ‘All Naql on a complaint by his son and beheaded in the 
fort of Gwalior. 

Dara had marched on to Lahore when he heard of the capture 
of Agra by Aurangzlb. There he assembled an army of 20,000 men 
and sent out parties to guard the ferries of the Sutlej. Aurangzib 
sent an officer eastward to capture Allahabad and another to the 
Punjab, while he himself stayed in Delhi for three weeks to organize 
the administration. He was formally crowned emperor at Delhi 
on 31 July, 1658. 

The Mughul empire reached its greatest prosperity in the reign 
of Shah Jahan. “The means employed by Shah Jahan in these 
happy years”, the author of Lubbut Tawarikh says, “to protect and 
nourish his people, his knowledge of what made for their welfare, his 
administration by honest and intelligent officers, the auditing of 
accounts, his care of the crown-lands and their tenants and encou¬ 
ragement of agriculture and the collection of revenue, together with 
his punishment and admonition of evil-doers, oppressors and mal¬ 
contents—all tended to the prosperity of the empire.” Muslim 
writers hold him up as an ideal Muslim monarch, and call him the 
pillar of the Shar’iyat , “the defender of religion, and the restorer of 
the waning fortunes of Islam.” But contemporary European travel¬ 
lers, though testifying to the extent and the prosperity of his em¬ 
pire, “depict him as a despicable creature whose only concern in life 
was how to indulge in his bestial sensuality and monstrous wicked¬ 
ness.” Elphinstone describes the age of Shah Jahan as “the most 
prosperous ever known to India. . . .together with a larger share 
of good government than often falls to the lot of Asiatic nations.” 
V. A. Smith is extremely critical and unfair in his indictment of 
Shah Jahan. “In affairs of state”, he says, “Shah Jahan was cruel, 
treacherous and unscrupulous. He had little skill as a military 
leader.... His justice was merely the savage, unfeeling ferocity of 
the ordinary Asiatic despot, exercised without respect for persons 
and without the slightest tincture of compassion.” 


216 


SHAH JAHAN 


These deprecating remarks do scant justice to Shah Jahan’s 
qualities of head and heart. 10 Whatever his weaknesses as a prince, 
he proved a firm and capable ruler, who (so Bernier tells us) “reign¬ 
ed not so much as a king over his subjects but rather as a father over 
his family and children.” As emperor he led a strenuous life; this 
is proved by the minute details of his daily routine recorded in con¬ 
temporary Persian accounts. He personally supervised the minutest 
details of the administration and appointed men of the highest abi¬ 
lity and uprightness of character as his ministers. The military 
campaigns were organised and the details were worked out by him 
personally with care and assiduity. Many abuses in the mansabdari 
and revenue system were removed by him, and never was security 
of life and property greater, nor justice more quick and fair, than in 
Shah Jahan’s reign. A loving father, a doting husband, a loyal 
friend, a capable ruler and wise statesman, Shah Jahan deserved a 
better end. He was harsh and vindictive to his enemies, but kind 
and generous to his friends. He punished the unruly and recalci¬ 
trant with severity, amounting to cruelty, but he was affable, kind 
and forgiving to those who sought his friendship or forgiveness. His 
supreme endeavour was to eradicate lawlessness and rebellion, 
to guarantee security of life and property to his subjects, and 
to promote their material and moral welfare. Orthodox as a Musal- 
man and anxious to fortify and strengthen the Muslim millat , he was 
never unfair to, or unmindful of, the interests of his non-Muslim 
subjects. 11 He loved pomp and show and considerably increased the 
royal retinue, the State-establishments and the magnificence of the 
court. The Peacock Throne, the Taj Mahal, the Agra Fort and nu¬ 
merous other works of architecture and art testify to his wealth as 
well as his aesthetic sense. He was an excellent calligraphist. His 
patronage of men of letters and of artisans and craftsmen was in 
keeping with the traditions of his family. Poets, philosophers, scho¬ 
lars, artisans—all flocked to his court and received his favours. He 
recognised merit and rewarded it generously. Poetry, music, 
painting, dancing, astronomy, mathematics and medicine flourished 
under the generous and intelligent patronage of the emperor. He was 
fond of Hindu music and patronised Hindu poets like Sundar Das, 
Chintamani and Kavindra Acharya. Amongst the royal musicians were 
Lai Khan, son-in-law of the famous Tan Sen, Jagannath, who receiv¬ 
ed the title of Mahia-Kavi-Rai, Sukh Sen and Sur Sen. Shah Jahan’s 
solicitude for the welfare of his subjects showed itself best in measures 
for famine relief in Gujarat, Kashmir and the Punjab. Soup kit¬ 
chen and aim-homes were established in Burhanpur, Ahmadahad and 
Surat. At Burhanpur Rs. 5,000 were distributed amongst the poor 
every Monday. Taxes amounting to 70 lakhs were remitted. In 


217 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Kashmir, Rs. 1,00,000 were distributed amongst the poor besides the 
provision of Rs. 200 worth of cooked food daily. Ten free kitchens 
were established in the Punjab. His treatment of his rivals at the 
time of his accession, as we have seen, is a great blot on his charac¬ 
ter; his aggressive wars were a great drain on the imperial treasury. 
Rut in the features of Shah Jahan the Mughul artists have succeed¬ 
ed in expressing that calmness and grandeur which so forcibly 
strikes us in the Taj Mahal, the greatest Indian architectural achieve¬ 
ment of all times. 

1. This is in accordance with the testimony of the Indian authors. There is, 
however, a story, recorded by some European travellers and in the annals of 
Persia, that Dawar Bakhsh was not actually killed but managed to escape by 
substituting another man in his place. For details, Cf. B. P. Saksena, 
History of Shar jahan of Delhi, p. 62, f.n. 88 (Editor). 

2. Op. cit. pp. 102-3. It is, however, difficult to justify the author’s comment 
and observations for distinguishing the nature of the two rebellions. 

2a. The date is given as c. 1579 by V. A. Smitr, Oxford History of India, (1919), 
p. 395. 

3. For a more detailed account and a less favourable view of Shah Jahan’s con¬ 
duct, cf. CHI, IV, pp. 190-192. The passage quoted is in p. 191. 

4. For a detailed and critical discussion of the causes of the Mughul failure 
against Qandahar, cf. Saksena, op. cit. p. 235. 

5. The view that Shah Jahan ‘‘never gave up the basic policy of toleration and 
forbearance” is belied by the author’s own statements that follow. Further, 
this discussion, on the basis of which the author makes the categorical 
statement, in the last para of this chapter, that Shah Jahan “was never 
unfair to, or unmindful of, the interests of his non-Muslim subjects”, is de¬ 
finitely opposed to well-authenticated facts if we remember, as we should, that 
the liberty to follow his own religion was regarded by every Hindu as his 
chief ‘interest’, more highly valued than any other privilege. The following 
passage in Dr. Saksena’s book (every statement of which is substantiated by 
reference to authorities in the footnotes) is more in accordance with known 
historical facts: 

“The practice of desecrating and destroying Hindu temples, though it 
was revived in the reign of Jahangir, became systematic under Shah Jahan. 
He first ordered, in January 1633, the demolition of the newly built temples 
in his whole Empire, especially at Benares, and this order was (in September- 
October) followed by a total prohibition for the erecting of new temples or 
the repairing of old ones. 

“Further, systematic efforts were made at the instance of the Emperor 
to convert the Hindus both by persuasion and bv force. The former included 
tempting offers of service and rewards. Shah Mir Lahauri and Muhibb ‘All 
Sindhl were especially commissioned with this work of proselytisation. They 
presented new converts to the Emperor, who conferred on them titles and 
distinctions, or assigned special allowance to them. The Hindus were strictly 
forbidden to influence or dissuade their relations from turning Musalman. 
Two cases of conversion among the nobility are worth notice.... 

“There are two instances on record in which government officials were 
transferred or dismissed on account of their religious convictions (concrete 
instances given)(Saksena, op. cit. pp. 293-5). 

To the above statement may be added the fact that a pilgrim tax was 
imposed on the Hindus (Manrique’s account, Vol. II. p. 147). (Editor). 

6. The whole of this paragraph is a special pleading in favour of Shah Jahan 
unsupported by facts and arguments. For example, no evidence is cited to 
prove that the Hindu temples were destroyed because “some of them were 

218 



SHAH JAHAN 


utilised against the State.” Again, one fails to understand how prohibition of 
conversion to Hinduism and Christianity may be justified as a defensive mea¬ 
sure. The last two sentences of this para are somewhat self-contradictory, 
and, in any case, do not deserve serious consideration from the point of view 
of the justification of Shah Jahan’s religious policy. 

7. This is true only in respect of the artistic achievements. 

8. No evidence is cited to prove that it was a deliberate policy of Dara to kill 
his brothers, nor is it easy to understand how ‘they were co-heirs and part¬ 
ners in the kingdom.’ 

9. It is, at best, a gratuitous assumption. Sir Jadunath Sarkar does not take such 
a view in his monumental work on Aurangzlb. 

10. For a moderate and reasonable view between these two extremes, cf. Saksena, 
op. cit., pp. 296 ff. 

11. Cf. foot-note 5 above. 

1V.B.—The Editor alone is responsible for all the above foot-notes [Ed.*]. 


219 


CHAPTER VIII 


AURANGZIB ( 1658-1680) 

I. FATE OF DARA 

Muhiy-ud-dln Muhammad Aurangzib, the third son of Shah 
Jahan and Mumtaz Mahall, gained two grand victories in the war 
of succession, the first, at Dharmat, fourteen miles south-west of 
Ujjain, on 15 April, 1658, and the second, at Samogarh, eight miles 
east of Agra fort, on 29 May; and then, after capturing the fort of Agra 
and imprisoning his father there, he ascended the throne at Delhi on 
21 July, 1658, with the lofty title of Abu-’l Muzaffar Muhiy-ud-din 
Muhammad Aurangzib Bahadur ‘Alamgir Padshah Ghazl. 

His father and ex-emperor, “the most magnificent of the Mughul 
emperors’’, had to pass the remainder of his life as a prisoner in the 
Agra fort. Aurangzib’s youngest brother, Murad, had been arrested 
on 25 June, and confined as a state-prisoner in the fort of Gwalior. 
But, even then, the new emperor did not feel secure about his own 
position, as many of his enemies were still active to strike him. 

From Samogarh, Dara had proceeded to Delhi and thence to 
the Punjab where he expected more co-operation and assistance 
than in any other place, while his eldest son, Sulaiman Shukoh, 
after defeating his uncle Shuja‘ at Bahadurpur, five miles north-east 
of Banaras, on 14 February, 1658, and concluding a peace with him 
at Monghyr, was marching towards Agra. 

Had Dara, instead of moving to the Punjab, marched eastward 
and, uniting with his son, advanced against Aurangzib, he might 
have created an alarming situation for his brother. But that was 
not to be, and his wrong move ruined his cause. An astute general 
as Aurangzib was, he guarded against the possible junction of the 
father and the son. The followers of Sulaiman found their path 
to the west blocked, and disheartened by the news of Daria’s dis¬ 
comfiture at Samogarh and his flight to the north-west, deserted in 
large number, making his position very precarious. 

Reaching Lahore, Dara raised his men to 20,000 and despatch¬ 
ed some of them to guard the ferries at Talwandi and Rupar on the 
Sutlej, as well as to keep him informed of the enemy’s movements. 
But as he was wanting in requisite courage and also did not get 
time enough to rally proper opposition to his brother’s forces, he 


AURANGZIB 


fled from place to place as soon as he heard of the enemy’s ap¬ 
proach. The emperor had deputed Bahadur Khan to pursue him. 
Then he appointed Khalil-ullah Khan, the governor of the Punjab, 
with orders to take up the pursuit more vigorously. When 
“Bahadur Khan crossed the Sutlej by surprise at Rupar... .Dara’s 
generals fell back from that river to Govindwal on the Beas. But 
when Aurangzib from Delhi reached the Sutlej, Dara fled from 
Lahore (18 August) to Multan, with his family and treasure, by 
boat. Once more Dara’s courage failed before Aurangzib; he des¬ 
paired of success and his despair infected his troops.” 1 From Multan 
he fled from one place to another in Sind, all the while losing large 
number of his troops from desertions, and finally, he left this pro¬ 
vince at Badin, proceeding over the Rann of Cutch towards Gujarat. 
Meanwhile, the alarming news of Shuja°s advance towards Agra had 
forced the emperor to turn back from the environs of Multan for 
Delhi. 

After his coronation (21 July, 1658), Aurangzib had assured his 
brother Shujia‘ of the possession of Bihar in addition to that of Bengal, 
but the latter, finding the deplorable plight of his father as well 
as of his brother, Murad, could not place reliance on his 
brother’s promise, and when he heard of Aurangzib’s absence far 
away from the capital, he considered this a suitable opportunity to 
conquer as far as Agra and release his father. Early in November, 
1658, he marched out of Patna with an army of 25,000 cavalry and 
a park of artillery. Taking possession of the forts on the way, he 
reached Khajuha, in the Fatehpur district, in Uttar Pradesh, on 30 
December, 1659. Here his path was barred by Muhammad Sultan, 
the eldest son of the emperor. 

Arriving at the environs of Delhi in November, 1658, Aurangzib 
sent reinforcements to his son, and himself advanced to meet his 
brother at Khajuha. On the night before the battle, Maharaja 
Jasvant Singh, who was the commander of the emperor’s right wing, 
all on a sudden, attacked and plundered the imperial camp and 
thereafter went back with his 14,000 Rajput followers to his own 
country. But the imperial position was saved by the emperor’s 
wonderful coolness and tactful handling of the situation and Shuja‘’s 
hesitation to act in time. 

In the encounter (5 January, 1659) the imperialists assembled 
50,000 to 55,000 men whereas Shuja°s army numbered 23,000. The 
battle started at 8 a.m. by an offensive from Shuja‘. The imperial¬ 
ists were driven to such an unfavourable position that they would 
have given way, but the cool courage, promptitude and superior tact 


221 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


of the emperor turned the impending defeat into a decisive victory, 
and Shuja* was compelled to take recourse to flight. His army also 
fled away, leaving their camp equipage and artillery as the victor’s 
prize. 

Aurangzib sent Muhammad Sultan and Mir Jumla in pursuit of 
Shuja‘ who fled to Monghyr, via Banaras and Patna, and thence to 
the Malda district through Sahibganj and Rajmahal. 

After making Tanda 2 his base of operations, Shuja* tried to 
check the advance of the imperialists and won over Muhammad 
Sultan, by offering him the hand of his daughter Gulrukh Banu. He 
also succeeded in recovering Rajmahal and compelled Mir Jumla to 
fall back from his position at Belghata, opposite Jangipur, towards 
Murshidabad. But when the information of the approach of an¬ 
other imperial army under Daud Khan, the governor of Bihar, to the 
assistance of Mir Jumla, reached him, he left Rajmahal and came 
back to Tanda (January, 1660). Sometime after, Muhammad Sultan 
deserted him and joined the imperialists but only to pass the rest 
of his life in imprisonment. Now all was over with Shuja‘. He had 
no other alternative but to take a precipitate flight to Dacca before 
Mir Jumla’s net could completely close round him. But even there, 
his position was not secure because of enmity of the local zamm- 
ddrs. As such, he was forced to leave Bengal and take shelter with 
the Magh Raja of Arakan. Here he conspired to seize the throne of 
his benefactor and then to proceed to recover Bengal. But the plot 
having leaked out, he tried to take to his heels but was pursued 
and slain (February, 1661). 

After great hardship, Daria had arrived at Ahmadabad where, 
with the assistance of Shah Navaz Khan, the governor of the pro¬ 
vince, he raised his army to 22,000 and marched towards Agra. On 
the way, on receipt of an invitation from Jasvant Singh who pro¬ 
mised to join him with his Rajput followers, he proceeded in the 
direction of Ajmer. But Jasvant Singh was meanwhile won over by 
the emperor, and Dara had no alternative but to fight with his 
brother who had already arrived at the vicinity. At the pass of 
Deorai, four miles south of Ajmer, he was once more defeated by 
Aurangzib (March, 1659) and compelled to go back towards Ahma¬ 
dabad. But unable to find refuge anywhere in Gujarat, he crossed 
the Rann once again and entered the southern coast of Sind (May, 
1659). Here, too, his position was miserable, as Aurangzlb’s pur¬ 
suing army and local officers closed his path from the north, east and 
south-east. Dara moved towards the north-west, crossed the Indus 
and proceeded towards Persia, via the Bolan pass and Qandahar. 


222 


AURANGZIB 


While on the way to Dadar, nine miles east of the Bolan pass, his 
beloved wife, Nadira Banu, succumbed to terrible hardship and ill¬ 
ness. Overwhelmed with grief, the bereaved prince sent her corpse 
to Lahore for burial, accompanied by his most faithful officer, Gul 
Muhammad, the soldiers still remaining with him. But to crown 
his misery, the ungrateful Malik Jivan, the chieftain of Dadar, whom 
he had once saved from death sentence and whose hospitality he 
accepted, seized him along with his second son Sipihr Shukoh and 
two daughters, and delivered them to Aurangzlb’s general Bahadur 
Khan. 

Brought to Delhi, Dara and Sipihr Shukoh were paraded through 
the streets with ignominy, and subsequently the former was tried 
by the court theologians on a charge of apostasy from Islam. He 
was found guilty and put to death (30 August, 1659). 

Dana’s eldest son, Sulaiman Shukoh, who had taken refuge in 
Garhwal, was captured and brought to Delhi in January, 1661. He 
was then sent as a state-prisoner to Gwalior where he was put to 
death (May, 1662) by overdoses of opium. 

At the instigation of Aurangzlb, a complaint was instituted 
against Murad by the second son of ‘All Naqi for the murder of his 
father, and the prince, having been declared guilty, was beheaded 
in the fort of Gwalior on 4 December, 1661. Thus, after removing 
his rivals one by one, Aurangzlb firmly secured his position, al¬ 
though the means to the end are open to severe criticism. 

He had celebrated his coronation for the second time on 5 June, 
1659, after his decisive victories against Shuja‘ and Dam at Khajuha 
and Deoriai, respectively. On this occasion, not only grand banquets 
and dazzling illuminations enlivened the function, but many officers 
and nobles were promoted and new appointments made. 

II. AURANGZIB AND NORTH INDIA 

The long “reign of Aurangzlb is naturally divided into two 
equal parts of about 25 years each, the first of which he passed in 
Northern India and the second in the Deccan. During the earlier 
of these two periods the centre of interest lies unmistakably in the 
North.... because the most important developments, civil and mili¬ 
tary, concerned this region. ... In the second half of the reign the 
situation is reversed: all the resources of the empire are concentrated 
in the Deccan; the Emperor, his court and family, the bulk of the 
army, and all his best officers live there for a quarter century, and 
Hindustan sinks back to a place of secondary importance . .. . the 


223 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


administration in Northern India naturally falls into decay at the 
v/ithdrawal of the master’s eye and the ablest officers; the people 
grow poorer; the upper classes decline in morals, intelligence and 
useful activity; finally, lawlessness breaks out in most parts”, 3 indi¬ 
cating the beginning of that great anarchy which prevailed through¬ 
out the eighteenth century. 

After his second coronation, the emperor gave his attention to 
alleviate the economic distress of the people. The prolonged war of 
succession and consequent disorder and confusion in the civil ad¬ 
ministration threatened the economic ruin of almost the whole of 
Northern India and grain was selling at exorbitant prices, beyond 
the reach of the ordinary people. The inland transit duties 
( rahdafi ) at every ford, ferry or provincial boundary, and the octroi 
( pandari ) levied in large towns like Agra, Delhi and Lahore, on 
articles of food and drink brought for sale from outside, enhanced 
the troubles as they not only hampered free movement of commodi¬ 
ties within the country but also increased their prices. The em¬ 
peror abolished both of them in the crown lands, and the assignees 
( jdgirdars ) and landholders ( zaimndtirs ) were asked to do so in 
their respective estates. By the abolition of ruhdurl alone, the govern¬ 
ment suffered a loss of twenty-five lakhs of rupees in revenue in 
the crown lands per annum. As a result of these measures, there 
was free movement of commodities from one place to another and 
their prices fell considerably. Many oppressive and burdensome 
abwubs (cesses) over and above the regular land revenue and 
customs duty were also abolished. Although forbidden again and 
again by various rulers like Firuz Tughluq, Akbar and Jahangir, 
they re-appeared every time after some intervals. The important 
abwubs or cesses were perquisites, gifts and subscriptions exacted 
by the officials in their own interest, fees and commissions realized 
for the State on various occasions, licence-tax for certain trades, 
duties on local sale of commodities and some special imposts on the 
Hindus, viz., the pilgrim’s tax, a tax on the occasion of the birth 
of a male child, and a tax for throwing the bones of the dead into 
the Ganges. Although they were abolished by Aurangzib and his 
actions showed his pious intention to do good to the people, his 
edicts could not be duly enforced in all regions, especially in far off 
places where the people suffered almost as before. 

From 1661 to 1667 the emperor received embassies from many 
Muhammadan powers outside India which had trade relations with 
Mughul India, congratulating him on his victories over his rivals 
and accession to the throne. Such embassies came from the Sharif 


224 


AURANGZlB 


of Mecca, the Safavi king of Persia, the kings of Balkh, Bukhara, 
Kashghar, the petty chieftains of Urganj (Khiva), Shahr-i-nau, the 
Turkish governors of Basra, Hadramaut or Southern Arabia to the 
north-east of Aden, Yaman and Mocha, the ruler of Barbary and 
the Christian king of Abyssinia. One embassy also came from Con¬ 
stantinople in 1690. Aurangzib’s “policy at the beginning was to 
dazzle the eyes of foreign princes by the lavish gift of presents to 
them and their envoys, and thus induce the outer Muslim world to 
forget his treatment of his father and brothers, or at least to show 
courtesy to the successful man of action and master of India’s un¬ 
told wealth, especially when he was so free with his money.” 4 

Although Shah ‘Abbas II, the Safavi king of Persia, sent a 
grand complimentary embassy in 1661, his relation with Aurangzlb 
became strained later on, leading to a complete rift due to the 
former’s overweening pride, and aggravated by the religious differ¬ 
ence between the two sovereigns, Shiah ‘Abbas II being a Shiah and 
Aurangzlb an orthodox Sunni. Parbiyat Khan, the Indian envoy, 
was rudely treated and humiliated at the Persian Court, and the 
Persian emperor threatened an invasion of the Mughul empire; 
though it did not materialize, Aurangzlb had to be very vigilant on 
the north-western frontier. With the death of Shah ‘Abbas II in 
1667, the danger of Persian invasion disappeared, as during the 
rest of the reign of Aurangzlb, Persia was too weak to strike. 

The relation between Aurangzlb and Shah Jahan since the 
latter became a captive in the Agra fort on 18 June, 1658, was very 
bitter. During the period of this captivity of the father, the son 
never visited Agra and his treatment of the former was a pitiable 
instance of open disregard for decorum and canons of morality and 
justice. Shah Jahan gradually realized the position into which he 
had been cast by the cruel hand of destiny. He was closely sur¬ 
rounded by the emperor’s guards and his movements within the fort 
were watched with strict vigilance. Acrimonious letters were ex¬ 
changed between the father and the son, and when the attempts of 
the former to correspond with Daria and Shuja‘ were detected, they 
made his position worse still. His bonds of captivity were tightened 
and writing materials were withheld from him; whatever he desired 
to write, had to be written through government staff, and such corres¬ 
pondence passed through government agents. There were sordid 
wranglings between the father and the son over the crown jewel¬ 
leries and those left by Dara in the Agra fort, and Aurangzlb took 
possession of them in spite of Shah Jahan’s remonstrances. The cor¬ 
respondence between them became so bitter that the father, without 

225 

M.E.— 15 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


further complaint, at last resigned to the inevitable. The heart¬ 
rending news of the sad end of Dara, Shuja‘, Murad and Sulaiman 
Shukoh gave him rude shocks, one after another, but he bore them 
with extraordinary patience. He spent his time in prayer 1 , reli¬ 
gious discourses, reading the Qur'an and performance of all other 
duties according to the canons of Islam. It was a great solace to 
him to receive till the last moment of his life the loving care of his 
eldest daughter, Jahanara, who shared with him all sorrows and 
miseries, consoling him with tenderness of a mother and daughter 
combined in one. Deprived of liberty, bereft of all powers and 
stricken down with bereavements, he only waited for deliverance 
from such a sad and gloomy existence, and at last it came on 22 
January, 1666, at the age of seventy-four, after an illness continuing 
for about fifteen days. 

During the first decade of Aurangzib’s reign there were a few 
disturbances in his empire, but they were local and not of much 
importance, and were easily put down. Champat Rai of Bundel- 
khand, who had rebelled against the emperor, was hunted from 
place to place and eventually, unable to defend, he stabbed him¬ 
self to death (1661). A disputed succession in Navanagar in Sau- 
rashtra led to the intervention of the Mughul suzerain. The faujdar 
of Junagarh after a desperate fight against the usurper Rai Singh, 
killed him, and restored Raja Chhatra Sal, Jam of Navanagar, in 
his possession (A.D. 1663). Rao Karan of Bikaner, who had de¬ 
fied the emperor's authority, was forced to submit and pardoned. 

The territorial expansion of the Mughul empire, initiated and 
continued by the predecessors of Aurangzib, went on during his re¬ 
gime also, and the early years of his reign witnessed the extension 
of the empire in various directions. In 1661, Daud Khan, the gover¬ 
nor of Bihar, invaded Palamau in South Bihar, then inhabited mostly 
by the Cheros, a Dravidian people, and conquered it. It was an¬ 
nexed to the Suba of Bihar. In 1665, as the result of a mission 
from the Mughul governor of Kashmir, the ruler of little Tibet or 
Ladakh, out of fear, acknowledged the suzerainty of the Mughuls, 
built a mosque at his capital and minted coins in the name of the 
emperor. 

A great military expedition was undertaken by the imperialists 
on the north-eastern side, in Assam. A branch of the Shan race, 
the Ahoms, who had been originally inhabitants of Upper Burma, 
migrated to Assam in the thirteenth century, conquering a part of 
the Brahmaputra valley. They went on expanding their kingdom 
in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries till they held sway up to 


226 


AURANGZiB 


the Bar Nadi river on the north-west and the Kalang river on the 
south-west. They were very hardy, worshipped demons and were 
feudally organized, but in the course of their stay in Assam, they 
began to be influenced by Indian civilization and the Hindu reli¬ 
gion. By the conquest of Kuch Hajo, embracing the present districts 
of Goalpara and Kamrup in Assam, in the early part of the seven¬ 
teenth century, the eastern boundary of the Mughul empire had 
extended up to the Bar Nadi. Thus a conflict between the Mughuls 
and the Ahoms was almost inevitable, and as a matter of fact, much 
desultory fighting went on between them in the course of which the 
Ahoms raided the eastern frontier of the Mughul empire. At last, 
a peace was concluded in 1638, according to which the Bar Nadi 
was recognized as the boundary between the two kingdoms. 

During the war of succession, taking advantage of the defence¬ 
less condition of the frontiers, the Ahoms as well as the Raja of 
Cooch Behar sent expeditionary forces to occupy the Mughul dis¬ 
trict of Kamrup from the east and west, respectively. Afraid of attacks 
from two sides, and without any hope of reinforcement from Ben¬ 
gal, Mir Lutf-ullah ShirazI, the faujdar of Gauhati, fled away to 
Dacca, leaving the district in a defenceless state. The Ahoms oc¬ 
cupied Gauhati, without any resistance, and much booty, including 
140 horses, 40 pieces of canon and 200 matchlocks, fell into their 
hands. They plundered the whole district and drove away the 
troops of Cooch Behar, and thus the whole of Western Brahmaputra 
valley came into their possession (A.D. 1658). 

After the civil war, the emperor appointed Mir Jumla as viceroy 
of Bengal (June, 1660) with orders to punish the miscreants and re¬ 
cover the Mughul territories. Having completed necessary prepara¬ 
tions, the viceroy started from Dacca early in November, 1661, with 
12,000 cavalry, 30,000 infantry and a flotilla of more than three 
hundred war-vessels. At first he went to Cooch Behar, the capital 
of which was occupied without any resistance, as the Raja and his 
officers had fled away in terror. After a successful campaign in 
this kingdom and annexing it to the Mughul empire, Mir Jumla 
proceeded against Assam. Although his path lay through forests 
and innumerable streams, he marched forward bearing all hard¬ 
ships and captured many forts of the enemies, viz, Joglgupha, Gau¬ 
hati, Srlghat, Pandu, Beltala, Klajali, Sadhara and Simla-garh. In 
a naval engagement he destroyed their navy and finally reached 
Garhgaon, the capital of the Ahom kingdom, on 17 March, 1662. 
The Ahom king, Jayadhwaj, had fled away, leaving his capital at the 
mercy of the invaders. Immense booty was captured by the impe¬ 
rialists in the course of the Assam campaign. 


227 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


The Mughul general made necessary arrangements for keeping 
hold over the conquered territories during the ensuing monsoon. 
A strong garrison was maintained in the occupied Ahom capital 
and outposts were established for guarding the routes. As the river 
near Garhgaon was shallow, the Mughul fleet had to be anchored 
at Lakhau, about eighteen miles north-west of that town, while 
the general himself with the main army halted at Mathurapur, a 
village on a high ground, seven miles south-east of Garhgaon. Such 
a separation of the land army and the navy became the cause of 
terrible sufferings of the imperialists. 

The Ahoms still retained sufficient strength to give blows to 
their enemies. They resumed offensive and surprised the Mughul 
outposts by night attacks; even Garhgaon was not spared. During 
the rainy season the Mughul occupation of Assam was extremely 
precarious; the country was flooded, communications were cut off, 
the outposts isolated and the imperial army remained practically 
“in a state of siege”. Communications between the Mughul army 
and the navy were also cut off by the enemies who concentrated 
their attacks on Garhgaon, which was repeatedly attacked and saved 
only by the exertions and gallantry of the Mughul soldiery. 

To add to the misery of the Mughuls, a serious epidemic broke 
out at Mathurapur, levying a heavy toll of lives in Mir Jumla’s 
camp. The disease spread to the whole of Assam and 230,000 of its 
inhabitants succumbed to it. The life at Mathurapur being intoler¬ 
able, the Mughul army came back to Garhgaon, leaving many of 
the sick who could not be carried for paucity of transport. But the 
refugees infected the army at Garhgaon, making the situation worse. 

“Through all these dark months of alarm, suspense and even 
despair” 5 the Mughul navy at Lakhau successfully maintained its 
touch with Gauhati and through it with the headquarters of Ben¬ 
gal. When the monsoon was over, Mir Jumla with great difficulty 
succeeded in re-opening communication with the fleet and provisions 
were sent in large quantities under escort from Lakhau to Garhgaon. 
In place of famine, the Mughul camp was now in plenty. 

Resuming operations against the enemies, the Mughul general 
marched to Tipam via Solaguri. But he was attacked with fainting 
fits which were soon followed by high fever and pleurisy. His 
troops refused to proceed further and enter the pestilential hills 
of Namrup where Jayadhwaj, the Ahom king, had taken refuge. 
The situation of the latter, too, became very miserable by the deser¬ 
tion of many of his notables and he made overtures of peace to Mir 
Jumla, who gladly received them, and a treaty was concluded be- 


228 


AURANGZIB 


tween the two parties. By it, Jayadhwaj consented to send a 
daughter to the imperial harem, pay an annual tribute and a heavy 
war-indemnity including 20,000 tolas of gold, 120,000 tolas of silver, 53 
to give hostages for full payment of the indemnity, and to cede more 
than half of the province of Darrang. 

Thus “judged as a military exploit, Mir Jumla’s invasion of 
Assam was a success.” 6 It was no doubt gained at great hardships 
and immense loss of lives but the Mughul general shared all suffer¬ 
ings with the common soldiers and steered successfully through all 
adverse circumstances with uncommon perseverance and fortitude. 
He was attacked with a serious malady, consumption, which had 
developed from his pleurisy. Over-exertion and unhealthy climatic 
conditions of the country ruined his health beyond recovery, and 
when he was on his way to Dacca after his successful expedition, 
he expired on 31 March, 1663. 

The Mughuls retained the conquests of Mir Jumla till 1667 
when the Ahom king, Chakradhwaj, after sending two detachments 
down the banks: of the Brahmaputra, succeeded in capturing the 
Mughul forts one after another, in rapid succession. Even Gauhati 
itself fell into his hands and its faujdar was taken prisoner. It be¬ 
came the headquarters of an Ahom viceroy. The Mughuls were 
thus driven back to the river Monas. For many years the attempts 
of the imperialists to recover their lost position failed, in spite of 
the appointment of Raja Ram Singh, the son and successor of Mlrza 
Raja Jay Singh, with supreme command over the expeditionary 
forces in Assam and his stay at Rangamati for several years. He 
was ultimately recalled in 1676. Although in 1679, the Mughuls 
recovered Gauhati by bribery, the Ahom king, Gadadhar Singh, re¬ 
took it in 1681, and thus Kiamrup was finally lost to them. 

In 1662 the raja of Cooch Behar had reconquered his kingdom by 
expelling the Mughul army of occupation, but, in 1664, out of fear, 
he again offered his submission to the imperialists and paid an in¬ 
demnity of five and a half lakhs of rupees to Shayista Khian, the 
new Governor of Bengal. Later on, taking advantage of serious 
dissensions and disorders within the kingdom, the Mughuls con¬ 
quered its southern and eastern portions, including the present dis¬ 
tricts of Rangpur and Western Kamrup. 

One of the most brilliant achievements of Shayista Khan as 
governor of Bengal was the conquest of Chittagong. The Fenny 
river formed the boundary between the Mughul empire and the 
Magh kingdom of Arakan but the Magh pirates, in conjunction with 
the Feringis or Portuguese adventurers and their half-caste off- 


229 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


springs, who used frequently to come to Bengal by the river-route, 
not only committed depredations and other heinous acts here, but 
also carried off the people, some of whom were employed in pillage 
or some other degrading pursuits, and sold others as slaves. The 
raids of these pirates rendered Deltaic Bengal desolate, causing 
serious damage to imperial prestige and heavy loss of revenue. 
Situated between Arakan and Bengal, Chittagong was a convenient 
base of operations of these miscreants, and it was of utmost neces¬ 
sity to bring it under the control of the imperial administration. 
With this end in view, Shayista Khan built a new navy of three 
hundred war-vessels and made proper arrangements for the protec¬ 
tion of Dacca against any possible attack by water. Next, in 
November, 1665, he captured the island of Sandwip. Meanwhile, 
he had been trying hard to win over the Feringis by liberal offers 
of service, and a serious quarrel between them and their Arakanese 
chiefs facilitated his design. All the Feringis of Chittagong fled 
with their family and property to the Mughul territory, where they 
were treated with liberality. 

A strong expeditionary force was then sent from Dacca to 
Chittagong under Buzurg Ummed Khan, a son of Shayista Khan, 
and admiral Ibn Husain. The imperial fleet consisted of 288 vessels 
of their own and about 40 vessels of the Feringis, as auxiliaries. 
It was planned that the land army and the navy should co-operate 
with each other. The Maghs were defeated in three naval engage¬ 
ments, and in the last of these, fought near the fort of Chittagong, 
the Arakanese navy suffered a heavy discomfiture; several ships 
were sunk and one hundred and thirty-five captured by the imperial¬ 
ists. The fort of Chittagong was then besieged and captured, the 
garrison having surrendered after the resistance of a day only (26 
January, 1666). 

The conquered territory was placed under direct imperial ad¬ 
ministration. The name of Chittagong was changed to Islamabad 
and it became the headquarters of a Mughul faujdar. The most im¬ 
portant benefits of the victory were the release of thousands of 
Bengal peasants who had been kidnapped and held there as serfs 
and the increase of cultivation in the areas so long rendered deso¬ 
late by the oppressions of the Maghs and Feringis. 

The north-western frontier had all along been a source of 
trouble to the Mughul empire. The various Afghan clans like the 
Afrldls, Yusufzals and Khattaks living in that hilly region were noto¬ 
rious for highway robbery from time immemorial. Their lands being 
arid and less productive, they found it more profitable for their 


230 


AURANGZiB 


sustenance to plunder the inhabitants of the plains and rich traders 
who happened to pass through their country. Finding it too diffi¬ 
cult to keep them under control by force of arms, the Mughul em¬ 
perors bribed these hillmen with a view to maintaining peace and 
keeping the routes in the north-western frontier open to traffic. 
Aurangzib paid the various border chiefs six lakhs of rupees annual¬ 
ly, but even these bribes did not always succeed in maintaining 
peace in that hilly region where new leaders arose and used 
to plunder the Mughul territory. The trouble commenced early in 
1667, when the Yusufzais living in the Swat and Bajaur valleys 
and the plain of northern Peshawar, rose in arms under their leader 
Bhagu who crowned a pretender under the title of Muhammad Shah 
and crossed the Indus near Attock. Entering the Hazara district 
he attacked the Mughul outposts there, while other Yusufzai bands 
ravaged the western Peshawar and Attock districts, and then com¬ 
ing over to the south bank of the Indus at Harun, they attempted 
to hold the ferry there with a view to preventing the Mughul army 
from crossing into the tribal territory. But they were severely 
beaten back by Kamil Khan, the commandant of Attock, and the 
Mughul territory on the south side of the Indus was thus cleared 
of the enemies (April, 1667). In the following month Shamsher 
Khan, another commander, crossed the Indus, and, marching into 
the Yusufzai country, gained several victories over them and des¬ 
troyed many of their farms and homesteads. Muhammad Amin 
Khan who was next invested with the supreme command to punish 
these rebels, inflicted such severe blows on them that they remain¬ 
ed quiet for some years. 

In 1672 there was another rising in the frontier region. The 
Afrldi Chieftain, Akmal Khan, crowned himself king and declared 
a holy war against the imperialists, inviting all the Pathans to join 
him in this national struggle. The Khyber pass was closed and 
the rebels attacked Muhammad Amin Khan, then governor of 
Afghanistan, at ‘All Masjid, cutting him off from the stream from 
which he received his supply of water. Their severe assaults in 
the hilly region were too much for the Mughuls to bear and they 
were thrown into utter confusion. The imperialists suffered heavy 
discomfiture and immense losses in men and property. Muhammad 
Amin Khan and some of his high officers somehow succeeded in 
escaping to Peshawar. Such a grand victory enhanced the fame and 
resources of Akmal Khan and lured more recruits to his banner. The 
rebellion spread in the entire frontier regions; the Khattak clan, 
also, joined the Afrldis, and Khush-hal Khan, the poet and leader 


231 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


of the former, became the guiding spirit of this national struggle of 
the Pathans. 

The defeat of Amin Khan gave a rude shock to Aurangzib who 
degraded him and sent Mahabat Khan as governor of Afghanistan. 
But the new governor avoided any risky action and entered into a 
secret understanding with the rebels not to molest each other; and 
so the Khyber pass remained closed as before. Highly displeased, 
the emperor sent Shuja‘at Khan with a large force to punish the 
rebels but he was defeated and killed in the Karapa pass on 22 
February, 1674. 

The situation became so alarming that the emperor himself 
proceeded to Hasan Abdal, near Peshawar, for directing the opera¬ 
tions. Mahabat Khan was removed from the governorship and all 
possible actions were taken against the rebels. The emperor used 
both arms and diplomacy with much success. Many clans were 
bought over with presents, pensions and posts in the Mughul army, 
while the more refractory clans like the Ghorai, Ghilzal, Shirani 
and Yusufzais were crushed by arms. The imperial commander, 
Uighur Khan, won repeated victories over the Afghans and created 
awe and panic among them. The position of the Mughuls improved 
sufficiently by the end of 1675 and Aurangzib left Hasan Abdal for 
Delhi after his stay at the former place for a year and a half. 

He appointed Amffi Khan, the son of Khalil-ullah, governor of 
Kabul in 1677. This choice was most befitting. Amir Khan, who 
had already distinguished himself by his capabilities, governed 
Afghanistan with singular tact, energy and efficiency till his death 
in 1698. By his diplomacy and conciliatory policy he succeeded in 
restoring order in the frontier and keeping the Khyber pass open 
to traffic. His success was to a great extent due to the tact and 
wise counsel of his wife. 

His policy of paying subsidies to the tribal leaders and creat¬ 
ing dissensions among the clans bore fruit, leading to the break-up 
of the confederacy under Akmal Khan, and on the death of the 
latter, the Afrldls submitted and came to terms with the emperor. 
But the unbending and high-spirited Khattak leader, Khush-hal 
Khan, continued the struggle for many years more, undaunted by 
the inimical actions of the Bangashes, Yusufzais and his own son 
Ashraf who had joined hands with the Mughuls. Alone did he 
fight for the cause of Pathan independence till he was betrayed by 
his son, culminating in his capture and imprisonment by his enemies. 
The war of Aurangzib on the north-west frontier thus came to a suc¬ 
cessful end, though at a heavy cost. Sir Jadunath Sarkar is per- 


232 


AURANGZIB 


fectly justified when he says: “Ruinous as the Afghan war was to 
imperial finances, its political effect was even more harmful. It 
made the employment of Afghans in the ensuing Rajput war impos¬ 
sible, though Afghans were just the class of soldiers who could have 
won victory for the imperialists in that rugged and barren country. 
Moreover, it relieved the pressure on ShivajI by draining the Dec- 
can of the best Mughul troops for service on the N.W. frontier.” 7 
Taking advantage of this diversion of the imperial forces, the 
Maratha king conquered Carnatic (1667) without any opposition. 

III. ORTHODOXY AND BIGOTRY 

No one can possibly underestimate the great influence exerted 
on the life and activities of Aurangzib by the orthodox reform move¬ 
ment in Indian Islam started by Mujaddid Alf-i-SanI Shaikh Ahmad 
Sirhindl (1563-1624), the aims of which were regeneration and re¬ 
juvenation of Islam in strict accord with the shar’iyat and “the es¬ 
tablishment of a true Islamic State conforming to Islamic ideas and 
practices in all its activities. . . . ”. ?a While a prince, Aurangzib came 
into contact with Khvaja Muhammad M‘asum, son of Mujaddid Ah¬ 
mad Sirhindl. He held him in high esteem and sought his advice on 
important matters of Muslim theology. After his accession to the 
throne also, he maintained his contact with the Khvaja and his son 
Muhammad Saifuddln as well, and their influence had much to do 
in bringing him within the fold of the orthodox school and shaping 
his puritanic state policy. 

Aurangzib had claimed the throne as the champion of Sunni 
orthodoxy against the liberal-minded Dara whom he considered to 
be a heretic. It was neither his personal caprice nor any political 
or material gain that shaped his policy. As a zealous Sunhi Muslim, 
he believed in the Islamic theory of Kingship according to which the 
ruler is to enforce strictly the Qur’anic law in the administration of 
his empire, or in other words, as a pious Muslim, he considered it 
to be his duty to “exert himself in the path of God” i.e., to carry on 
jihad (holy war) against infidels and convert his realm from ddr-ul- 
harb (non-Muslim land) to dar-ul-IslcLm (realm of Islam). In pur¬ 
suance of this ideal, he reversed the policy enunciated by Akbar, the 
Great, in regard to his non-Muslim subjects, who, in consequence, 
suffered from various social, political and economic disabilities and 
felt degraded because of the inferior position they held in the empire. 
Such discriminatory measures alienated the sympathy and good will 
of the vast majority of his non-Muslim subjects, eventually under¬ 
mining the foundation on which rested the political fabric of the 
empire. 


233 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


In 1659 he issued a number of ordinances for restoring the Mus¬ 
lim law of conduct according to the teaching of the Qur’an. He dis¬ 
continued the practice of inscribing the kalima (Muhammadan con¬ 
fession of faith) on the coins lest they were defiled by men of other 
faiths, and abolished the celebration of the new year’s day ( nauruz ) 
of the Zoroastrian calendar—a custom followed by the Mughul emper¬ 
ors in imitation of the Persian kings. The cultivation of bhang 
(cannabis Indica) was forbidden throughout the empire. Censors of 
public morals ( muhtasibs ) wetfe appointed in all big cities to en¬ 
force the Qur’anic law and put down the practices forbidden in it, 
like drinking of wine, gambling and illicit traffic of women. Their 
duties also included punishment of Muslims for heretical opinions, 
blasphemy, omission of obligatory prayers and Ramzan fast. In en¬ 
forcing orthodoxy the emperor did not spare the Sufis and Shiahs, 
where deemed necessary. Among the important sections of the 
Muslim population who suffered serious persecution for heresy was 
the Isma‘ilia or Bohra community of Gujarat. 

In 1668 the emperor forbade music at his court and the court 
musicians and singers were pensioned off. The royal band was not, 
however, discontinued. The ceremony of weighing the emperor 1 on 
his two birthdays, according to the lunar and solar calendars, against 
precious articles like gold and silver, and the practice of Jharokd - 
darsan, a custom according to which the Mughul emperors used to 
appear every morning at the outer balcony of their palace to receive 
the salute of the subjects, were discontinued, as these were un- 
Islamic. The emperor also forbade the customary rejoicings on his 
birthdays and on the anniversary of his coronation. 

Although every endeavour was made to enforce his regulations 
and elevate his subjects, it was not possible to achieve the desired 
result, as they were not yet prepared to follow his high ideals of 
puritanical morality. Drinking and gambling were so much deep- 
rooted in the country that it was simply impossible to stamp out 
these evils by a stroke of the pen. The orders regarding the cour¬ 
tesans and dancing girls either to get themselves married or leave 
the empire were also not effective. Similarly, the emperor’s edict 
prohibiting the rite of satl or burning of a Hindu widow along with 
the dead body of her husband, could not be duly enforced owing to 
strong opposition of the people. 

In a farmdn gr'anted to a priest of Banaras in 1659, Aurangzlb 
‘avowed that his religion forbade him to allow the building of new 
temples, but did not enjoin the destruction of old ones’. In 1664 
he forbade old temples to be repaired, and on 9 April, 1669, an 


234 


AURANGZIB 


order was issued to the governors of the provinces “to demolish the 
schools and temples of the infidels and put down their teaching and 
religious practices strongly.” 8 Besides innumerable temples through¬ 
out the empire, even the famous Hindu temples of Viisvanatha at 
Banaras, of Keshav Dev at Mathura, and Somnath at Patan were 
destroyed. Even the loyal State of Jaipur was not spared, and 
sixty-six temples were razed to the ground at Amber. 

An order was issued re-imposing the jizya tax on the Hindus 
from 2 April, 1679, “with the object of spreading Islam and over¬ 
throwing infidel practices.” 9 It was a commutation tax, i.e., the 
price of indulgence, and had to be paid by an assessee in person 
with marks of humility. For its assessment and collection the non- 
Muslim population was roughly divided into three grades; the first 
grade having an income above 10,000 dirhams had to pay 48 dirhams, 
the second, whose income was from 200 to 10,000 dirhams paid 24 
dirhams , and the third, i.e., those whose income fell below 200 
dirhams paid 12 dirhams a year, the value of a dirham being a 
little more than a quarter of a rupee. It appears that the jizya hit 
the poor non-Muslim population most, as the rate of taxation in 
their case was heavy in proportion to their income. Women, chil¬ 
dren below fourteen, slaves, beggars and paupers were exempted 
from this tax. Of the monks, the heads of wealthy monasteries 
only had to pay; government officials were however, exempted 
from this tax. 

Aurangzlb ignored all protests and remained adamant in rea¬ 
lizing the jizya. He felt gratified when many Hindus, unable to 
pay it, embraced Islam. 

Various other measures were adopted to put pressure on the 
Hindus with a view to increasing the number of converts to Islam. 
By an edict in April, 1665, the customs duty on the commodities 
brought in for sale was fixed at 2 \ per cent, ad valorem for Muslim 
merchants and 5 per cent, for the Hindu merchants. In May, 1667, 
this duty in the case of Muslim traders was abolished, whereas it 
was retained at the old rate of 5 per cent, on the Hindus. The em¬ 
peror offered rewards and posts in the public service, liberation 
from imprisonment and even succession to property under dis¬ 
pute in favour of those who would embrace Islam. In 1671 an 
order was passed for the dismissal of all Hindu head-clerks and 
accountants, and replacing them by Muslims, but due to paucity of 
qualified Muhammadans the emperor, later on, allowed half of these 
posts to be held by the Hindus. In 1668 all Hindu religious fairs 
were prohibited, and in March 1695 another order was passed for- 


235 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


bidding the Hindus, except the Rajputs, to ride in pallets (palan¬ 
quins), on elephants and good horses; they were also forbidden to 
carry arms. 93 

All these discriminatory measures of the emperor produced far- 
reaching and disastrous consequences, impairing the stability of the 
empire. The affected Hindu community became highly discontent¬ 
ed, and opposition to the destruction of their holy temples was of¬ 
fered in Rajasthan, Bundelkhand, Malwa and Khandesh, and many 
converted mosques were demolished or the call to prayer was stop¬ 
ped. In certain places the j izya collectors were assaulted and 
driven out. 


IV. REACTION AGAINST BIGOTRY 

The first great Hindu reaction against the emperor’s policy of 
persecution occurred in the district of Mathura. Early in 1669, the 
sturdy Jat peasantry under their leader Gokla of Tilpat took up arms 
against the imperialists and killed ‘Abd-un-Nabi, the oppressive 
faujddr of Mathura. They then sacked the parga^a of Sadabiad and 
created disorder and confusion in the neighbouring district of Agra 
also. A strong reinforcement under Ra‘dandaz Khan was of no 
avail and the emperor himself proceeded to the disturbed area. 
Gokla mustered 20,000 men and fought valiantly but was at last 
overpowered by Hasan ‘All Khan, the Mughul commandant of 
Mathura. The Jat leader was put to death and the members of his 
family were converted to Islam. 

In 1672 the formidable rising of the Satnamls took place in 
the districts of Narnaul and Mewat. The Satnamls were a peaceful 
sect, believing in the unity of God, mostly employed in agriculture. 
They were honest, industrious and formed a brotherhood, calling 
themselves Satnamls, Satniam meaning good name. As they used 
to shave their head and face including eye-brows, they were popu¬ 
larly called Mundiyas. A petty quarrel near Narnaul between a 
Satnami cultivator and a Mughul foot-soldier of the local revenue 
collector led to the outbreak. The high-handedness of the soldier 
was too much for them to bear and the wrangling soon developed 
into a religious war against the Mughuls. The Satnamis defeated 
the imperialists on several occasions and took possession of the town 
and district of Narnaul. When these alarming news reached the em¬ 
peror, he sent there a large force under Ra‘dandaz Khan, equipped 
with artillery. The Satnamis fought with courage and determina¬ 
tion but could not succeed against the well-organized and well-equip¬ 
ped Mughul force. Two thousand men of this sect fell fighting 


236 


AURANGZiB 


on the field and many of them were killed during the pursuit. The 
rebellion was thus crushed and the affected areas brought under 
control. 

Aurangzib’s policy of intolerance and religious persecution rous¬ 
ed the Sikhs to take up arms against him. He passed an order for 
the demolition of the Sikh temples and expulsion of the Sikh Guru’s 
agents from the cities. Tegh Bahadur, the Sikh Guru, offered open 
opposition and encouraged the Hindus of Kashmir in their resist¬ 
ance against forcible conversion to Islam. But he was siezed and 
taken to Delhi where he was imprisoned. On his refusal to em¬ 
brace Islam, he was put to death after torture for five days (De¬ 
cember, 1675). 

The Sikhs were thus turned into bitter enemies of the Mughul 
government. Govinda Singh, the next Guru and the only son of 
Tegh Bahadur, was determined to avenge his father’s cruel murder. 
He devoted his time and energy in transforming the Sikhs into a 
military community and instituted the custom of baptism wth a 
new oath. Those who accepted this baptism were known as the 
Khalsa (pure) and the members were required to put on a distinct¬ 
ive dress, keeping five things on their person, viz., Kesh (hair), 
Kangha (comb), Kripdn (sword), Kachha (underwear) and Kara 
(iron bangle). They were to give up all restrictions about caste, 
food and drink. “The Sikhs felt themselves to be a chosen people, 
the Lord’s elect. Everything was, therefore, ready for converting 
the sect into a military body obedient to its chief to the death,.... 
and ever ready to surrender the individual conscience to that of the 
guru.” 10 

In the hilly regions of the northern Punjab, Guru Govinda fought 
against the local Muslim chiefs and Hindu rajas who had been asked 
to co-operate with the imperial forces in suppressing him, and won 
some victories over them. His stronghold at Anandapur was be¬ 
sieged five times, and at last he had to leave it to take refuge in 
the plains, hotly pursued by the imperialists. His four sons were 
slain and he had no alternative but to proceed to the Deccan through 
Bikaner. He came back to Northern India after the death of 
Aurangzib and joined Bahadur Shah in the war of succession with 
his brothers. He also accompanied Bahadur Shah to the Deccan and, 
while encamped at Nander on the Godavari, he was murdered by 
an Afghan follower (1708). 

He was the tenth and last Guru of the Sikhs. Before his death, 
his instruction to his followers was to get themselves organized into 
a military democracy, without having any more need of a Guru. 


237 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


V. FIGHT WITH THE RAJPUTS 

Aurangzlb was on the look-out for a suitable opportunity to 
establish direct control over Mar war, one of the most powerful Hindu 
States in Northern India. The reasons behind his motive were that 
it occupied a position of strategic importance, as through it lay the 
shortest military and commercial routes from the Mughul capital 
to the rich cities and ports of Gujarat, and, secondly, such a power¬ 
ful State was not only a menace to the safety of the empire but it 
might also offer stubborn opposition to his cherished religious policy. 
Its Maharaja, Jasovanta Singh Rathor, who had fought against 
Aurangzlb in the battle of Dharmat and committed treachery against 
him prior to that of Khajuha, was afterwards appointed by the em¬ 
peror in responsible positions. Since the death of Raja Jay Singh 
of Amber in 1667, he occupied the foremost place among the Hindu 
peers in the Mughul court. While commanding the Mughul frontier 
posts in the Khyber pass and the Peshawar district, he died at 
Jamrud on 10 December, 1678, without an heir. This offered Aurang- 
zib an opportunity to give effect to his contemplated design. On 
hearing of the Maharaja’s death, he took steps to seize Marwar and 
place it under direct rule of the Mughul government. He himself 
went to Ajmer to supervise the actions. As the State was then 
without a head and many Rathor officers and troops were in Afgha¬ 
nistan, no resistance could be offered, and Marwar was easily brought 
under imperial control. The emperor then went back to Delhi (2 
April, 1679), and on that very day re-imposed the jizya on the 
Hindus. Meanwhile, he learnt that the two widowed queens of 
Jasovanta had given birth to two posthumous sons, but he remained 
adamant in his purpose without any thought of legitimate succession. 
Indra Singh Rathor, the chieftain of Nagaur and grand-nephew of 
Jasovanta Singh, was recognized as the Maharaja of Marwar on pay¬ 
ment of a succession fee of thirty-six lakhs of rupees, and as he had 
no local support, the Mughul generals and other officers in occupa¬ 
tion of the country were kept there for his assistance. 

Towards the end of June, the family of Jasovanta Singh, includ¬ 
ing the surviving son Ajit Singh, reached Delhi, the other child 
having died a few weeks after birth. The rights of Ajit Singh had 
been urged before the emperor more than once. According to one 
opinion, Aurangzlb ordered that the child should be brought up in the 
royal harem till he would come of age when his rights would be duly 
recognized; and according to another version, “the throne of Jodhpur 
was offered to Ajit on condition of his turning Muslim. Such a 
proposal would be quite in keeping with Aurangzlb’s past policy, 
as he had lately given the zamlndaris of Jogigarh, Deogarh, and 


238 


AURANGZIB 


Mau to those among rival claimants who had agreed to accept Islam.” 11 
In 1703, also, we find the same policy pursued by the emperor when 
he offered the Maratha throne to the captive Maratha prince Shahu. 12 
This extraordinary proposal was too much for the loyal Rathors 
who made up their mind to rescue A jit even at the cost of their lives. 
At such a critical juncture, they were fortunate in having a leader of 
rare ability like Durga Das, the son of Jasovanta’s minister Askaran, 
and “the flower of Rajput chivalry.” He was a man of undaunted 
heroism, inflexible determination, unswerving loyalty, and combined 
in himself all the requisite qualities of an efficient general. 

Aurangzib sent a strong force to seize A jit and the Ranis. While 
the Mughuls besieged the mansion of Jasovanta in Delhi, a band of 
brave Rathors opposed them with all their might, and another party 
under Durga Das stealthily came out of the mansion with Ajit and 
his mothers in male attire and rode away towards Marwar. Al¬ 
though he was overtaken by the imperialists at a distance of nine 
miles, a band of Rajputs under Ranchhor Das Jodha opposed them 
to the last man and, overcoming all opposition, Durga Das and his 
party reached Marwar. Ajit was kept in a safe place of hiding. 
Baffled in his attempt to seize Jasovanta’s son, Aurangzib took a 
milkman’s baby in his harem and proclaimed him to be true Ajit. 
Durga Das’s protege was declared fictitious and Indra Singh was 
removed for his incapacity; but Marwar was far from subdued. The 
Rathors had taken up arms against Mughul oppression, and Aurang¬ 
zib again went to Ajmer (25 September, 1679), despatching his son, 
prince Akbar, with a large army against the Rathors. Success attend¬ 
ed Mughul arms and all the great towns including Jodhpur were 
plundered and temples destroyed. 

Maharana Raj Singh of Mewar realized the gravity of the situa¬ 
tion, and could well understand that his State would be the next 
victim of imperial aggression. He had been asked to pay the jizya 
tax for his entire State and this was as humiliating as vexatious. 
Added to these was also his deep concern for the safety of Marwar 
whose queen and mother of Ajit was a Mewar princess. But ere 
he could strike, the Mughul general, Hasan ‘All Khan, with seven 
thousand chosen troops attacked Mewar. Unable to defend the 
plains, the Maharana deserted them and retired with his men to the 
hills. The Mughul army occupied his capital Udaipur and the fort 
of Chitor, and destroyed the temples there. Pursuing the Maharana, 
Hasan ‘All defeated him and inflicted heavy losses on him (22 Janu¬ 
ary, 1680). 

The emperor who had been guiding the military operations then 
left Udaipur and returned to Ajmer, leaving prince Akbar in Mewar 


239 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


and another force in Marwar. But the Mughul troops in Mewar and 
Marwar were too far to combine for any united action, if need be 
Moreover, the troops under prince Akbar were too small for the 
territories to be controlled. The Rajputs carried on guerilla warfare, 
raiding the Mughul outposts, cutting off their supplies and thus creat¬ 
ing terror among the Mughuls. Even Akbar’s camp near Chitor was 
once surprised at night. After this the Mahiarana proceeded to the 
Bednor district, threatened Akbar’s communications with Ajmer 
and defeated him; the losses suffered by the imperialists on this occa¬ 
sion were very heavy. These reverses infuriated the emperor who 
transferred the prince to Marwar for his slackness and incapacity, 
placing prince A‘zam in charge of Chitor. A grand plan was made to 
enter into the hills of Mewar from three directions under the leader¬ 
ship of three princes, A‘zam, Mua‘zzam and Akbar, but it did not even¬ 
tually succeed, as the princes could not act up to the plan. As Akbar 
could not fare better in Marwar than in Mewar, he despaired of suc¬ 
cess. Disgusted with censures from his father and removed from 
Mewar, and finding no other means of improving his situation, he 
hailed the invitation of the Rajputs in wresting the crown of Delhi 
from his father with their assistance. Both Durga Das and Maha- 
rana Raj Singh assured him of their support but the death of the 
Maharana (22 October, 1680) delayed the project for some time. Jay 
Singh, the son and successor of Raj Singh, also agreed to lend his 
support to the prince who, on 1 January, 1681, proclaimed himself 
emperor of Delhi, and on the following day, marched with his Rathor 
and Sisodia allies against his father who was then at Ajmer, 
Aurangzlb had great affection for this son and was rudely shocked 
by his conduct. He had then a meagre force with him, and had 
Akbar arrived at Ajmer in haste without whiling away his time 
in pleasure, the emperor’s position would have been extremely 
critical. But a fortnight’s delay, which was solely due to his care¬ 
free movements, was fully utilized by Aurangzlb in calling reinforce¬ 
ments and strengthening his position. Meanwhile, despite paucity 
of his men, he had gone out of Ajmer and taken up his stand at a 
place ten miles south of it. 

As Akbar advanced nearer his father, desertions followed from 
his camp in large number, but 30,000 Rajputs remained faithful to 
him. Arriving at a distance of three miles from his father’s camp, 
he halted there for the night for a battle on the next morning. 
During the night the shrewd emperor took to diplomacy for win¬ 
ning over the prince’s adherents. Tahavvur Khan was the right- 
hand man of Akbar, but the father-in-law of the former then held 
a high office under Aurangzlb, who had a letter written by him to 


240 


AURANGZIB 


his son-in-law, promising him pardon, in the event of his coming 
over to the side of the imperialists, but in case of his non-compli¬ 
ance, his family then held as hostages in the imperial camp, would 
be materially injured. Highly perturbed, Tahavvur Khan secretly 
left his tent to meet the emperor but was slam by the imperial 
attendants. 

Meantime, the emperor had written a false letter to his re¬ 
bellious son, commending him for bringing the principal Rajputs 
with him, according to his (emperor’s) plan, so as to have them 
crushed between the imperial army and those of the prince in the 
next day’s battle. As intended, the letter was dropped near the 
Rajput camp, and it upset Durga Das when he read it. He went to 
Akbar for an explanation, but when informed that the prince was 
asleep, he sent men to call Tahavvur Khan only to learn that the 
latter had already left for the imperial camp. Believing treachery 
on the part of the prince, the Rajputs fell on his camp, looted as 
much as they could and hurried towards Mewar. After this, most 
of his other troops also deserted him and joined the emperor. When 
Akbar awoke and found himself in a helpless condition, he retreated 
hurriedly towards Mewar with some members of his family and the 
treasure he could carry. 

As soon as the real matter came to light, Durga Das lent his 
helping hand to the prince and took him under his protection. 
Evading the Mughul pursuers, he escorted Akbar successfully 
through Rajasthan, Khandesh, and Baglana to the shelter of the 
Maratha king, Shambhuji. 

Aurangzffib’s plan of action in Mewar was considerably affected 
by the prince’s flight to the Deccan, and he was eager to patch up 
a peace with the Maharana for personal supervision of strong mili¬ 
tary operations against his son in the Deccan. On the other hand, 
the Maharana also earnestly desired peace, specially because of ex¬ 
tensive devastation of his cornfields by his enemies, threatening 
the whole population to starvation. He visited prince Muhammad 
A‘zam (14 June, 1681) and concluded a treaty with him. Accord¬ 
ing to its terms, Mewar was restored to Jay Singh with the title of 
Rana and a mansab of 5,000. He had to cede the pargands of 
Mandal, Pur and Bednor to the Mughuls in lieu of the jizya im¬ 
posed on his kingdom. But Aurangzlb’s war with Marwar con¬ 
tinued for about twenty-seven years more. After the treaty with 
Jay Singh, the emperor sent a powerful force under prince A‘zam 
to pursue Akbar and he himself proceeded hurriedly towards the 
Deccan, reaching Burhanpur on 13 November, 1681, and Auranga¬ 
bad on 22 March, 1682. 

241 

M.E.—16 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


VI. AURANGZlB AND SHIVAJ! 

During the first half of his reign, as the emperor had been busy 
in the north, he left the administration and military operations of 
the Deccan in the hands of his viceroys. The two States of Bijapur 
and Golconda were then in process of decay, but on account of pau¬ 
city of fighting forces in the Deccan, absence of firm determina 1 - 
tion and a strong and vigorous policy on the part of the Mughul 
viceroys, as also lack of mutual co-operation and support of their 
officers, these States could not be annexed to the empire till the 
emperor’s personal presence there in the second half of his reign. 

The third kingdom in the Deccan was that of the Marathas 
created by the zeal and untiring efforts of their leader Shivaji, 
whose father, ShahjI Bhonsle, originally a small jdgirdar under the 
Sultan of Ahmadnagar, became later on a king-maker there, but 
after his defeat by the imperialists in 1636, entered the service 
of the ‘Adil Shahll Sultan as a leading Hindu general. 

A detailed account of Shivaji will be given in the next Chapter. 
Imbued with an uncommon spirit of adventure and love of inde¬ 
pendence from his early life, Shivaji! moved freely among the sturdy 
people of the Mavals or western belt of the Poona district, “hard¬ 
ened himself to a life of privation and strenuous exertion”, and 
after gathering recruits from these healthy and brave men, he com¬ 
menced his activities for the building up of an independent 
kingdom. 

The continued illness of Muhammad ‘Adil Shah from 1646 to 
his death in 1656 afforded Shivaji a good opportunity to carry out 
his designs and he captured, one by one, several Bijapur forts, viz., 
Torna, Kondhana (Sinhgarh), Rohira, Chakan, and Purandar and 
built the fort of Raigarh, three miles from Torna. He also surprised 
Shambhuji Mohite and took possession of Supa, south-east of Poona. 
The year 1656 saw his conquest of the State of Javll in the Maha- 
baleswar range and this acquisition not only opened his path for 
further conquests in the south and south-west but also secured him 
the service of many Mavle infantrymen from it. Here he acquired 
also a vast accumulated treasure which immensely increased his 
financial resources. Two miles west of Javll, he constructed a new 
fort for the protection of this area and named it Pratapgarh. These 
were followed up by his important exploits in north Konkan where 
the rich towns of Kalyan and Bhiwandl and the fort of Mahuli 
came into his possession, and in this way he got a firm footing in 
northern Konkan. “By the year 1659 he had extended his domi- 


242 


AURANGZIB 


nions in the uplands or Desk to the southern limit of the Satara dis¬ 
trict, and in Konkan from Mahuli to near Mahad.” 13 

The Bijapur government sent Afzal Khan in 1659 to capture the 
Maratha leader dead or alive, but Afzal Khan himself was slain and 
the Bijapur army sustained severe losses. This wonderful feat not 
only enhanced the self-reliance of the Maratha chief but also in¬ 
creased his power and prestige, and rudely shocked the ‘Adil Shah! 
Sultanate. Next he took possession of South Konkan and the 
Kolhapur district. 

But next year (1660), he was besieged in the fort of Panhala 
by the Bijapur general, Sldl Jauhar, and compelled to evacuate it. 

Taking advantage of the Mughul invasion of Bijapur and the 
diversion of the imperial forces, ShivajI had raided Mughul terri* 
tories in the districts of Ahmadnagar and Junnar (1657) and even 
plundered the wealthy city of Junnar. Aurangzib, who was then 
viceroy of the Deccan, took prompt action against him. He was sur¬ 
prised and routed, and Maratha villages ravaged. When Bijapur con¬ 
cluded peace with the imperialists, ShivajI, too, submitted to them. 
Although Aurangzib forgave him for the time being, he could not 
place reliance on his adversary’s plighted words and waited for an 
opportunity to strike him after the war of succession. 

After his accession to the throne, Aurangzib sent Shayista Khian 
as viceroy of the Deccan with instruction to crush ShivajI. Com¬ 
mencing his campaign early in 1660, the new viceroy took posses¬ 
sion of Poona, the fort of Chakan, Kalyan and north Konkan in 
the course of about a year and a half, but the Maratha chief gave 
him a serious blow by a surprise night attack on his residence in 
Poona on 5 April, 1663, wounding him and slaying, among others, 
one of his sons and six women of his harem. In January, 1664, 
ShivajI sacked Surat, a very wealthy port in the Mughul empire, 
and returned with a rich booty exceeding one crore of rupees in 
value. 

Highly perturbed, Aurangzib transferred Shayista Khan to 
Bengal and sent Jay Singh of Amber, one of the greatest generals 
and diplomats of the age, with Dilir Khan, an efficient general, to 
put down ShivajI and chastise ‘All £ Adil Shah II for his evasion of the 
conditions of the treaty of 1657 and his secret aid to the Maratha 
chief. By his wonderful tact and skilful handling of the situation, 
Jay Singh succeeded in securing the support and ungrudging assist¬ 
ance of those whom ShivajI had antagonized in one way or the 
other, and thus creating a ring of enemies around the latter, the 


243 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Mughul viceroy and generalissimo of the Deccan made Shivaji’s 
position extremely precarious. Next, the fort of Purandar, where 
the families of the Maratha officers had been kept, was besieged, 
while another Mughul detachment was sent to plunder and burn 
the villages of Maharashtra. 

At last, finding it very difficult to defend the fortress any 
longer, ShivajS personally visited Jay Singh and concluded the 
treaty of Purandar with him (12 June, 1665), whereby he ceded 
twenty-three of his forts to the imperialists, retaining twelve only 
for himself, acknowledged the suzerainty of the Mughul emperor 
and promised to serve him loyally in the Deccan. The Maratha 
chief served the imperialists with complete loyalty during their in¬ 
vasion of Bijapur shortly afterwards. 14 

On Jay Singh’s advice and assurance of safety, Shivajif paid a 
visit to the emperor in his court at Agra on 12 May, 1666. There 
he was ranked as a mcmsabddr of 5,000 only, and feeling highly 
humiliated at this, he made a loud protest in the open court accus¬ 
ing the emperor of breach of faith, and swooned. For this un¬ 
usual conduct, he was kept under guard and forbidden to attend 
the court. It was after three months of captivity at Agra that 
eluding the vigilance of the guards, he managed to escape with his 
son in two baskets of sweetmeats (19 August, 1666) and reached 
Raigarh in the guise of a mendicant on 12 September. 15 

After his successful termination of war with the Maratha chief, 
Jay Singh had proceeded against Bijapur and conquered, one by 
one, many of ‘Adil Shah! forts. In spite of harassments by the gue¬ 
rilla tactics of the Bijapur army, he advanced within twelve miles 
of the fort of Bijapur, but was unable to capture it by a coup de 
main, on account of timely and energetic actions of the ‘Adil Shah! 
Sultan by strengthening its defences and taking other measures to 
the detriment of the imperialists. Consequently, Jay Singh decided 
to retreat and this he had to do against severe harassments by his 
enemies, besides two severe battles with them. He returned to his 
headquarters at Aurangabad incurring heavy losses and without 
achieving anything. His irate master censured and recalled him to 
court. His disgrace and recall were also partly due to the suspi¬ 
cion of the emperor about his secret aid to the escape of ShivajI from 
his confinement at Agra. Broken-hearted at this humiliation and 
disappointment, the unlucky general died on the way at Burhanpur 
on 28 August, 1667. 


244 


AURANGZIB 


For more than three years after his return to Raigarh, Shivaji 
did not take up any offensive against the Mughuls, and a formal 
peace was effected in 1668 with the emperor who conferred on him 
the title of Raja . Rut in 1670, he renewed his military operations 
against the imperialists and captured the fort of Sinhgarh which 
was followed up by his seizure of Kalyan and other places of north 
Konkan. The quarrel between Shah ‘Alam, the Mughul viceroy of 
the Deccan, and his general Dilir Khan rendered it difficult for the 
imperialists to oppose the Maratha chief effectively, and the latter 
moved on with his plundering raids from place to place. He sacked 
Surat for the second time in October, 1670, and carried away rich 
booty in cash and kind. Next, he conducted most daring raids on 
Aurangabad and the Mughul provinces of BaglJana, Khandesh and 
Berar, and captured Salher, an important fort on the borders of 
Khandesh and Gujarat. 

The emperor was much worried by his daring successes and, 
recalling Shah ‘Alam, appointed Bahadur Khan as viceroy of the 
Deccan (1672). But during the five years of his viceroyalty Baha¬ 
dur Khan could not improve the position of the Mughuls there. 
Shivaji achieved success after success. He conquered Jawhar and 
Ramnagar, the two States in the KoR country, south of Surat, and 
levied chauth (blackmail, one-fourth of land revenue) in various 
places of the Deccan. Confusion and disorder in the Bijapur king¬ 
dom, following the death of ‘Ali ‘Adil Shah II in December, 1672, 
and the Afghan risings in the north-west frontier, necessitating the 
transfer of the best Mughul troops from the Deccan, gave the 
Maratha chief opportunities for successful military operations. From 
1672 to 1678, the Mughul generals carried on desultory fightings 
with him without any tangible result. On 6 June, 1674, he per¬ 
formed his formal coronation ceremony at Raigarh with great pomp 
and grandeur, spending a huge sum of money on the occasion. 

In 1677 he concluded an alliance with Golconda, and conquered 
Gingee and Vellore with a vast territory in the Madras, Carnatic 
and the Mysore plateaus which greatly augmented his power, pres¬ 
tige and financial resources. His successful career came to an end 
with his death in April, 1680, but the spirit he had infused into the 
people of Maharashtra survived his death, and Aurangzlb could not 
cope with them even after his strenuous efforts for a quarter of a 
century with his headquarters in the Deccan. 

1. J. N. Sarkar, A Short History of Aurangzih, 3rd edn. Calcutta, 1962, p. 72. 

2. Four miles west of the old fort of Gaur. 

3. J. N. Sarkar, History of Aurangzih , Vol. Ill, Calcutta, 1916, pp. 1-3. 

245 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


4. Ibid, p.115. 

5. Ibid, p.196. 

5a. Ibid, Ch. XXXI, Section 18, According to CHI , 420,000 tolas of silver (IV. 235). 
'Phis Statement in CHI is also by J. N. Sarkar. As this was published (pro¬ 
bably also written) later, it may be taken as his later view and a more 
correct one. (Ed.) 

6. Sarkar, p. 203. 

7. Ibid, pp.281-282. 

7a. Mohammad Yasin, A Social History of Islamic India, (1605-1748), Lakhnau, 
(1958), p.150. 

8. Cambridge History of India, Vol. IV, p.241. 

9. Ibid., p.242. 

9a. For a detailed account of Aurangzlb’s bigotry, cf. J. N. Sarkar, History of 
Aurangzib, Vol. Ill, Ch. XXXIV, Sections 9-17 and Appendix V. 

10. J. N. Sarkar, History of Aurangzib, Vol. Ill, p. 358. For a detailed account, 
cf. Ch. XI. 

11. Ibid., p.374. 

12. CHI. IV, p.,247. 

13. J. N. Sarkar, History of Aurangzib, Vol. IV, Calcutta, 1930, p. 42. 

14. For further details, cf. next Chapter. 

15. For discussion on this date, cf. next Chapter. 


246 


CHAPTER IX 


SHIVAJI 

I. THE RISE OF THE BHOSLES 

The origin of the Bhosle (also called Bhonsle) clan of the 
Maratha caste and even the derivation of their name are shrouded in 
mystery. They claimed descent from the Sisodia Ranas of Chitor 
and Udaipur, and possibly a branch of their family migrated to the 
south after the kingdom of Chitor had been devastated by Ala-ud- 
din Khaljl early in the fourteenth century. 1 So far as the Maratha 
history is concerned, the Yadavas of Devagiri, later named Daulata- 
bad, the Bhosles of Verul and the Nimbalkars of Phaltan near Palara, 
are the three Maratha families which are connected with the rise of 
Shivaji. Of these, the Yadavas were the descendants of the re¬ 
nowned rulers of Devagiri who were subjugated by ‘Ala-ud-din 
Khalji of Delhi towards the end of the thirteenth century. The 
descendants of this ruling Yadava family took service with the 
Nizam Shahis of Ahmadnagar. This city was invaded and captured 
by the Emperor Akbar in 1600, and the Nizam Shah! kingdom was on 
the point of extinction, when an able organizer named Malik ‘Ambar, 
an Abyssinian minister of that State, came to its rescue. ‘Ambar 
made friends with the Hindus and, using their best talent and co¬ 
operation both for war and administration, he improved the reve¬ 
nues of that kingdom and successfully opposed the Mughul advance 
for a quarter of a century. In this grand political struggle Shivajl’s 
father, Shahji, and grandfather, Maloji, were closely associated 
with Malik ‘Ambar, so that they gradually realized their strength 
and asserted their power in the course of time. 

Lukhji Jadhava of Devagiri had a clever daughter named Jija 
Bai, who was married in 1605 to Maloji Bhosle’s son, S-hahji, a brave 
soldier of fortune, who long exerted himself in upholding the fall¬ 
ing fortunes of the Nizam Shahi against the Mughul onslaught. 2 

Maratha history in its initial stages is, thus, an unbroken 
struggle of three generations of the Mughul emperors striving to 
put down the three generations of the Bhosle family. In this trial 
of strength, Maloji and his son, Shahji, prepared the ground, of which 
Shivfaji, the offspring of Shahji and Jija Bai, took advantage. The 
three emperors, Jahangir, Shah Jahan and Aurangzib, attempted to 
subjugate the Deccan and the Bhosles stood forth to defend it, al- 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


though the parties were unevenly matched, the Bhosles being poor in 
resources compared with the might of the emperors. MalojI and 
Shahji acquired lands under the Nizam Shah! regime, rendering 
service in return. The Bhosles soon made themselves indispensable 
to the rulers of the Nizam Shahi State. ‘Ambar patronized them 
and used their services in keeping the Mughuls at bay. In the battle 
of Bhatvadi near Ahmadnagar in 1624 Malik ‘Ambar inflicted a crush¬ 
ing defeat upon the combined armies of Delhi and Bijapur. Shahji, 
who took part in this battle, won distinction and gained valuable ex¬ 
perience. Thereafter for several years Shahji ably defended the 
Nizam Shahi State against the all-powerful Shah Jahan. Shah Jahlan, 
after years of war, succeeded in 1636 in extinguishing the king¬ 
dom of Ahmadnagar and expelling Shahji from his homeland. The 
latter sought service under the Sultan of Bijapur on condition that 
he should no longer live in Maharashtra. 

Shahjl’s later life was spent in the regions once ruled by the 
Hindu sovereigns of Vijayanagara which had been devastated by 
the Muslims in 1565. Later on, when Shahji established his posi¬ 
tion at Bangalore and Kanakagiri, he had to deal with the various 
Hindu chieftains of the old Vijayanagara State. Here he imbibed 
the tradition of Hindu independence and resistance to Muslim 
aggression. Shahjl’s wife, Jija Bai, carried in her vein a similar 
tradition of her Yadava ancestors. Thus their son ShivlajI was fired 
from early days with the same spirit of independence. Shahji 
died in 1664 in Bijapur service by an accident while hunting. 

II. SHIVAJl’S EARLY LIFE 

ShivajI was born on 6 April, 1627, in the fort of Shivner near 
Junnar. 3 His mother Jijia. Bai gave birth to six sons, of whom the 
eldest, SambhajI, and the youngest, ShivajI, alone grew up to old 
age. Shahji and his father-in-law, LukhjI, often faced each other in 
open battles, as the latter deserted his master Nizam Shah and 
joined the Mughul emperor. But the spirited lady, like a pious 
wife, elected to follow her husband’s fortunes and refused to go to 
her father’s home for her delivery, when picked up by him after a 
battle on a high road in her advanced pregnancy. In that sad 
plight she took her residence in fort Shivner, then under her 
husband’s jurisdiction. In this fort was ShivajI born. Her eldest 
son, SambhajI, lived with his father and shared his labour in Bija¬ 
pur service. Shahji thereafter deserted Jija Biai and married a 
second wife, Tukabai, of the Mohite family of Supa. She gave birth 
to a son named EkojI or Vyankojl, who later became the founder 
of the kingdom of Tanjore. When hard pressed by the emperor 


248 


SHIVAJI 


Shah Jahan in 1636, Shahji had to flee for life after entrusting the 
management of his paternal jagir of Poona and the care of his 
wife Jija Bai and her young son Shivaji to his trusted agent DadlajI 
Kondadev, a clever officer in Bijapur, who discharged the duty of 
guardianship most creditably. 

The early life of Shivaji was full of peril and adventure. For 
the first nine years of his life, a period of war conducted by his 
father against the Mughul emperor, the young boy and his mother 
had to wander from place to place in imminent danger of being 
captured and punished. Shah Jahan’s officers succeeded in captur¬ 
ing Jija Bai, but she cleverly managed to have her son concealed 
in an out of the way village. Later, she was released on payment 
of a large fine. It was in 1636 when a formal treaty was conclud¬ 
ed that the son and the mother found a safe and settled residence 
at Poona where Dadaji built them a commodious house, Ldl Mahal, 
as it later came to be known in history. Here Shivaji! lived for 
some ten years, until they removed to their newly built fort 
Rjaigarh, which became his first capital for the original jagir. 
Twenty years later, about 1667, Raigarh became the formal resi¬ 
dence of Shivaji, where his coronation took place. 

The common education of those days was imparted to Shivaji 
as soon as he came into a settled life. He was taught reading, 
writing and arithmetic, 33 and heard portions of the Ramayana and 
Mahabharata expounded to him by the family preceptors. He was 
fond of Harikirtana and devotional music, and attended the sermons 
of Sant Tukailam, then living and preaching in the vicinity of Poona. 
Shivaji received his best education, not through books and classes 
as in the present day, but in the wide world, by personal contact 
and practical experience. Intense love of religion was a trait he 
developed by the sight of Muslim atrocities and the reports he heard 
about them. He later introduced compulsory recitations of the war 
chapters of the Ramayana by all his fort garrisons. 

Shivaji’s success in life was, however, mainly due to hard and 
incessant knocks he had to share with his mother in his early days. 
Proud of her Kshatriya extraction, with vivid memories of her royal 
ancestors of Devagiri and their splendour, chastened by years of 
suffering ever since her marriage and now practically deserted by 
the husband, this spirited lady developed in her son a spirit of 
defiance and self-assertion and became to him a veritable guardian 
angel. All her life’s ambition and solace now entirely centered in 
this boy’s well-being and good fortune. Shahji had defied a powerful 
emperor for years; why may not the son imitate the same course? 


249 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


The mother and the boy constantly talked of wild plans which the 
shrewd Dadaji wholeheartedly supported. In addition, he impart¬ 
ed to Shivaji his own tact and circumspection gained during the 
course of his management of the Poona jagir, which in itself supplied 
a ready field for experiment. Dadaji was not merely a clerk or a 
competent accountant. A strict disciplinarian and taskmaster, he 
was, in addition, a noble character, well versed in the politics of the 
day with a buoyant spirit for organizing national resources and a 
hatred for foreign domination with its persecution of the Hindus. 
He had long served the Bhosle family through weal and woe as 
their trusted friend and adviser. He was imbued with a deep love 
for the peasantry and felt a keen anxiety for ameliorating their lot. 

Thus the young Shivaji looked up to these two, his mother and 
the guardian, for guidance in life. The secluded hilly regions of 
the Mavals (the western valleys of Poona) offered him plenty of 
outdoor occupation and opportunity for adventure. Constant ex¬ 
posure to rain, sun and cold and the rough life in the midst of wild 
nature hardened the young boy’s body and mind. Riding, wrestling, 
spear-games, swordsmanship, swimming through torrential streams, 
became his main occupation and he developed from his 
early childhood an intimate comradeship with man and nature away 
from the temptations of vice and luxury of court life. He made 
friends with companions of his age and wandered with them through 
hills and dales, organizing measures for defence. The art of dis¬ 
guise was in those days highly perfected for purposes of protection 
and the needs of life. Shivaji himself could dexterously imitate 
the voices of birds and beasts. He could quickly cover long dis¬ 
tances on foot or riding, eluding pursuit and enduring privations. 
His rambles were intensive and deliberate for acquainting himself 
with secret paths, recesses and strongholds of the long Sahyadri 
range of the Deccan plateau. With eyes and ears ever alert, he 
gained first-hand knowledge of the sentiments of the people, their 
joys and sorrows, their occupations and resources, their needs and 
comforts. 

Dadaji’s first concern was to make Shivaji a real master of the 
people. He gave him useful hints as to how he should appear pro¬ 
perly attired and behave among assemblages of village panchayats 
and on public occasions. Dadaji proclaimed to the people that they 
were to look up to Shivaji for all their needs as well as for the 
redress of their grievances. 


250 


SHIVAJI 


III. THE FIRST EXPERIMENT IN SWARAJ 

The jdgir entrusted by ShahjI to the care of Jija Bal and 
Dadaji extended over the regions known as the Mavals mentioned 
above, namely the valleys to the west of Poona, roughly extending 
from Junnar to Wai. Dadaji raised a local militia for guarding the 
lives and property of the inhabitants and, along with Shivaji, toured 
the villages making inquiries and deciding disputes on the spot. The 
land revenue system, initiated by Akbar under the directions of 
Todarmal, had been already adopted in the Deccan by Malik ‘Ambar 
and now Dadaji adopted it for the territories of the jdgir. Dadaji 
took measures to destroy wild animals that damaged the crops; fresh 
lands were brought under cultivation; gardening and tree-planting 
were specially encouraged. All this work of development which 
greatly enhanced the welfare of the people and were carried out in 
ShivajI’s presence and in his name proved for him a valuable prepa¬ 
ration in practical methods of government in his future life. It 
fostered a sense of emulation and self-help among the people, eli¬ 
minated their usual lethargy and despair, and instilled into them a 
bright new hope. Friends and comrades of varied capacities quickly 
flocked round the new boy-master to share his labours, willing to 
make any sacrifice that might be demanded. ShivajI’s vision ex¬ 
panded. He began to dream of grand prospects outside the limits of 
his jdgir. He held secret consultations with his comrades in arms, 
planning to make fresh acquisitions, repairing buildings, garrisons 
and forts, raising funds by daring night attacks on private and public 
treasures. Buried wealth was cleverly traced and carried away. It 
became a strong belief throughout the land that Goddess BhavanI 
appeared before the young hero and communicated to him the exact 
location of secret hoards. Earnest work earned quick results. 

Shivaji possessed a persuasive tongue with which he at once 
won peoples’ hearts. He was alert and foremost in jumping into a 
risk and facing the consequences. He held secret conferences with 
his companions and anxiously deliberated on the liberation of his 
homeland from Muslim control so as to put an end to the wanton 
persecution of the Hindus. Shivajl’s court historian thus summarizes 
his sentiments: 

“Why should we remain content with what the Muslim rulers 
choose to give us? We are Hindus. This whole country is ours by 
right, and is yet occupied and held by foreigners. They desecrate our 
temples, break holy idols, plunder our wealth, convert us forcibly to 
their religion, carry away our women folk and children, slay the 
cows and inflict a thousand wrongs upon us. We will suffer this 


251 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


treatment no more. We possess strength in our arms. Let us draw 
the sword in defence of our sacred religion, liberate our country 
and acquire new lands and wealth by our own effort. Are we not 
as brave and capable as our ancestors of yore? Let us undertake 
this holy mission and God will surely help us. All human efforts 
are so helped. There is no such thing as good luck and ill luck. 
We are the captains of our fortunes and the makers of our freedom.” 4 

The pious Jija Bai blessed these sentiments. She daily wit¬ 
nessed how complete darkness prevailed under Muslim government, 
where there was no law, no justice; the officials acted as they pleased. 
Violation of women’s honour, murders and forcible conversions were 
the order of the day. News of demolition of temples, cow-slaughter 
and other atrocities poured upon the ears of that lady so constantly 
that she used to exclaim: “Can we not remedy this evil? Will not 
my son have the strength to come forth boldly to resist it?” The 
Nizam Shah had openly murdered Jija Bai’s father, his brothers 
and sons. Bajaji Nimbalkar, the ruler of Phaltan, a scion of the 
old Paramara race, was forcibly converted by the Sultan of Bijapur. 
The Hindus could not lead an honourable life. This spectacle moved 
the lady and her son to righteous indignation. An intense feeling of 
revolt took possession of their minds. Shivaji prayed for strength, 
dreamt bright visions and entered upon a wild career full of hope 
and promise without caring for consequences. He possessed an in¬ 
born capacity of judging the character of men almost at first sight. 
He mixed with all kinds of men and picked up suitable helpmates, 
and converted to his views even those who were leading evil lives. 
His sympathy and selflessness and his earnest endeavour to serve his 
land appealed to all, so that within a few years the contrast became 
glaring between the improved conditions of his paternal jdglr and 
the disorder prevailing in the Muslim-ruled region outside. Soon a 
compact, well-knit geographical unit of a small swarajya came into 
being in which law and order prevailed, duties of officials were 
clearly defined, justice quickly rendered, honest work well rewarded 
and where life and wealth were perfectly secure. All this had pro¬ 
found effect upon the ruling class and even Shivajf s father in far-off 
Bangalore. 


IV. FIRST CONFLICT 

Shahji was employed by ‘Adil Shah in the conquest of the Kar- 
natak regions, which once formed part of the Vijayanagara empire. 
Shahji thus became the helpless instrument for conquering the 
Hindus and pouring the wealth of Hindu shrines into the Muslim 
coffers of Bijapur. Stories of this fresh spoliation reached the ears 


252 


SHIVAJI 


of Jija Bai and Shivaji and caused them extreme distress. In the 
meantime, the activities of Shivaji and DadajI in the Maval lands 
enraged the ruling authorities of Bijapur and induced them to take 
prompt measures to put down the revolt. ShahjI felt extreme annoy¬ 
ance at the turn the affairs were taking both in his own sphere at 
Bangalore and in the Deccan. Jija Bai and DadajI had Shivaji 
married about the year 1640 to a girl from the Nimbalkar family, 
named Saibai. Soon after this event, the atmosphere became tense 
for ShahjI as mentioned above. His own position as a loyal servant 
of Bijapur and his son’s revolt could not go together. Very pro¬ 
bably, ShahjI was called upon to account for the impropriety and 
asked to restrain his son. As Shivaji was yet too young to appear 
as the author of the mischief, the mother and the regent DadajI 
were held mainly responsible for the reported disloyalty and sedi¬ 
tion. In such circumstances, ShahjI invited to Bangalore, for a per¬ 
sonal deliberation, Jija B>ai and DadajI under the plea that he was 
anxious to see his newly wedded daughter-in-law and his young son. 
The party was away from home for nearly two years (1642-43), when 
the whole family and establishment of ShahjI met together at Banga¬ 
lore. ShahjI, one may gather, discussed the situation fully and 
freely. Jija Bai, finding it awkward to put forth any decided plan 
of action, employed her sojourn, it seems, in visiting the famous 
shrines of the south and avoided discussion. She certainly felt no 
regret for the revolt her son was organizing in the interest of na¬ 
tional honour. The authorities of Bijapur fully knew what was going 
on. ‘Adil Shah commanded ShahjI to pay a personal visit to his 
court at Bijapur with all his family and there receive the Govern¬ 
ment’s decision on the course to be followed in future. ShahjI there¬ 
fore paid a visit to Bijapur about the year 1643, and spent some time 
there in answering charges preferred against himself and his manage¬ 
ment of the Poona jdgir. The defiance attributed to Shivaji in not 
making the prescribed bow when he attended the Darbdr, appears 
to have occurred at this time. It was also during this visit that 
Shivaji is said to have restrained a butcher slaughtering a cow in a 
public thoroughfare. Small though in itself, the incident reveals the 
audacious and uncompromising trait in ShivajI’s character. When he 
perceived a vital wrong being perpetrated, he at once punished the 
wrong-doer, reckless of consequences. At Bijapur, Shivaji retaliated 
the outrage on a cow and would perhaps have been imprisoned had 
he not managed to run away unnoticed to his homeland. He lost 
no time upon his return in forming an independent State of his own 
wherein full political and religious freedom would prevail with¬ 
out molestation from the Muslim overlords. While at Bangalore 
the subject was doubtless fully discussed and again also at Bijapur, 


253 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


with what outcome we have no means of knowing. It seems there was 
no way for a compromise. The father and the son probably formed 
an understanding between them how best to ward off the danger 1 ap¬ 
prehended from the Bijapur atrocities. The father would answer 
that he was not responsible for what his son did and that he was 
powerless to punish him. This was indeed the reality. At heart, 
Shahjl probably approved the way the son was following and even 
encouraged him by lending him some trained loyal officials from 
Bangalore to organize a proper government for the jdglr. Elephants, 
infantry, cavalry with flags and insignia of royalty, in addition to 
the treasure for immediate need, were, say Parmanand and Sabha- 
sad, despatched from Bangalore by Shahjl for his son’s use. Shyam- 
rao Nilakanth Peshwla, Sonopant Dabir and other officials of Shahjl’s 
trust were sent for duty in Maharashtra. 

How money was collected for this venture and how ingeniously 
the plan was put into execution by gradual steps and careful fore¬ 
thought must now be told. Seven years of efficient management of 
the Maval jagir now began to yield fruit in the shape of a regular sub¬ 
stantial income, which Shivaji utilized in maintaining infantry, re¬ 
pairing and garrisoning forts and improving the administrative 
machinery. Already a band of young enthusiastic comrades flocked 
around him to share his labours and execute his commands. One such 
w T as Kanhoji Jedhe, 5 Deshmukh of Kari, a leading and respectable 
chieftain in the employ of Bijapur and well known to the Bhosles 
for a long time. With Kanhoji’s help, Shivaji, after his return from 
Bijapur, easily acquired possession of all the twelve Maval forts, 
west of Poona, along with fort Rohida and fort Sinhgarh which he 
strongly garrisoned. He immediately started building a new fort 
which he named Raigarh and made it the principal seat of his govern¬ 
ment. These activities during the two years 1644-1645 could no 
longer be concealed from the knowledge of the Shah of Bijapur, 
who took immediate steps to restrain DadajI and disgrace Shahjl. 
The Shah called upon Kanhoji Jedhe to remain faithful on pain of 
death. 

Shivaji replied to the Shah’s challenge, saying that he was not 
disloyal; he was merely putting his turbulent lands in a state of 
defence and bringing peace so essential for the development of this 
hilly country. Shivaji was, however, busy, running from place to 
place, securing recruits for his plan, forming friendships, encourag¬ 
ing, persuading, threatening and coercing people so that they soon be¬ 
gan to talk of him as a heaven-sent leader. In 1646 the Shah of 
Bijapur was attacked by paralysis which kept him bed-ridden 


254 


SHIVAJI 


throughout the remaining decade of his life, an incident which 
directly favoured the task of Shivaji. 

V. INDEPENDENCE TAKES SHAPE 

Shivaji’s guardian, Dadaji Kondadev, died in 1647 and left 
Shivaji entirely to his own resources. He now set about his work with 
greater vigour and allowed no break in his undertaking. He soon 
managed to capture two strong forts near Poona, Chakan in the north 
and Purandar in the east, both of great strategic importance. The 
guardian of Purandar was one Nilopant Sarnaik, a long-standing 
friend of the Bhosle family whose shelter Shivaji sought during the 
rains of 1648. When, during the Divali celebration of that year 
Shivaji and his family were admitted into the fort as friendly guests, 
Shivaji managed to persuade his host and his brothers to accept him 
as their master, resigning their traditional service to Bijapur. This 
illustrates to what different artifices Shivaji had recourse in accom¬ 
plishing his object. 

Next, Shivlaji one dark 'night surprised Sambhaji Mohite of 
Supa, an important wealthy mart, south-east of Poona. Sambhaji 
Mohite’s sister, Tukabiai, was the second wife of Shahji and so 
Shivaji’s step-mother. Sambhaji offered but little resistance. He 
was captured and despatched to Bangalore, as an undesirable neigh¬ 
bour. 

Shivaji had now two main objects in view,—first, to secure the 
utmost welfare of the people in his charge, and secondly, to have 
well-guarded frontiers which he could easily hold. He was careful 
not to attempt any expansion at the sacrifice of security. He pro¬ 
claimed his independence in a curious fashion. He began to use a 
new seal on all official papers issued by him with a significant motto, 
which ran thus: 6 “This seal of Shiva, son of Shah, shines forth for 
the welfare of the people and is meant to command increasing res¬ 
pect from the universe like the first phase of the moon.” This seal 
is found attached to papers dating 1648 onward, so that one may 
conclude that this novel plan of Shivaji began to take shape about 
that year. 

Similarly papers are found in which Shivaji’s title Chhatrapati 
and the seals of his ministers thereon are mentioned. 63 This proves 
that a small cohesive independent State with ministers and officials 
charged with definite duties came into being some time before 1653, 
although the final shape took many years to be completed and was 
announced only at the time of his formal coronation. 


255 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


A serious danger, however, threatened the whole project. 
Bijapur could not take all this lying down. In 1648 the Adil Shahl 
forces led by Mustafa Khan, under whom served Shahji, were 
fighting before the fort of Gingee. One night, the chief commander 
Mustafa suddenly raided Shahji’s camp and made him a captive 
under the orders of the Shah. He was then sent to Bijapur for 
trial and threatened with death if he did not restrain his son 
Shivaji from the wicked course he was following. Shahji was then 
called upon to restore Sinhgarh and Bangalore, the former held by 
Shivaji and the latter by his elder son SambhajL This was the move 
the king of Bijapur adopted to crush Shahji and his two rebellious 
sons. The father accordingly wrote to ShivajI to give back Sinhgarh 
and save his life. The elder son Sambhaji also was similarly ap¬ 
proached in regard to Bangalore. At the same time, Bijapur forces 
arrived at both these places to put down the rebellious brothers 
and take charge of the two important posts. The two brothers 
fought valiantly at both places and maintained their positions, in¬ 
flicting severe losses upon the opponents. But Shahji was a pri¬ 
soner in Bijapur upon whom the Sultan could easily wreak his 
vengeance. Shahji wrote pressing Shivaji to save his life by restor¬ 
ing Sinhgarh. Jija Bai interceded with Shivaji for saving her hus¬ 
band’s life and reluctantly the latter yielded and gave back the fort 
to Bijapur. 7 

In the heart of the Maval country there ruled an ancient 
Deshmukh family named More in Satara District with their seat 
of authority in Javli in the Mahabalesvar range. Proud of their 
allegiance to Bijapur, the Mores moved heaven and earth to put 
down this new Bhosle upstart, of a low origin in their estimation. 
So the inevitable clash came as Shivaji could not allow such an ini¬ 
mical rival to remain as his neighbour. For years, Shivaji used all 
his arts of persuasion and amity, as he had done in other cases 
before, in persuading the Mores to fall in with his plan of national 
uplift. Failing to conciliate them, Shivaji ultimately made up his 
mind to teach the Mores a lesson such as others could never forget. 
Early in 1656 Shivaji attacked Javli and immediately captured it 
after killing its main defender Hanumant Rao. Some members of 
their family ran to different places for safety. Shivaji negotiated 
with them, but failing in his endeavours to win them over, he in a 
short time killed three more of their large family, Yasvant Rao 
and his sons KrishnajI and Baji. 8 The Bijapur authorities could 
not save them. One member alone named Pratap Rao escaped to 
Bijapur where he was taken under shelter and whence he continued 
for some time to cause pin-pricks to Shivajfs rising career. The 


256 


SHIVAJi 


short work which ShivajI did with the Mores conveyed a whole¬ 
some lesson to all who would not willingly accept his plan. Here 
was a born leader to whom it was wise to submit. Such a belief 
engendered by this episode of the Mores and soon widely proclaim¬ 
ed outside, strengthened Shivaji’s hands in all his future plans and 
projects, now mostly undertaken against foreign powers. No Mara- 
tha clansman dared hereafter to stand in opposition to ShivajI. A 
small compact little kingdom soon came into being, comprising rough¬ 
ly the present districts of Poona and Satara. Written evidence 
gives 1653 as the time of the completion of this first phase of 
Shivaji’s swardjya. To protect this new conquest of Javli, ShivajI 
erected a new fort and named it Pratapgarh, which can now be 
sighted from the present hill station of Mahabalesvar. 

VI. AFZAL KHAN OVERCOME 

ShivajI quickly followed up his conquest of Javli by descend¬ 
ing into north Konkan and capturing Kalyan, its chief city, a 
wealthy mart of Adil Shahi’s west coast regions. He also seized by 
means of accurate planning a large treasure which was on its way 
from Kalyan to Bijapur. In the course of this affair a young fair 
Muslim lady, the daughter-in-law of the Governor, fell into the 
hands of Shivaji’s officers and was presented by them for Shivaji’s 
acceptance as a trophy of the war. ShivajI disapproved this wick¬ 
ed action of his subordinates, reprimanded them severely, and 
allowed the lady to return to her home, duly protected by his own 
escort. This unprecedented generosity, rare in the Muslim annals 
of India, enhanced Shivaji’s reputation far and wide as the great 
respecter of the fair sex. 

Having arranged the administration of north Konkan, ShivajI 
rapidly turned to the south, inspecting Dabhol, Shringarpur, Pra- 
bhavali, Rajapur, Kudal and other places on the coast with a view 
to fortifying it as a line of defence for his projected dominion. A 
few years later he erected the strong naval forts, a marvel of giant 
work even today, of Suvarnadurg, Vijayadurg, Sindhudurg (Mal- 
van), and lastly Kolaba, and created a powerful navy with ship¬ 
building yards and arsenals for purposes both of defence and trade. 
Shivaji’s ingenuity in this respect presents a striking contrast to 
the unpardonable neglect of the Mughul emperors for the naval de¬ 
fence of India. They paid no attention to what the Europeans 
were doing by establishing fortified factories on both the west and 
east coasts which ultimately proved so dangerous to the existence 
of the empire. ShivajI borrowed the plan from the Europeans, 
made friends with them and utilized their skill for his own purpose. 

257 

M.E.—17 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


A turning point occurred in the politics of India about the 
year 1656-57. Muhammad ‘Adil Shah died on 4 November, 1656, 
with the result that his State began to decline and was attacked 
by Aurangzib in 1657. At Agra, Emperor Shah Jahan was suddenly 
taken ill, giving rise to a fratricidal war, in which out of his 
four sons, Aurangzib became victorious and proclaimed himself 
Emperor at Delhi in July, 1658. In view of these changes Shivaji 
manoeuvred his course with courage and fortitude as the sequel 
will show. 

The widowed queen of Muhammad ‘Adil Shah decided to take 
vigorous measures to put down Shivaji’s power by capturing him 
alive or dead. For this purpose she selected an intrepid soldier of 
her court and a declared enemy of Shivaji’s family. She called Afzal 
Khan to her presence, promised him ample reward, supplied him 
with a strong well-equipped force and commanded him to employ 
all possible means to bring Shivaji, dead or alive, to Bijapur. Afzal 
Khan, leaving his headquarters in September, 1659, came sweeping 
against Shivaji, pulling down Hindu shrines on the way and plunder¬ 
ing the prosperous regions of Shivaji’s domains. Shivaji received 
full details of the Khan’s atrocities through his spies and, unable to 
encounter the Khan in an open contest, took his residence at his 
new fort of Pratapgarh in the midst of hills and planned to over¬ 
come his opponent by some subtle stratagem. 

The Khan, learning that Shivaji had gone to Pratapgarh, pitch¬ 
ed his camp at Wai, about 25 miles east of the latter’s position. 
Agents of the two moved freely between them for some time nego¬ 
tiating for a personal meeting between the two for a solution. 
After several discussions, the Khan, confident of his strength, agreed 
to meet Shivaji below the fort of Pratapgarh in a specially erected 
tent with a decorated canopy. The meeting took place on the 
afternoon of Thursday, 10 November, 1659. The Khan possessed a 
powerful body atnd felt confident of overcoming in a personal grip 
his small slim Maratha antagonist, twenty years his junior in age. 
Shivaji similarly took all precautions for meeting any eventuality. 
He wore an iron cuirass of chains under his vest, a metal cap over 
his skull, concealed under the turban with a long white flowing 
robe overall, having broad sleeves, covering a dagger in one hand 
and tiger-claws on the other. After receiving his mother’s bless¬ 
ings, Shivaji boldly set forth on his dangerous venture to meet his 
antagonist. As he walked in, the Khan rose and, in his first em¬ 
brace, gripped him tightly in his left arm and stabbed him with a 
dagger in the right hand. With great presence of mind, Shivaji 
saved the blow, ripping open the Khan’s bowels with the tiger- 


258 


SHIVAJI 


claws and instantly bringing him to the ground. The whole affair 
was finished in a moment. As the bearers picked up the Khan’s 
body to carry it away in his palanquin, they were quickly disabled 
by Shivajl’s men, who severed the Khan’s head and exhibited it 
from a high mast of the topmost bastion of the fort. It was by 
then the dusk of the evening, and concealed Maratha parties, at a 
given signal, rushed out of the woods and routed the Khan’s armies 
both in the wild passes of the hills and in the plain of Wai. 9 

The tragic episode caused favourable repercussions for Shivaji 
far and near. Bijapur now lay practically prostrate before him, 
and he at once became a power to be reckoned with. The fort of 
Panhala in the heart of Maharashtra became now Shivajl’s objec^ 
tive, as it was the last strong post belonging to Bijapur in his on¬ 
ward march. It took Shivaji some years more to come into posses¬ 
sion of this renowned fortress. 

VII. SHAYISTA KHAN AND PLUNDER OF SURAT 

Shortly after getting rid of Afzal Khan, Shivaji had to face 
a new danger. A new figure had come to occupy the Mughul 
throne at Delhi, who took prompt measures to put down ruthlessly 
the rising power of this Maratha rebel. Aurangzlb nominated his 
uncle, Shayista Khan, to the Government of Deccan and sent him 
well-equipped to annihilate Shivaji while it was not yet too late. 
Afzal Khan was finished in November, 1659, and in the following 
January, Shayista Khan arrived at Aurangabad and, quickly advanc¬ 
ing seized Poona, making Shivajl’s palace his own residence. He 
also captured Kalyan and north Konkan which Shivaji had pos¬ 
sessed a short while before. The Khan’s strength was irresistible, 
being fully backed by the whole might of the Mughul empire. For 
three long years, Shivaji was so hunted out in all directions that 
he became a homeless wanderer and was at a loss how to get out 
of this almost hopeless situation. In this darkest hour Shivajl’s innate 
ingenuity alone saved him and he succeeded in turning the whole 
game against the Khan. He employed secret agents to obtain 
minute details about the arrangements and disposition of the Khan’s 
camp and hit upon a bold plan of a surprise attack at night. With 
about fifty clever and intrepid followers, he entered the Mughul 
general’s harem on the evening of 15 April, 1663. After midnight, 
when the guards and the Khan’s family were asleep and enveloped 
in darkness, Shivaji and his companions attacked the inmates in 
their beds, cutting and hacking indiscriminately. The noise and con¬ 
fusion that resulted was indescribable; several were killed and 
wounded; the Khan himself, it was later discovered, escaped with 


259 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


only his forefinger lost. One of his sons, forty attendants, and six 
women were killed. The incident proved eminently successful for 
Shivaji’s purpose. Without undergoing a large-scale fighting, he 
struck terror into the heart of his opponents. The mortified em¬ 
peror at once transferred the Khan to Bengal and the Mughul hold 
slackened in the Deccan. ShivajI, now breathing freely, resumed 
his onward career without check. 

For a time after the departure of Shayista Khan, ShivajI roam¬ 
ed fearlessly as an invincible conqueror. His spies wandered far 
and wide, bringing news of treasures and wealth of cities and of 
the weak links in the Mughul Government. His head spy, Bahirji 
Naik, reported to ShivajI that of all the rich Mughul possessions 
Surat was the most undefended and contained enormous wealth. It 
was the richest port of western India and was highly prized by the 
emperor as an important port which was used by pilgrims to Mecca. 
ShivajI established a secret camp near Nasik with specially selected 
five thousand stalwarts; and without disclosing his destination he 
left the base on 1 January, 1664, and proceeded north through the 
coastal regions. He suddenly appeared at Surat and planted his 
flag at its eastern gate. On the previous day he had issued a warn¬ 
ing to the local Governor and the richest merchants to pay a certain 
amount which he demanded or stand the consequences of his wrath 
for non-compliance. The warning was not heeded and, in addition, 
the Governor contrived a foul attempt on Shivaji’s life on the third 
day of his arrival. In retaliation, ShivajI let loose hell upon the 
hapless town, burning and sacking in every possible way. Houses 
were dug up and set on fire, chests were broken open and heaps of 
money carried away. He took care to inflict no wanton cruelty upon 
innocent inhabitants. Possession of wealth was the only crime 
which he punished. On 9 January, hearing that Mughul armies 
were coming upon him from Burhanpur, ShivajI hurriedly returned 
with such booty as could be easily conveyed. No estimate of value 
of what he carried away is recorded. Possibly ShivajI himself never 
made an exact calculation, but the plunder must certainly have been 
in the neighbourhood of a crore of rupees, possibly double that 
amount. It was taken straight to Raigarh and utilised to fortify that 
giant structure of his future capital. 

Immediately on his return from Surat, ShivajI learned the sad 
news of his father’s death near Harihar in the present Mysore ter¬ 
ritory. This made Jija Bai altogether disconsolate, and ShivajI 
was at grleat pains in dissuading her from undertaking the self-im¬ 
molation of a sati. 


260 


SHIVAJI 


Shivajl’s sack of Surat was the severest blow to Aurangzlb and 
a direct affront to his power and prestige. The emperor lost his 
peace of mind and at once decided to send a fresh expedition 
against Shivajl and annihilate him for good. 

VIII. SHIVAJI SUBMITS TO JAY SINGH 

Aurangzlb placed this new expedition under Mirza Raja Jay 
Singh with Dilir Khan to assist and probably to spy. The famous 
Italian traveller Manucci, then residing at Delhi, was pressed into 
service and accompanied the General as an officer of artillery. A 
splendidly equipped force commanded by Jay Singh left the base 
in December, 1664, and arrived at Poona in March following, when 
Shivajl, entirely unaware of these moves of the emperor, was en¬ 
gaged in consolidating his southern possessions and conducting a 
war against Bijapur, where he had just overcome Khavas Khan and 
Baji Ghorpade who had come against him on behalf of that State. 
He killed Baji Ghorpade and, early in 1665, led a large naval ex¬ 
pedition with fighting ships of large calibre on the Malabar coast 
and secured plunder from ports like Bassur. In February, he 
visited Karwar and while engaged in his devotions to the deity of 
Gokarn he learned of the terrible attack upon his homelands by 
Mirza Raja Jay Singh. Shivajl at once proceeded to Raigarh and 
set about devising measures against this new danger. 

Jay Singh carried out his undertaking with all the vigour and 
loyalty he was capable of. He secured implicit obedience and un¬ 
grudging help from all the chiefs and powers whom Shivajl had 
overawed, and he actively supported those who had suffered from 
Shivajl’s aggression, like the sons of Afzal Khan. So Shivajl found 
himself paralysed in all directions, unable any longer to oppose the 
formidable tactics now employed against him. 9a Jay Singh establish¬ 
ed a complete hold on the north Poona regions and besieged Puran- 
dar with such vigour that Shivajl could no longer conduct any 
operations in open. Complete surrender was his only recourse with 
only such grace as the Mughul Generalissimo would choose to 
grant. Shivajl made approaches to Jay Singh and appealed to his 
religious sentiment. But the latter turned a deaf ear to all his en¬ 
treaties and declined even to receive his visit, until all his posses¬ 
sions were conquered. 

In this situation Shivajl, with an anxious heart, held constant 
deliberations with his mother and advisers and decided to throw 
himself upon Jay Singh’s mercy. He lost no time and fearlessly 
proceeded unarmed to Jay Singh’s quarters below fort Purandar on 


261 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


11 June, 1665, just after his (Shivajl’s) valiant captain, Murar Baji, 
and many of his brave Maval soldiers had lost their lives in de¬ 
fending that fort against overwhelming forces led by Dilir Khan. 
Shivaji was well received on arrival and after a formal talk, was 
directed to meet Dilir Khan. Shiva]I then called on the Khan as 
he was conducting the siege and won his sympathy by his extreme 
humility and sweetness of manner. The three then met for con¬ 
sultation and a treaty was concluded on 12 June settling the 
terms of Shivaji’s submission. He agreed to hand over twenty-three 
of his important forts, keeping twelve minor ones for himself and 
to serve the emperor loyally, fully co-operating in the war against 
Bijapur which Jay Singh was now to undertake; Shivaji’s son, Sham- 
bhujl, was to be created a panjhazari mansabddr with a suitable 
jdglr. Jay Singh advised Shivaji to win the emperor’s favour by a 
personal visit to his capital and receive his pardon. Jay Singh 
thus hoped to bring about a permanent reconciliation between the 
two, a vain hope as it proved eventually. 

Shivaji personally handed over to Jay Singh’s son, Kirat Singh, 
at Sinhgarh the keys of that fort. In the following November, 
Shivaji joined Jay Singh with his force and co-operated in the war 
upon Bijapur; but for various reasons the war ended in failure. 

Jay Singh made full reports to his master on his transactions 
with Shivaji and explained how it was impossible to put him down 
with their force and how it was advantageous to win him over and 
turn him into a serviceable ally. With this view he requested the 
emperor to receive Shivaji in a personal audience and employ his 
services in defending the Mariathia country which had never been 
fully conquered. Aurangzib, although not very sanguine on the 
outcome of such a visit, agreed to Jay Singh’s proposal and invited 
Shivaji to his presence on a solemn promise that no harm would 
befall him. During the early months of 1666 the subject was hotly 
debated between Shivaji and his counsellors; there was a strong 
sentiment that he should not undertake the risk of just walking 
into the lion’s den. The treaty of Purandar was almost a stage- 
managed affair; it meant no humiliation to Shivaji, as he was neither 
openly beaten nor his power extinguished. Jay Singh strongly 
advised Shivaji to go and meet the emperor and induce him per¬ 
sonally to adopt a conciliatory policy towards the Hindus after the 
manner of his great ancestor Akbar. 

In view of the antecedents of Aurangzib, Shivaji did not hope 
to be able to convert the emperor to his views, but there were other 
weighty considerations which impelled him to undertake the ven- 


262 


j 


SHIVAJi 


ture. Such a visit would enable him to obtain a first hand impres¬ 
sion about the inherent strength of the empire, to study men and 
matters on the spot and thus to make it feasible for him to carry 
into effect his life’s mission of a Hindu padshahi. He meditated on 
the subject anxiously in his own mind and spent days in consulta¬ 
tion with his mother and advisers. He was constantly in touch 
with Jay Singh who sent solemn oaths about his safety and so did 
his son Ram Singh who served at the court. The decision was 
taken and communicated through Jay Singh to the emperor who 
paid a lakh of rupees for the expenses of Shivaji’s journey and assured 
that Shivaji would be accorded the honours of a Shdhzada during 
his absence from home. On Monday, 5 March, 1666, Shivajl took 
his departure from Raigarh accompanied by some of his intimate 
helpmates and a retinue of about 300 souls all told. 

IX. THE WONDERFUL ESCAPE 

The emperor, proud of his victory over Shivaji, was to cele¬ 
brate his accession at Agr-a on 12 May, 1666, taking his seat on the 
peacock throne, as his father Shah Jahan had died in the preced¬ 
ing January. Shivaji was to be received in a full durbar on that 
occasion. He arrived at Agra by slow marches in time. The 
Diwan-i-Am of Agra presented that day a unique spectacle; all the 
Mughul splendour was displayed. Through some mistake Shivaji 
was rather late in arriving at the durbar and was led to the em¬ 
peror’s presence when he had repaired to the Diwdn-i-khas. The 
Prime Minister, Asad Khan, led Shivaji with his son to the presence. 
Both made their obeisance and offered the customary nazar where¬ 
upon they were taken back and asked to stand in the third row of 
the nobles. Shivaji noticing this affront burst out in a sort of open 
defiance complaining of the breach of the terms that were agreed 
upon. The emperor noticed Shivaji’s demeanour and sent Ram 
Singh to pacify him. In the meantime, Shivaji left his place and 
moved to a corner, vehemently protesting and imprecating, a scene 
unprecedented in the imperial court. The emperor closed the dur¬ 
bar and asked Shivaji to be taken away. It was evident that Shivaji 
had committed a gross offence by defying the emperor so publicly. 
A strict guard was placed on his residence in Ram Singh’s garden, 
and his movements were restricted. 

Both parties now began to exercise their ingenuity to end the 
deadlock and smoothen matters. What was possible for the em¬ 
peror to do? One of these three alternatives—(1) to put Shivaji 
to death; (2) convert him to Islam and employ him in imperial 


263 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


service; or (3) to conciliate and send him back. The emperor ask¬ 
ed for Jay Singh’s advice, and after long deliberation, decided up¬ 
on the first course—how best to accomplish it without incurring 
public blame or the Rajput hostility being the only question that he 
revolved in his mind. With this object, it was decided to remove 
Shivaji to a new residence, more secluded, where his end could be 
accomplished without a public scandal. During all this time 
Shivaji, too, exercised his brain to the utmost in finding some 
means of escape, fully gauging the emperor’s intentions. From 12 
May to 18 August, Shivaji remained in confinement at Agra, devis¬ 
ing ways for extricating himself and his son out of the situation. 
Ultimately, he hazarded a contrivance and succeeded in effecting 
his escape. After pretending illness for some time, he sent away 
most of his followers with instructions to shift for themselves. He 
and his son, on the afternoon of 19 August, squeezed themselves in 
two separate baskets of sweetmeats hanging from an elastic bamboo 
on the shoulders of porters, and were carried away without being 
detected by the guards on duty. 

In the darkness of the evening Shivaji proceeded towards 
Mathura in the north, eluding the search parties that were set in 
motion after his escape had been detected about noon the next day, 
thus gaining a clear start of about 18 hours. “Instead of moving 
due south-west from Agra, through Malwa and Khandesh or Gujrat, 
he travelled northwards to Mathura, then eastwiards to Allahabad, 
and finally south-westwards through Bundelkhand, Gondwana, and 
Golkonda, describing a curve east of the public highway to the 
Deccan, in returning to Rajgarh,” and appeared before his mother 
at Raigarh in the garb of a wandering mendicant on 12 September, 
that is 25 days after he had left Agria. 10 It was the most thrilling 
exploit of all his wonderful deeds, which has for ever added a 
super-natural glow to his unique personality. It immediately re- 
sounded throughout the country, making Shivaji an all-India figure, 
divinely endowed with extraordinary powers. The incident simul¬ 
taneously exposed the emperior’s craft, still further adding to his 
evil repute for cunning and cruelty. Shivaji’s reputation, on the 
other hand, reached its zenith for having outwitted the cleverest 
and mightiest of the emperors. 

Aurangzib felt extremely mortified at Shivaji’s escape and rued 
the event to the end of his days. He cited this to his sons as an 
instance wherein a trifling negligence led to incalculable harm. He 
suspected Jay Singh and Ram Singh of being privy to Shivaji’s 
plans and disgraced them both. He appointed his son Mu‘azzam, to 
the Government of the Deccan with Jaswant Singh to assist him. 


264 



SHIVAJi 


Jay Singh was recalled and he died at Burhanpur on his return 
journey. 

For some time after his return Shivaji took no active or aggres¬ 
sive measures and spent a year or two in reorganizing his re¬ 
sources. The new govertnor, Mu‘azzam, adopted a policy of concilia¬ 
tion and gave no provocation to Shivaji. A formal peace was 
arranged, the emperor conferred the title of ‘Raja’ on Shivaji, and 
on his behalf the young ShambhujI was sent to the Mughul camp at 
Aurangabad, serving there on behalf of his father in consonance 
with the treaty of Purandar. It seems ShambhujI at this time tasted 
the pleasures of luxury and vice, which later ruined his career. 

Shivaji also effected a peaceful understanding with Bijapur and 
Golconda, both purchasing his goodwill by agreeing to pay him the 
stipulated annual amounts of chauth. Thus Shivaji was accepted 
as an independent ruler in Maharashtra. 

X. A FRESH WAVE OF FANATICISM 

Shivaji spent two years in comparative quiet and would have 
possibly continued inoffensive, had not a fresh impulse of fanaticism 
seized the emperor once more to which reference has been made 
above (pp. 233-36). On 9 April, 1669, he issued general orders for 
demolishing all Hindu schools and temples and putting down all 
their rleligious teaching and practices. All Hindu fairs and cere¬ 
monies were forcibly banned. The famous temple of KasI Visvesvar 
was pulled down in 1669 and that of Keshab Rai in 1670, the news 
of which flashed like lightning throughout India. New grand mos¬ 
ques arose on the sites of both the temples which stand to this day, 
visible for miles as one travels to Banaras and Mathura. Shivaji 
and Jija Bai received these reports with sorrow and consternation 
and stood forth boldly to resist the emperor in retaliation. As 
Sinhgarh was the key fort of Deccan politics personally handed 
back by Shivaji five years ago, he now attacked it openly, killed its 
guardian, the Hindu Udaibhan, and wrested it from the Mughul pos¬ 
session, although in the venture Shivaji lost his best comrade, 
TanajI Malusare, whose heroism Maharashtra commemorates to this 
day. This capture of Sinhgarh was effected in February, 1670, and 
was quickly followed up by ShivajI’s seizure of the Mughul terri¬ 
tories of Kalyan and other places of north Konkan. In April, Shi¬ 
vaji collected a large plunder by raiding several important Mughul 
towns. He declared he was taking revenge for the emperor’s attack 
on the Hindu religion. Once more he turned his attention to Surat 


265 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


and plundered it for full three days in October, 1670. He continued 
such devastation upon the Mughul dominions for full three years. 

In this new phase, war continued and severe fighting took 
place between Shivaji and the emperor’s veteran commanders, Daud 
Khan, Ikhlas Khan, Mahabat Khan and others. It was round Salher 
that a great contest raged, as it was a key fort on the borders of 
Khandesh and Gujarat which commanded important routes of com¬ 
munication. Shivaji captured this fort in 1671 and the Mughuls 
put in heroic efforts to wrest it back, causing a heavy toll of dead 
and injured and an immense sacrifice on both sides. In this fight 
for Salher the Marathas fought artillery duels on a large scale, and 
Shivaji’s Prime Minister, Moropant Pingle, earned a unique name 
for valour, which bards have permanently commemorated. 

One must pass over minor episodes in Shiviajl’s career—his re¬ 
newed war against Bijapur, his capture of the fort of Panhala in 
1673 and so on, which rendered the three years’ period (1670-1673) 
one of severe strain and labour for Shivaji. Such a strain, how¬ 
ever, called forth the best qualities of Maratha character—spirit of 
sacrifice and co-operation, and a sense of national unity, which 
Shivaji’s unique leadership evoked in his followers and which for a 
time made the Maratha name respected all over India. This is 
Shivaji’s greatest achievement. 

XI. THE GRAND CORONATION 

Thus, after thirty years of hard struggle Shivaji now reached 
a stage in which it became possible to legalize his position as an 
independent sovereign ruler—a complete master of his homeland. 
Such a consummation was devoutly wished for a long time and a 
formal ceremony was considered the best means of proclaiming its 
realization and, at the same time of reviving an ancient tradition. 
The neighbouring powers looked upon Shivaji as an upstart, a 
vagabond, and a plunderer. He was prevented from exercising 
authority on equal terms with neighbouring powers, or exacting re¬ 
venue from his own subjects as a legal master. For more than 
twenty years he owned a separate kingdom and exercised power 
over it, but this de facto position required a formal announcement. 

There was, however, some difficulty. Shivaji had to prove 
that he was a Kshatriya and therefore entitled to be formally crown¬ 
ed. It was discovered that the Ranas of Udaipur preserved the 
old Kshatriya tradition and the Banaras Brahmanas performed coro¬ 
nation rites for them in Vedic chants. Shivaji sent a strong de¬ 
putation to Udaipur and secured evidence that his own house 


266 


SHIVAJI 


was descended from the iSisodia clan of Udaipur; he also obtain¬ 
ed sanction from the Banaras Pandits for his formal coronation. 
One learned priest of the Bhatt family of Banaras named Visves- 
vara alias Gaga took a rational view of the subject, declared that 
Shivaji had proved by his action that he was a Kshatriya and him¬ 
self came to Raigarh to conduct the coronation rites for him. 

Grand preparations were made. Guests gathered in large 
number—agents of foreign States, local magistrates, priests, and 
friends. A gorgeous throne of octagonal shape with profuse de¬ 
corations was constructed and suitable edifice befitting a capital 
town had been completed. Saturday, June 16, 1674, was fixed as 
the auspicious day for the ceremony, although minor rites had 
started long before. 

An elaborate programme was drawn up and punctually carried 
out. The prescribed rites according to ancient tradition were gone 
through with Vedic incantations befitting a Kshatriya hero. Shivaji 
was weighed in gold and the amount of 16,000 hons (equal to about 
140 lbs. weight of his body) was distributed in charity. The English 
ambassador, Oxenden, who attended the ceremony at Raigarh with 
presents from the East India Company, has left a detailed descrip¬ 
tion of what he saw and heard. It is, perhaps, the most authentic 
account available of that event. 

The cost of the ceremony together with the construction of the 
throne is estimated by Sabhasad at Rs. five crores. This probably 
includes the cost of the fortifications and buildings of the capital, 
as well as its tanks and the streets, of which one notices the ruins 
today. The ceremony alone cost about 50 lakhs and was attended 
by some fifty thousand people, all being fed with sumptuous meals 
for some weeks. Jija Bai fortunately lived long enough to see this 
signal fulfilment of her life’s cherished ambition—an independent 
Maharashtra. She died just eleven days after the grand function. 

It is instructive to notice the permanent marks of royalty as¬ 
sumed by Shivaji on this occasion in order to announce the forma¬ 
tion of his sovereign State. The erection of forts and the organiza¬ 
tion of an armed force and the navy are the usual requisites of an 
established kingdom and need not be mentioned. But the royal in¬ 
signia and the particular titles he devised as marks of the Maratha 
ruler together with the cabinet of eight ministers nominated by him 
require some explanation: 

(1) Kshatriya-Kulavatamsa (Head of the Kshatriya Kula), 

(2) Simhasanddhtsvara (Lord of the Throne), 


267 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


(3) Maharaja (Emperor), 

(4) Chhatrapati! (Lord of the Umbrella), 

are the four Sanskrit titles which ShivajI assumed at the time of 
his coronation. In addition, ShivajI introduced a new era of his 
own dating from his coronation, and on that account received the 
appellation “founder of an era” ( Saka-Karta ). 

Another significant measure instituted by ShivajI was his 
cabinet of eight ministers, each with a department of his own. Most 
of these ministers were appointed long ago as ShivajI’s Swavdjya 
began to take shape. The whole scheme was completed and an¬ 
nounced at the time of his coronation with regulations and duties 
properly defined. 

The eight ministers were: 

(1) Peshwa (Prime Minister), Moro Trimal Pingle. 

(2) Muzmudar (Amatya) Revenue Minister, Ram Chandra 
Nilkanth. 

(3) Surnis (Sachiv) Finance Minister, Anaji Datto. 

(4) Waqenavis (Mantrl) Home Minister, Dattaji Trimbak. 

(5) Sarnaubat (Senapati) Commander-in-chief, Hambir Rao 
Mohite. 

(6) Dabir (Sumant) Foreign Mnister, Ram Chandra Trimbak. 

(7) Nydyddhls (The Chief Judge) Raoji Niraji. 

(8) Panditmo (Minister for Religion) Raghunath Pandit. 

The salary of the Prime Minister was 15,000 hons a year, and 
of the rest ten thousand— a hon being worth about Rupees thrlee and 
a half. This works out the Premier’s salary at Rs. 4,375 per month 
in the coin of those days, quite a substantial amount if the pur¬ 
chasing power of money at that time is taken into account. The 
salary for a minister was Rs. 3,000 per month. 

ShivajI appears to have borrowed this departmental division 
from ancient Hindu scriptures which have prescribed it. ShivajI 
was an autocrat and allowed no definite independent powers to his 
ministers. 

The Hindu character of ShivajI’s Swavdjya was clearly mark¬ 
ed. He excluded all foreign elements. Instead of Urdu and Per¬ 
sian which were the court languages for centuries past, ShivajI in¬ 
troduced Marathi and coined Sanskrit technical terms for adminis¬ 
trative purposes. Thus came into being the famous Rdja^Vyava- 


268 



SHIVAJI 


hara-Kosa, a dictionary of official terms. This was composed by a 
panel of experts under the supervision of Raghunath Pandit Hanu- 
mante. The elaborate Sanskrit introduction to this dictionary is 
worthy of serious study. Similarly, forms of address in official and 
private correspondence, office regulations, seals for Government 
documents and similar innovations were brought into force so as 
to complete the scheme of this new kingdom. 

This coronation ceremony marks a distinct stage in the life of 
Shivajl. While it gave him a new and reliable status, it increased 
his responsibilities in no small measure and involved him into fresh 
risks. While the Hindu world in general rejoiced in his achieve¬ 
ments, there were others who became bitter in their enmity to¬ 
wards him. The Mughul emperor in particular started a virulent 
campaign to put down this new rival striving to uproot his king¬ 
dom. The year of the Coronation itself did not pass off peacefully. 
Bahadur Khan pressed Shivajl from the east. To counteract this 
move, Shivajl carried fire and sword through the Koli country of 
north Konkan, Baglan and Khandesh. He also turned his attention 
to the Portuguese of Goa and captured their important post of 
Ponda. Nearer home, he captured the Bijapuri fort of Satara and 
established the seat of his guru, Ramdas, in the neighbouring fort 
of Parli, thereafter known as Sajjangarh. 

XII. THE LAST GREAT VENTURE IN KARNATAK 

With all the splendour and demonstration of Shivaji’s corona¬ 
tion and the lofty titles of full sovereignty assumed by him, his 
actual dominion was hardly more than two hundred miles in length 
and far less in breadth. Even the whole Maratha country had not 
come under his control. The Siddis of Janjira and the Portuguese 
were his constant enemies on the west coast. The Mughul pres¬ 
sure from the north was increasing. Even his brother Ekoji in the 
south had imitated him and announced his sovereignty at Tanjore 
in a similar coronation ceremony. Expansion of his dominion thus 
became a necessity for Shivajl. He was the regenerator of the 
Hindu religion, but all the peninsular lands of South India, essen¬ 
tially Hindu in character, had been long under Muslim rule. The 
emperor had barred his way effectively in the north. So the south 
alone remained free for his ambition. There were other conside¬ 
rations which equally influenced his march southward. 

The south was loosely held by the two States of Bijapur and 
Golconda. During Shahji’s days the rulers of these tried to extend 
their sway throughout the southern region, but their scheme had 


269 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


collapsed and when Shivaji appeared on the scene as the defender 
of the Hindus, these southern lands began lustfully to look up to 
him for a helping hand. The situation rapidly changed when in 
1672 the rulers of both Bijapur and Golconda died, leaving disputed 
successions and inevitable anarchy behind. Bijapur, all along a 
Shiah State, fell under the Sunni Piathan power of Bahlol Khan 
who would rather sell the State to Aurangzib and his nominee Dilir 
Khan than let it fall into the hands of Shivaji. The condition of 
Golconda was even worse. There ‘Abdullah Qutb Shah held a 
precarious headship with the help of two astute, clever, Hindu 
ministers Madanna and his brother Akkanna. There was no 
Muslim chief strong enough to preserve order in the State and save 
it from the greed of the Mughul emperor. The two Hindu minis¬ 
ters therefore came forth boldly to uphold Qutb Shah and for 
several years so ably managed the administration that its revenues 
improved and it began to enjoy peace and prosperity. This Hindu 
regeneration of Golconda excited the extreme ire of Aurangzib at 
a moment when Shivaji’s coronation had exasperated him beyond 
measure. Finding their position untenable, the two Hindu minis¬ 
ters decided to make a common cause with Shivaji as the only 
means of self-preservation. 

There was another complication contributing to this fresh 
move. It was a grievous sight for an acclaimed hero like Shivaji 
to find his own step-brother Ekoji, ruler of Tanjore, holding him¬ 
self a bond-slave of Bijapur and working openly against Shivaji’s 
work of Hindu uplift. Ekoji’s wise and capable minister, Raghu- 
nath Pant Hanumante, tried his utmost to dissuade Ekoji from the 
evil course he was following. He had with him a number of 
Muslim counsellors always working in the interest of the Pathan 
ruler of Bijapur and preventing Ekoji from making a common cause 
with Shivaji. On this point Ekoji and Raghunath Pant fell out so 
severely that the latter resigned his post in disgust, refused to be 
a party to the wicked policy of his master, and left Tanjore for 
seeking fortune elsewhere. He first visited Bijapur and, dissatis¬ 
fied with the policies that he found developing in that State, went 
to Golconda. There he made friends with the ministers Madanna 
and Akkanna and concerted a grand scheme both of preserving the 
Muslim status of the Qutb Shah and extending the cause of Hindu 
regeneration in the south with the help of Shivaji. The east coast 
regions sorely needed some power to give them peace and order. 
The scheme of conquest launched by Muhammad ‘Adil Shah had 
broken down after his death. The Nayakas of Tanjore and Madura 
and other minor rulers were looking askance for some one to give 


270 


SHIVAJl 


them protection. Here was an opportunity for Ekoji to stand forth 
boldly for co-operation with his brother and extend his pro-Hindu 
campaign to the south, which had been begun in Maharashtra. 
But Ekoji did not respond and Raghunath Pant felt the urge and 
seized the opportunity. He induced ‘Abdullah Qutb Shah to re¬ 
ceive a visit from Shivaji and make an alliance of defence and 
offence with him for carrying out the conquest of the southern 
lands in co-operation. 

This was in the year 1676 when the whole politics of the penin¬ 
sula was in a fluid state. Having secured willing assent to his 
scheme from the men in power at Golconda, Raghunath repaired to 
Raigarh and there discussed with Shivaji the pros and cons of this 
new venture. It was heartily welcomed by Shivaji who found in 
the Pandit just the sort of a co-operator that he needed in order to 
extend his Swiardjya to regions outside Maharashtra. 

Shivaji welcomed Raghunath Pant’s proposal enthusiastically 
as it afforded a new channel for national uplift and the regenera¬ 
tion of the decaying Hindu prestige. Messengers hurried between 
Raigarh and Golconda arranging the details of the forthcoming 
visit. Adequate preparations were quickly made to put the grand 
project into shape and the machinery set in motion with definite 
duties assigned to the various agents. The Hindus of the south be¬ 
came enthused with the prospective liberation from Muslim domi¬ 
nation. Hanumante returned to Golconda immediately. 

Shivaji left Raigarh at the beginning of January, 1677, having 
already despatched strong parties of armed forces to subjugate local 
Muslim chiefs who were suspected of working against the main 
scheme. A ceremonial visit of a Hindu potentate to a Muslim capi¬ 
tal was a unique event in the annals of India and Shivaji knew 
how to influence the Muslim world with his beneficence and sob¬ 
riety. He enforced strict discipline and orderliness upon his fol¬ 
lowers, all carefully selected and tutored in advance. He reached 
Haidarabad early in February, and left it early in March, 1677. A most 
enthusiastic reception with plenty of entertainment and hospitality 
was extended to him. Shivaji had several ceremonial and private 
visits and frank talks with the Sultan. An agreement was conclud¬ 
ed between them for jointly resisting the Mughul advance and 
dividing the new conquests between them half and half. Shivaji 
agreed to pay to the Shah a yearly tribute of 6 lakhs of hons. 

From Haidarabad, Shivaji proceeded to the eastern regions with 
Qutb Shah! contingents, paying devotions to the several shrines on 


271 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


the way. Shivaji appeared before Gingee, then held by a Bijapuri 
captain, who surrendered the fort after receiving suitable provi¬ 
sion for him. Shivaji constructed new' fortifications for Gingee, 
the remnants of which we see at this day. He then advanced 
against Vellore which was captured after a year’s effort. Shivaji 
then journeyed to the south where deputations met him from the 
French of Pondicherry and the Nayaka of Madura. He then 
arrived at Tirumalvadi on the Coleroon, about ten miles north of 
Tanjore, where his brother Ekoji ruled. 

Here Ekoji came on a visit to Shivaji in July and lived with 
him for a week. Ekoji did not show any inclination to fall in with 
Shivaji’s views or accept his demand for a half share in the pater¬ 
nal acquisitions. Although a gentle, benevolent character, Ekoji 
was entirely guided by Muslim advisers who had then sympathies 
for Bijapur, and Shivaji’s work of national uplift in no way appealed 
to Ekoji. Suspecting he might come into trouble Ekoji escaped 
under cover of darkness one night and returned to Tanjore without 
obtaining a formal leave. Thereupon Shivaji sent his agents to Tan¬ 
jore to explain matters and, finding that the subject could not be 
quickly finished, Shivaji left matters in the hands of his Senapati 
Hambir Rao Mohite with strong forces, and his representative 
Raghunath Pant, and himself returned to Maharashtra where his pre¬ 
sence was urgently needed. On the way, he seized most of Ekoji’s 
possessions in the Mysore plateau. 

Ekoji at Tanjore decided to try his luck in an open fight and 
attacked Hambir Rao Mohite at Valigandpuram on 16 November, 
when in a severe engagement, he was routed, losing heavily in life 
and property. When Shivaji learned of this result he at once wrote 
a long conciliatory letter to his brother explaining how foolishly he 
brought that trouble upon himself, and how it would be wise for 
him to retrace his steps. Ekoji’s wife, Dipabai, was a shrewd, wise 
lady who brought about a reconciliation between the two brothers 
and induced Ekoji to entrust his administration to Raghunath Pant. 
The Muslim advisers were dismissed. As Shivaji died soon after, 
all the grand results planned and expected of this extensive Karna- 
tak venture fell to the ground. The only benefit that accrued 
from it to the Mariatha nation was that during Shambhuji’s and Raja- 
ram’s reigns these Karnatak conquests of Shivaji proved of im¬ 
mense benefit. When Aurangzib conquered the Maratha lands, Shi¬ 
vaji’s son, Rajaram, found a hospitable shelter at Gingee and the 
Mughul danger was warded off. 


272 


SHIVAJi 


XIII. SHAMBHUJf S DEFECTION AND 
DEATH OF SHIVAJI 

This Karnatak expedition proved to be Shivaji’s last great 
achievement. Thereafter his health and the state of affairs both 
deteriorated. Dilir Khan began to exert severe pressure upon the 
Maratha dominions. Shivaji’s son, Shambhujl, now aged twenty-two 
(b. 1657), had been misbehaving for some time and was kept under 
close supervision for a time at Shringarpur near Sangameshwar 
(Konkan). He was also sent to Sajjangarh to be reclaimed under 
Ramdas’s care. He, however, succumbed to the temptations, secret¬ 
ly offered to him by Dilir Khan, of some splendid prospects under 
the Mughul Government. Without sufficient forethought or regard 
for consequences, Shambhujl suddenly escaped from Panhala on 13 
December, 1678, along with his wife Yesubai, and was enthusiasti¬ 
cally welcomed by Dilir Khan near Pandharpur. They together 
attacked Bhupalgarh, east of Satara, where, Shambhujl knew, Shi¬ 
vajl had deposited valuable treasure and a number of Maratha fami¬ 
lies for safety. They captured the fort in April, 1679, and commit¬ 
ted a fearful slaughter of inmates that fell into their hands. From 
Bhupalgarh they proceeded to Bijlapur which was saved from fall¬ 
ing into the Mughul hands mainly through the timely help render¬ 
ed by Shivajl. Discomfited before Bijapur, Dilir Khan and Sham¬ 
bhujl turned their steps towards Panhala. In the meantime Shi¬ 
vajl had employed secret agents to induce Shambhujl to return. At 
Tikota, a few miles west of Bijapur, Dilir Khan perpetrated severe 
atrocities by plundering and slaughtering innocent population, in¬ 
cluding women and children. A similar scene was repeated at the 
next mart of Athni, when the suffering people appealed to Sham¬ 
bhujl for protection. Shambhujl made strong protests to the Khan 
which he resented and a severe rupture came about between them. 
Some of ShambhujI’s friends in the Khan’s camp warned him that 
the Khan intended a foul game against him of handing him over 
into the emperor’s hands as a prisoner. This terrified Shambhujl so 
much that he left the Mughul camp at night with Yesubai in male 
attire. As he was proceeding to Bijapur, Shivaji’s agents met him 
and brought him to Panhala, where he arrived on 4 December after 
an absence of nearly a year. 

The year 1679 strained Shivaji’s nerve in another direction also. 
Aurangzlb issued a fresh order reimposing the jizya on all the Hindu 
population of India from 2 April. It was an open challenge as 
much to Shivajl as to the many Rajput chiefs of North India. The 
latter in resentment started a dreadful war against the emperor, 
which in the long run he was at severe pains to bring to an end 

273 

M.E.—18 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


(pp. 238-41). Shivaji also wrote a letter to Aurangzlb making a 
strong protest, couched in vigorous terms, against the unwise mea¬ 
sure and the wrongs which it imposed upon the innocent population. 
He wrote: “God is the Lord of all men and not of the Muhamma¬ 
dans only. Islam and Hinduism are only different pigments used by 
the Divine Painter to picture the human species.” 11 

Unfortunately, Shivaji did not live long enough to follow up 
the noble words with a suitable action. And now approached the 
saddest moment of Shivajl’s life. He well knew Shambhuji did not 
possess the capacity to preserve what he had secured in a life¬ 
time of tremendous labour and activity. He could not, however, re¬ 
claim his son. Upon the latter’s arrival at Panhala Shivaji visited 
him and gently tried to impress upon his mind what responsibility 
rested on him in his prospective inheritance. He employed a large 
staff to prepare accurate lists of all his property and possessions— 
of every item, trivial or costly. But Shambhuji did not rise to the 
occasion and his conduct immeasurably distressed his father’s last 
days. 

Greatly disappointed in mind and much emaciated in body, 
Shivaji kept strong guards to watch Shambhuji at Panhala and re¬ 
paired to his guru at Sajjangarh to seek solace. But what could 
Ramdas do to relieve the Raja’s misery? The two lived and dis¬ 
cussed together for a month. In February, 1680, Shivaji proceed¬ 
ed to Raigarh where the sacred thread ceremony of his son Rajaram 
was performed in March. A week later, on 23 March, Shivaji had 
an attack of fever from which he never recovered. He expired at 
noon on Sunday, 4 April, 1680 (on the previous day, according to 
some). Out of his eight wives married mostly on political grounds, 
Puttabai became Sati. One Sakwarbai long survived him keeping 
company to Yesubai (ShambhujI’s wife) in the emperor’s imprison¬ 
ment. Soyrabai was put to death by Shambhuji. The others had 
predeceased their husband. 

XIV. CONCLUSION 

What the earnest endeavour of one man can achieve in this 
wicked world is illustrated in Shivajl’s life narrated so far. It has 
not been possible, within the limited space, to give a more detailed 
account of all the varied activities and achievements of that unique 
personality. Only the main incidents and their prominent features 
could be attempted. But even these will doubtless prove the divine 
gift of genius which Shivaji possessed and which baffles analysis. 


274 


SHIVAJI 


“On more than one occasion he so recklessly plunged into a 
venture that he had burnt his boats and made retreat impossible 
for himself. Today, after the lapse of three centuries from his 
birth, even the most severe critic is bound to admit that though 
Shivaji’s dynasty is extinct and his State has crumbled into dust, 
yet he set an example of innate Hindu capacity and left a name 
which would continue to fire the spirit of man and shine forth as 
an ideal for ages yet unborn.” 12 

We have now before us for study records and eulogies refer¬ 
ring to Shivaji from the pen of those who came in direct contact 
with him—poet Parmanand, Ramchandra Pant Amatya, Raghunath 
Pant Pandit Hanumante, and not a few European traders and tra¬ 
vellers who visited him in India in one connection or another. The 
Amatya has left a piece of writing elaborately describing the polity 
and personality of Shivaji, a unique production in Marathi. Saint 
Ramdas often gives vivid pen pictures which appear to pertain to 
no other person but Shivaji, whose valour, circumspection, selfless¬ 
ness, and devotion to religion are now attested to and scattered 
throughout his writings. Krishnaji Anant Sabhasad, a member of 
Shivaji’s court, composed an elaborate faithful account of Shivaji’s 
life and achievements, which is of inestimable value. 13 

Did Shivaji aim at a Hindu Empire for India? A look at Shi- 
vajfs whole life closely discloses his intense regard for religion. He 
indeed cared more for religious emancipation of his land than mere 
political dominion. Ramdas has exquisitely described this spirit of 
Shivaji in his work Anandvana-Bhuvan. The religious persecution 
practised by Muhammed ‘Adll Shah and Aurangzlb moved Shivaji 
intensely and influenced all his actions. He at the same time rea¬ 
lized that religious freedom could not be obtained without political 
power, and to that extent he exerted himself in freeing his home¬ 
land from Muslim control. As a result of his visit to the em¬ 
peror’s court he was perhaps convinced of the hollowness of the 
Mughul empire, and thereafter exerted himself in bringing India 
under Hindu control. The imposition of chauth on lands outside 
his immediate sway was a means to that end. His coronation cere¬ 
mony and the grand title he assumed suggest his intention of esta¬ 
blishing a Hindu empire, certainly by degrees according to his means. 
His expedition to the Karnlatak was a clear move towards a Hindu 
India, in which he roped in Qutb Shah of Haidarabad. He had all 
but engulfed the State of Bijapur also. His public protest against 
the imposition of jiizya explains his attitude in unmistakable terms. 
If he had been vouchsafed a little longer span of life, he could have 
brought about the deposition of Aurangzlb, so clearly emphasized a 


275 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


little later by his son ShambhujI in his Sanskrit letter to Ram Singh. 
‘This kingdom belongs to Gods and Brahmans’, ‘Hindustan is essen¬ 
tially a land of the Hindus’, and similar phrases scattered through¬ 
out Sanskrit and Marathi literature are sentiments actuated by Shi¬ 
va ji’s endeavour, so closely followed after him by the Peshwias also. 
Mahadaji Sindhia indeed felt the glory of having achieved some of 
these dreams when he attained supreme power at the court of 
Delhi. 

At the same time Shivaji was never actuated by a hatred of 
the Muslims. He was no bigot and allowed equal freedom to all 
faiths. He was served as zealously by the Muslims as by the 
Hindus. The Muslim saint, Baba Yakut of Kelsi, was treated as his 
guru. Mulla Haidar was his confidential secretary. Ibrahim Khian, 
Daulat Khan and Sidi Misri were his naval commanders. A large 
Muslim population lived under him in equal contentment with their 
brother Hindus. He respected the personal honour of a Muslim as 
his own. He built a mosque opposite his palace at Raigarh for the 
use of his Muslim subjects. Shivaji’s ideals were broad and philan¬ 
thropic, embracing the highest good of all. He respected all holy 
men equally. Wherever he travelled in his expeditions, it was his 
particular passion to contact the holy men and preachers of the 
various localities; he valued their blessing to which he attributed his 
success. While he intensely respected Ramdas, it cannot be main¬ 
tained that in political affairs he was influenced by that guru. They 
were both exalted characters and worked in different spheres in 
their own ways. Ramdas was a great practical teacher; he did not 
meddle in politics. 

Shivaji’s administrative measures were a marvel of his time and 
far in advance of his age. He strictly prohibited grants of land in 
lieu of military or other service, thereby avoiding the patent evils 
of the jdglr system. While the Mughul administration continued 
blindly on the same old model built up by Akbar, Shivaji had created 
innovations in almost every branch. His division of official 
work among eight ministers, his system of forts for the defence of 
his realm, his organization of the navy, his army regulations includ¬ 
ing those for discipline and plunder, his compilation of the Raja - 
Vyavahara-kosa, his imposition of the system of chauth are all mea¬ 
sures of his own creation, utterly unlike what was then in vogue. 
Shivaji lavished money like water on repairing old forts and con¬ 
structing new ones, about 250 in all, which particularly suited the 
geographical situation of the Marathla region. Each fort was a self- 
sufficient unit with plenty of water supply and cornland enclosed, so 
that when besieged, each fort could stand defence by a small gar- 


276 


SHIVAJI 


rison for any length of time. The sonorous and significant names 
given to these forts reveal Shivaji’s ingenuity even in this detail 
and remind us even today what their use and grandeur must have 
been at that time. 

The annual revenue of Shivaji’s dominions has been roughly 
calculated at seven crores of rupees, possibly much less in actual 
realization. It may be roughly put down that all the peninsular 
lands, south of the river Tapti, either wholly or partially owed 
allegiance to Shivaji. 

Many writers, particularly the western, represent Shivaji as a 
plunderer and a rebel, conveying thereby that he was no steady or 
confirmed ruler, but a pest to the society. This is entirely a wrong 
view. Every patriot striving to free his land from foreign domination 
is bound to be a rebel until his position becomes stabilized. Shi¬ 
vaji never committed wanton atrocities during his raids and never 
harassed innocent population. He subjected Muslim lands to plun¬ 
der and devastation only when he was at war with those powers. 
Shivaji’s plunder had the nature of a war levy of our modern days. 

Glowing tributes have been paid to Shivaji’s character as a 
national hero alike by foreign biographers and his own countrymen, 
both of his own day and during recent times of advanced historical 
research. The French envoy, Germain, who visited Shivaji near 
Tanjore, wrote in July, 1677: 

“The camp of Shivaji was without pomp, without women; 
there were no baggages, only two tents of simple cloth, coarse and 
very scanty, one for him and the other for his prime minister.” 

But what his formidable antagonist, emperor Aurangzib, him¬ 
self wrote upon hearing of Shivaji’s death is no small praise; he 
said: 

“He was a great captain and the only one who has had the 
magnanimity to raise a new kingdom, while I have been endeavour¬ 
ing to destroy the ancient sovereignties of India. My armies have 
been employed against him for nineteen years and nevertheless his 
State has been increasing.” 

Insistence on order, obedience and strictest discipline were the 
main characteristics of Shivaji’s rule. Bernier, Tavernier, Khafi 
Khan, Grant-Duff, Elphinstone, Temple, Acworth, W.S.M. Edwards, 
Sir Jadunath Sarkar and other scholars and writers have all given 
Shivaji glowing tributes regarding him as unequalled by any hero 
in recent Indian history. He was not only the maker 1 of the Maratha 


277 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


nation but the greatest constructive genius of medieval India. No 
Bacon had appeared in India to point out a new way to human ad¬ 
vancement. Even Ramdas did not dream of a new path. Shivaji 
alone understood how to organize his national resources. He called 
the Maratha race to a new life of valour and self-reliance, of honour 
and hope. Therefore, it is no exaggeration to say that he is the 
creator of the Maratha nation, as Sir Jadunath had aptly put it, 
“the last great constructive genius and nation-builder that the Hindu 
race has produced.” Jadunath further observes: 

“He called the Maratha race to a new life. He raised the Maria- 
thas into an independent self-reliant people, conscious of their one¬ 
ness and high destiny, and his most precious legacy was the spirit 
that he breathed into his race. He has proved by his example that 
the Hindu race can build a nation, found a State, defeat enemies; 
they can conduct their own defence, protect and promote literature 
and art, commerce and industry; they can maintain navies and ocean¬ 
trading fleets of their own and conduct naval battles on equal 
terms with foreigners. He taught the modern Hindus to rise to the 
full stature of their growth. ShivajI has shown that the tree of 
Hinduism is not really dead, that it can rise from beneath the 
seemingly crushing load of centuries of political bondage; that it 
can put forth new leaves and branches. It can again lift up its 
head to the skies.” 14 

1., For an elaborate account of the political and social conditions of Maharashtra 
and the rise of the Bhosles, see G.S. Sardesai, New History of the Marathas, 
1957, Vol. I, pp. 17-92. 

2. Highly eulogistic accounts appear to have been recorded in Sanskrit about 
the exploits of Maloji and Shahji, after Shivaji's reputation had been fully 
established. Vide Sanads and Letters, pp. 211-215, and the unique Sanskrit 
composition known as Sambhajl/s dtin-<patra. Paramananda follows in the 
same strain in his Siva Bharat. 

3. Most of the old records support this date corresponding to 2, Vaisakh Suddha, 
Raktakshi Samvatsara Saka 1549. However, on the basis of some epigraphical 
and astrological evidence, some scholars favour the date 19 February, 1630. 
Recently Sstu Madhavrao Pagadi has suggested that Shivaji was born on 
25 April, 1628. J. N. Sarkar accepts Monday, 10 April, 1627 ( Shivaji and His 
Times, Ch. II, Section 3, which also discusses other dates). 

3a. According to J. N. Sarkar he was illiterate (op. cit. Ch. XVI, Section 9). 

4. Cf. Sardesai, op.cit., Vol. I, p.97, (First Edition). 

5. The well-known ‘Jedhe Chronology’ was discovered among the old papers 
of this family. Kanhoji Jedhe was asked by Shahji to help Shivaji. See 
G.S. Sardesai, op.cit., p.89. 

6. Cf. G.S. Sardesai, op. cit., pp. 104-5 for a slightly different version. 

6a. Ibid. 

7. Cf. Siva Bharat, Ch. XVI, 45. 

8. (Editors Note). 

The oldest and contemporary account of the capture of Javli, written 
by Shivaji’s courtier, Krishnajl Anant Sabhasad, differs materially from the 

278 


SHIVAJi 


version given in the text which is based on the accounts of later writers. 
The conclusion arrived at by Sir Jadunath Sarkar after a comparison of all 
available texts, seems to be more in consonance with facts. His reconstruc¬ 
tion of the episode may be summed up as follows: 

The ruler of Javli was a boy of sixteen and the State was ruled by the 
Diwan, Hanumant Rao More. An agent of Shivaji met the latter on a false 
pretext and treacherously slew him at a private meeting. He escaped un¬ 
scathed and quickly brought ShivajI to the Scene with a vast army. Javli 
was captured after six hours’ fighting, and several members of the More 
family were taken prisoner, but the boy king KrishnajI, with his younger 
brother Baji, took refuge in Raigarh, a fort belonging to Javli. ShivajI in¬ 
vested the fort and gained possession of it by negotiations. The boy king and 
his brother were carried away by ShivajI to Poona and there the former was 
beheaded. The younger boy escaped and later, in 1665, joined Jay Singh 
for war against ShivajI. 

Sir Jadunath's comments on this episode are also worth quoting: “The acqui¬ 
sition of Javli was the result of deliberate murder and organised treachery on 
the part of ShivajI. His power was then in its infancy; and he could not afford 
to be scrupulous in the choice of the means of strengthening himself. In 
exactly similar circumstances, Sher Shah, his historic parallel, used similar 
treachery in gaining forts in South Bihar as the first step to a throne. 

“The only redeeming feature of this dark episode in his (ShivajI’s) life 
is: that the crime was not aggravated by hypocrisy. All his old Hindu bio¬ 
graphers are agreed that it was an act of premeditated murder for personal 

gain . Even Shivaji never pretended that the murder of the three Mores 

was prompted by a desire to found a ‘Hindu swaraj’, or to remove from his 
path a treacherous enemy who had repeatedly abused his generous leniency. 

“This last touch of infamy it has been left to the present generation to 
add .... the twentieth century admirers of the national hero.” J. N. Sarkar, 
Shivaji and His Times, Third Edition, pp. 44-45. (The last para has been 
omitted in the Sixth Edition (1961) ). 

(In spite of his great respect for the author of this chapter, G.S. Sardesai, 
the Editor feels obliged to add this note as a corrective to the impression 

that might be otherwise left on the mind of the readers). 

9. Opinions differ on the vital point, viz. who struck the first blow, Afzal Khan 
or Shivaji, and on this depends the answer to the vexed and much-discussed 
question whether the slaying of Afzal Khan was a treacherous murder or an 
act of self-defence on the part of Shivaji. On this also, the opinion of 

Jadunath Sarkar (op. cit., pp. 72-3), supporting the version given in the text, 
Seems to be a fair one (Editor). 

9a. It appears from some newly discovered documents that Shivaji had been 
receiving help from the Portuguese of Goa in his struggle against the Mughuls, 
but Jay Singh succeeded in winning over the Portuguese who no longer dared 
help Shivaji openly. This might have been a contributing factor to the sub¬ 
mission of Shivaji. Of. Proceedings of the Indian History Congress, XXI, 

pp. 187-8. 

10. This is the latest view on the route followed by Shivaji during his escape 
and the date of his arrival at Raigarh. According to the older view, based 
on Marathi records, which was endorsed by both J. N. Sarkar in the earlier 
editions of his book Shivaji and His Times and G. S. Sardesai, the author 
of this Chapter, in his draft written long ago, Shivaji passed through Mathura, 
Allahabad, Varanasi, Gaya and, even Jagannath Purl, and returned to Raigarh 
on 20 November, 1666 ( Shivaji and His Times, Third Edition, 1929, pp. 153-56). 
The view given above in the text is quoted from the sixth edition of this 
book published in 1961, pp. 149-53. It is based on a spy’s report received 
at Delhi on 14 November, 1666, to the effect that Shivaji had reached his 
home “25 days after escaping from Agra”, thus fixing the date of his arrival 
at Raigarh on 12 September. Relying on this, and in consideration of the 
short duration of the journey, J. N. Sarkar has revised his old views and 
discussed the whole question in detail in an Appendix to Chapter VI of the 
sixth edition of his book (pp. 157-9). 

In his New History of the Marathas, Vol. I, published in 1946, Sardesai 
states that Shivaji, after leaving Mathura, travelled through the country of 

279 



THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


the Gonds on to Golconda and Bijapur and reached Raigarh “on 12 September, 
1666, or on the 25th day after leaving Agra”. But, evidently, through over¬ 
sight, he gives the date of ShivajI’s flight from Agra on 17 August, instead 
of 19 August (Vol. I, pp. 178-80), which is given by Sarkar and others, on 
independent grounds, and is in agreement with the interval of twenty-five days 
between the date of the flight from Agra and arrival at Raigarh. 

11. For the full text of the letter, cf. J. N. Sarkar, History of Aurangzib, Vol. Ill, 
Ch. XXXIV, Appendix VI. 

12. J. N. Sarkar, House of Shivaji (New Ed.), pp. 103-4 and 113. 

13. The estimate of Shivaji which follows may appear to many as somewhat exag¬ 
gerated, particularly as there is no reference to many of the statements on 
which the observations are based. Unfortunately the eminent writer of this 
chapter passed away before the Editor had any opportunity of discussing the 
subject with him. The Editor, out of regard for the late lamented scholar, 
G. S. Sardesai, who wrote this chapter, thought it best to leave it as it is, 
particularly as it follows more or less the views expressed by him in his 
scholarly work, New History of the Marathas , Vol. I, published in 1946. 

For a more proper estimate of Shivaji, reference may be made to J. N. 
Sarkar’s two books mentioned above. 

14. J. N. Sarkar, Shivaji and His Tunes, Chapter XVI, Section 9. 


280 


CHAPTER X 


AURANGZlB ( 1681-1707 ) 

I. THE DECCAN 

After Shivaji’s funeral, his younger son Rajaram, a boy of ten, 
was crowned at Raigarh by his mother Soyila Bai with the help of 
a party at the capital. But another party in the State was against 
this succession and Shambhuji, the eldest son of Shivaji and step¬ 
brother of Rajaram, succeeded in securing the throne of his father, 
overcoming all opposition (18 June, 1680). Rajaram and his mother 
were imprisoned, but the latter was subsequently put to death. 

Shambhuji continued his father’s policy of raiding the Mughul 
territories in the Deccan, and in the winter of 1680-81, he plunder¬ 
ed north Khandesh and the suburbs of Burhanpur. An attempt was 
also made in November, 1681, to capture the fort of Ahmadnagar, 
but it did not succeed. He had given shelter to prince Akbar and 
promised him Maratha aid in capturing the throne of Delhi. Such 
was the Mughul-Maratha relation on the eve of Aurangzib’s arrival 
in the Deccan. Reaching there, the emperor made an extensive 
plan to invade Maharashtra from different directions and launched 
a vigorous offensive with a view to giving it a stunning blow. 
Sayyid Hasan ‘All was sent to north Konkan, Shihab-ud-din Khan 
with Dalpat Rai to Nasik on the western frontier, Ruh-ullah Khan 
and prince Shah ‘Alam to Ahmadnagar district to guard that side 
against any possible Maratha attack; and prince A‘zam was directed 
to proceed towards Bijapur to cut off any assistance coming to the 
Marathas from that direction. But in spite of all these, the emperor 
could not gain anything substantial in 1682, and all the detachments 
had to be recalled in April, 1683. 

Thus, even after a year of his arrival in the Deccan, the emperor 
could not achieve anything decisive. He was rudely shocked by 
the unfilial conduct of his son Akbar whom he had loved so dearly. 
“In truth, he was at this time passing through a domestic and 
mental crisis; his faith in his family had been totally shaken and 
he did not know whom to trust or where he would be safe. Hence 
his policy for some time after was hesitating, suspicious, watchful 
and seemingly capricious or self-contradictory.” 1 But Shambhuji’s 
invasion of the Portuguese territory at this time and conclusion of 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


a treaty with the Mughuls gave Aurangzib a temporary respite to 
think of another offensive against the Marathas. 

In the meantime prince Akbar, who had been highly dis¬ 
appointed at the vain expectation of aid from the Maratha King, 
decided to proceed to the Portuguese territory and thence to sail 
to Persia for refuge. After leaving his residence at Pali, he went 
to Banda in Savantvadi and then to Bicholim, about ten miles north 
of Goa. Purchasing a ship he embarked at Vingurla (November, 
1683), but Durga Das and Kavi-Kalash, Shambhuji’s prime minister, 
persuaded him to come back, holding out fresh hopes of support 
from the Maratha King. He wasted another year (1684) in the 
Ratnagiri district, making repeated requests to Kavi-Kalash to meet 
him and decide on future actions. The internal condition of the 
Maratha kingdom was then extremely gloomy. Neglecting his 
duties Shambhuji was indulging in luxury of low tastes, and the 
government was greatly distracted by the jealousy of the Maratha no¬ 
bility against Kavi-Kalash, who was a Brahman of Kanauj in nor¬ 
thern India and hated as a foreigner at the Maratha Court. Added 
to these, there were rebellions in the State and desertions of officers. 
In these circumstances, it was not possible for prince Akbar to 
secure necessary Maratha assistance to fight against his father. 

Taking advantage of confusion in the Maratha kingdom, Aurang¬ 
zib started another offensive against it in September, 1683. The 
Sidi of Janjira was asked to watch the movements of Akbar and 
prince Shah ‘Alam was despatched at the head of a grand army to 
lead the main attack on the Maratha territory and penetrate into 
Savantvadi and South Konkan. Another detachment under Shihab- 
ud-din was posted at Poona from which he raided Nizampur in the 
Koliaba district. Prince A‘zam was sent to Nasik for guarding the 
road to Baglana and Khandesh, while Khan Jahan proceeded from 
Bidar to Akalkot to prevent any possible aid coming to the Marathas 
from Golconda and Bijapur, and the emperor himself went to Ahmad- 
nagar. 

Entering the Belgaum district Shah Alam captured some forts, 
cities and a large quantity of booty. Then he crossed the Ramghiat 
pass, twenty-six miles west of Belgaum, and proceeded into the plains 
of Savantvadi. After arrival at Bicholim he demolished the man¬ 
sions and gardens of Shambhuji and Akbar, and planned to occupy 
Goa by treachery, but this was a serious blunder, as it caused rup¬ 
ture with the Portuguese who stopped supply of grain to the prince 
by sea. The invading army then moved northwards, sacking and 
burning the towns and villages, and turning south again, they re- 


282 


AURANG2/IB 


turned to the north of Goa. Their progress was stopped by famine, 
and so the prince was compelled to return to the Ramghat pass 
where one-third of his men and a large number of horses, elephants 
and camels perished through pestilence. Harassed by the enemies 
from different directions the prince reached Ahmadnagar on 18 May, 
1684, and judged by the net result of his campaign the achievement 
was not at all worthy of serious notice. 

But the Mughuls achieved much better results in other quarters. 
The Marathas were defeated on several occasions and much of their 
territory occupied. Many Maratha captains joined the imperialists, 
and two wives and one daughter of ShambhujI were captured and con¬ 
fined in the fort of Bahadurgarh. After making a vain dash into the 
Mughul territory in June, 1686, and finding no ray of hope in fu¬ 
ture, prince Akbar hired a ship at Rajapur and sailed for Persia in 
February, 1687, reaching the Persian Court at Isfahan in January, 
1688. After thus sending him out of the Indian territory, Durga 
Das returned to Mar war. 

During the regime of Sikandar ‘Adil Shah (1672-1686), the 
last of the ‘Adil Shahi Sultans, the Bijapur kingdom suffered seriously 
from various troubles, viz, maladministration and internecine quar¬ 
rels among the nobles, which paved the way for its final extinction. 
Taking advantage of the rivalry between the Deccani party led by 
Khavass Khan and the Afghan party led by Buhlul Khan and even¬ 
tual disorder in the kingdom, the imperialists, on the request of the 
Deccani party, then out of power, took up their side, and invading 
Bijapur took possession of Naldurg and Gulbarga (1677). 

The condition of Bijapur steadily deteriorated from day to day. 
On the death of Buhlul Khan on 23 December, 1677, Sldi Mas‘ud, 
another influential Bijapur noble, became prime minister and re¬ 
gent with the assistance of the Mughuls. He made peace with them 
who imposed terms, suiting their purpose, viz., Bijapur should be 
guided by the orders of the emperor; it must not form any alliance 
with Shivaji; and Sikandar’s sister, Shahr Banu, popularly known 
as Padishah Blbl, should be sent to the Mughul court to be married 
to a son of the emperor (prince A‘zam). 

But Mas‘ud could not improve the dilapidated condition of the 
kingdom. On the other hand, by a secret alliance with Shivaji, he 
provoked the wrath of the imperialists who invaded Bijapur, con¬ 
quered some of its territories and made extensive raids on it, sack¬ 
ing and committing excesses. Such was the pitiable condition of 


283 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


the ‘Adil Shah! kingdom before the arrival of the emperor in the 
Deccan. 

Convinced of the assistance that the Marathas had been getting 
from Bijapur, the emperor despatched a strong force against it under 
prince A‘zam (1682). But he could achieve very little to his credit; 
he raided the frontier and occupied the fort of Dharur, about one 
hundred and forty miles north of Bijapur fort. His feeble campaign 
was confined to the region north of the river Nlra and he was re¬ 
called to court (June, 1683). 

Finding it impossible to set right the bankruptcy, chronic anarchy 
and other troubles in the kingdom, Mas‘ud left the court in disgust 
in November, 1683, and sent his formal resignation from his fort 
of Adoni early in 1684. Aqa Khusrav, who stepped into his posi¬ 
tion, died in October of the same year. Surrounded by dangers from 
within and without, specially of Mughul aggression, Sikandar ‘Adil 
Shah took vigorous steps for the defence of Bijapur and entrusted this 
important task to his brave general and new prime minister, Sharza 
Khan. 

Aurangzlb, who had been bent upon annexing this decadent 
State, wrote to ‘Adil Shah, calling upon him “as a vassal, to supply 
provisions to the imperial army promptly, allow the Mughal troops 
a free passage through his territory, supply a contingent of 5 or 6 
thousand cavalry for the emperor’s war with the Marathas, abstain 
from helping or harbouring Shambhuji, and expel Sharza Khan from 
his country!” 2 In the meantime the Mughuls had been appropriating 
parts of Bijapur kingdom and establishing their outposts in them. 
Mangalvide and Sangola with their environs were occupied in May, 
1684. But the emperor’s grim determination to swallow the whole 
of this State led him to follow a more vigorous policy. Thus a 
serious rupture with ‘Adil Shah seemed imminent. The latter sent a 
spirited reply to the emperor and acrimonious letters passed between 
them for some time, the interval being utilized by both the parties 
for their necessary preparations for the ensuing conflict. On the 
request of ‘Adil Shah, Abu-’l Hasan, the Sultan of Golconda, pro¬ 
mised to help Bijapur and a Maratha contingent from Shambhuji rea¬ 
ched it on 21 February, 1685. The Mughul siege of Bijapur fort 
commenced on 1 April, 1685, and prince A‘zam reached there with 
a large army on 14 June to take over the supreme command of the 
entire operation. The Bijapur army defended their capital with 
all their valour and strength and whenever possible, they went out 
to attack the besiegers, and also succeeded in bringing provisions 
and reinforcements from outside. In this distress of ‘Adil Shah 


284 


AURANGZIB 


aid came to him from the Sultan of Goleonda, ShambhujI for the 
second time, and ex-minister Mas‘ud who had established himself as 
a semi-independent ruler at Adorn. 

Prince A‘zam proceeded close to the fort on 29 June, and within 
a month, he had to wage three severe battles with the Bijapur army. 
For paucity of provisions a famine broke out in his camp but he 
continued the siege with determination in spite of his father’s direc¬ 
tion to return. The emperor then sent him all possible relief in 
regard to provisions, money and munitions with a strong escort 
under Ghazl-ud-dln Flruz Jang. But even after a siege of fifteen 
months, the fort could not be captured, and discord and jealousy 
among the officers hampered the progress of the siege-operation. 
Realizing the absolute necessity of his personal presence for the suc¬ 
cessful prosecution of the siege, the emperor went to the Rasulpur 
suburb, west of the fort, on 3 July, 1686. The fort was closely be¬ 
leaguered, and the siege was pressed in right earnest. The em¬ 
peror himself worked hard in supervising the operations and in¬ 
fusing fresh spirit into his men. 

On the other hand, the garrison was suffering badly from 
shortage of provisions causing the death of many men and animals. 
There was no possibility of succour from any quarters and the future 
of ‘Adil Shahl monarchy was extremely gloomy. The garrison lost 
heart and it shrank to 2,000 men only. It was therefore not worth 
while to resist any more and Sultan Sikandar surrendered on 12 
September, 1686. He left the throne of his ancestors and went to 
the emperor in his camp at Rasulpur where he was well received. 
He was enrolled as a Mughul peer with the title of Khan, and an 
annual pension of one lakh of rupees. 

Aurangzib entered the evacuated city of Bijapur on 19 Sep¬ 
tember and erased the pictures and Shiah inscriptions on the 
walls of the palace and the ‘Relic Shrine’ ( Asdr-i-sharlf ). The 
kingdom was annexed to the Mughul empire and all the ‘Adil 
Shahi officers were taken over into its (Mughul) service. 

Sikandar was at first confined in the fort of Daulatabad and 
then carried with the camp of Aurangzib as a captive. He died a 
premature death on 3 April, 1700. 

Goleonda was no less an attraction for the Mughul imperia¬ 
listic design than Bijapur. For about thirty years after the acces¬ 
sion of Aurangzib to the throne it enjoyed immunity from attack 
from the imperialists, as it “had not been so openly hostile to the 
empire as Bijapur,” 23 and the Mughuls were pre-occupied with the 


285 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


‘Adil Shahi Kingdom and Marathas. But on the accession of Abu-’l 
Hasan, the last ruler of the Qutb Shahi dynasty, in 1672, various 
factors contributed in helping the emperor’s policy of aggrandize¬ 
ment towards this State. Abu-’l Hasan spent his time in the company 
of courtesans and dancing girls, and the whole administration was 
practically run by the Brahman Prime Minister Madanna and his 
brother Akkanna. The predominance of the Hindu influence in the 
court of Golconda and its alliance with the Marathas were highly 
offensive in the eyes of the emperor. Although compared with 
Bijapur, Qutb Shah paid his tributes more regularly, he was also 
long in arrears. The incident which hastened open rupture was 
the interception of his letter to his agent in the imperial camp in 
which he had accused the emperor for his attack on Sikandar ‘Adil 
Shah “a helpless orphan”, and promised to send an army of 40,000 
under Khalil-ullah Khan to the assistance of Bijapur. Offended at 
this, Aurangzlb sent Shah ‘Alam with a large army to launch an 
attack on Hyderabad (July, 1685), but this army was held up at 
Malkhed by the Qutb Shahi force for more than two months. In 
October there was a change in the situation owing to the defec¬ 
tion of Mir Muhammad Ibrahim, the commander-in-chief of Gol¬ 
conda, who had been bribed by the Mughuls. This defection not 
only disheartened his army who fled back to Hyderabad but also 
made the defence of the latter well-nigh impossible, and the Sultan 
fled post-haste to the fort of Golconda. Shah ‘Alam took posses¬ 
sion of Hyderabad. Feeling helpless, Qutb Shah submitted and 
was pardoned by the emperor on the following conditions:—(a) the 
Sultan must dismiss Madanna and Akkanna, (b) he must cede 
Malkhed and Serum to the emperor, and (c) pay one crore and 
twenty lakhs of rupees in settlement of previous dues and also an 
annual tribute of two lakhs of hurts. 

But this peace did not last long. Qutb Shah put off the dis¬ 
missal of Madanna and Akkanna and at this, the discontented 
Muslim nobles, headed by Shaikh Minhaj and two widows of 
‘Abdullah Qutb Shah, caused the murder of both of them in the 
streets of Golconda; their houses were plundered and the members 
of their families ruined. 

Aurangzlb was not at all willing to allow Golconda to remain 
independent, however submissive it might be. On the fall of Bija¬ 
pur (12 September, 1686) he was free to resume his operations 
against it, and on 28 January, 1687, he reached the vicinity of Gol¬ 
conda. After occupying Hyderabad, the Mughul army laid regular 
siege to the fort of Golconda (7 February, 1687) in which the 


286 


AURANGZIB 


Sultan had taken refuge. Encamped north-west of the fort, the 
emperor personally supervised the operations. 

But the emperor’s arms were paralysed, though temporarily, 
by bitter personal jealousies in the imperial camp. Shah ‘Alam’s 
softness to save Abu-’l Hasan from utter humiliation on the one 
hand, and his eagerness to deprive his brother A‘zam of the credit 
of capturing Golconda on the other, led him to indulge in secret 
negotiations with Qutb Shah’s agents. The matter, however, leak¬ 
ed out and the irate father imprisoned his son with his family and 
confiscated his property. Moreover many Shiahs and orthodox 
Sunnis as well were not in favour of this war “between Muslims.” 
But nothing could deviate the emperor from his strong determina¬ 
tion and he pushed on the siege in all earnestness, in spite of 
heavy rainfall, tempest, famine, pestilence, repeated sorties of the 
enemies and their incessant fire from the walls of the fort. Three 
mines were carried under the bastions of the fort and filled with 
gunpowder, but when fired, the first one was misdirected and took 
the life of 1,100 imperialists, the second produced the same disas¬ 
trous effect, and the third, when fired, did not explode, as the 
enemies having discovered it, had filled it with water. The gar¬ 
rison defended with undaunted heroism and the investment con¬ 
tinued without any ray of hope. The emperor issued a procla¬ 
mation, annexing the Qutb Shahi kingdom, and posted his own 
officers in all parts of it with a view to stopping supply of provi¬ 
sions or any other form of relief to the garrison. Despite this, it 
was not possible to attain success and at last, the imperialists took 
recourse to bribery. Having been seduced, ‘Abdullah Pan!, sur- 
named Sardar Khan, an Afghan officer in the fort, opened the pos¬ 
tern gate on 21 September, 1687, at 3 o’clock in the morning, allow¬ 
ing the Mughuls to enter into the fort. The only officer who op¬ 
posed the imperialists was ‘Abdur-Razzaq Lari, surnamed Mustafa 
Khan, who had refused with scorn all the alluring offers of the 
emperor and fought with uncommon bravery till he was covered 
with seventy wounds. 

Abu-’l Hasan met his fate with calmness, consoled the members 
of his family and then left his palace for good. He was taken by 
prince A‘zam to the emperor who, after accusing him for his cor¬ 
rupt government and favouring the Brahmans, sent him as a State- 
prisoner to the fortress of Daulatabad with an annual pension of 
50,000 rupees. The booty acquired by the emperor at Golconda 
amounted to about seven crores of rupees in cash, besides other 
valuables like gold, silver and jewels, and the State was annexed to 
the Mughul empire. 


287 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Aurangzlb then took steps to conquer the unoccupied terri¬ 
tories and forts of Bijapur and Golconda and brought in his posses¬ 
sion Sagar, Adorn, Karnul, Raichur, Sera, Bangalore, Bankapur, 
Belgaum, Wandiwash and Conjeevaram in the course of a year. 

According to historians like Elphinstone 3 and Smith 4 the 
annihilation of the Sultanates of Bijapur and Golconda without first 
crushing the Maratha power with their assistance was impolitic 
on the part of the emperor. They are of opinion that it ‘Treed the 
Maratha Chiefs from any fear of local rivalry” which Aurangzib 
might have used profitably against the Marathas. “But”, says Sir 
Jadunath Sarkar, “this criticism misses the cardinal fact of Deccan 
politics in the 17th century. From the day when the emperor 
Akbar launched forth into a policy of conquest south of the Vin- 
dhyas to the day when Aurangzib rode in triumph into the fallen 
capital of the last of the Qutb-Shahis, the Sultans of Bijapur and 
Golkonda could never for a moment forget that the sleepless aim 
of the Mughal Emperor was their final extinction and the annexa¬ 
tion of all their territories. ... A union of hearts between Bijapur 
or Golkonda and the Mughal empire was a psychological impossi¬ 
bility.” 5 He holds further that it would not have been possible 
for the two decadent Sultanates to check the Marathas, who had 
organized themselves into a powerful national State, more effec¬ 
tively than the emperor himself could do. 6 The views of Sir 
Jadunath Sarkar reflect more correctly the real situation in the 
Deccan than those of Elphinstone and Smith and may be accepted 
in all fairness. 

During the period when the emperor was seriously engaged 
in utilizing the full military resources of the empire against Bija¬ 
pur and Golconda, Shambhuji did not make any well-thought-out 
plan to overcome the Mughul menace that hung so heavily on him 
and other Deccani powers. 

While he was plunged into drinking and merry-making at 
Sangameshwar, twenty miles north-east of Ratnagiri city, without 
even due care for his own safety, he was surprised and captured 
by Muqarrab Khan, a Mughul Officer, on 1 February, 1689. His 
Prime Minister Kavi-Kalash and twenty-five chief followers with 
their wives and daughters were also taken prisoners. Dressed as 
buffoons, Shambhuji and Kavi-Kalash were brought to the imperial 
camp at Bahadurgarh in a long procession with drums and trum¬ 
pets. The emperor offered to spare the life of Shambhuji if he 
would surrender his forts, let him know where he had hidden his 
treasures and disclose the names of the imperial officers who were 


288 


AURANGZiB 


in league with him. Publicly insulted and degraded, and driven to 
despair, he disdainfully rejected the offer of life, abused Aurangzib 
and asked for one of his “daughters to be given to him as the price 
of his friendship.” 7 After severe torture for more than three weeks, 
both Shambhuji and Kavi-Kalash were put to a cruel and painful 
death on 11 March, 1689. 

On the capture of ShambhujI, his younger brother Rajaram was 
enthroned at Raigarh on 8 February. The imperialists soon laid 
siege to it, but Rajaram managed to escape out of it in the guise 
of a hermit and went to Gingee (1 November). Raigarh fell on 
19 October, and ShivajI’s surviving widows and other members of 
the Maratha royal family including ShambhujI’s son, Shahu, a boy 
of seven, were taken prisoners. 

“Thus, by the end of the year 1689, Aurangzib was the un¬ 
rivalled lord paramount of Northern India and the Deccan alike. 
Adil Shah, Qutb Shah, and Rajah Shambhuji had all fallen and 
their dominions had been annexed to his empire.” 8 

“All seemed to have been gained by Aurangzib now; but in 
reality all was lost. It was the beginning of his end. The sad¬ 
dest and most hopeless chapter of his life now opened. The 
Mughal empire had become too large to be ruled by one man or 
from one centre. His enemies rose on all sides; he could de¬ 

feat but not crush them for ever. Lawlessness reigned in many 
parts of Northern and Central India. The administration grew 
slack and corrupt. The endless war in the Deccan exhausted his 
treasury. Napolean I used to say, ‘It was the Spanish ulcer 
which ruined me’. The Deccan ulcer ruined Aurangzib.” 8a 

The emperor’s long stay in the Deccan (for quarter of a cen¬ 
tury) with best of his officers, and his prolonged wars there with 
consequent drain of wealth and man-power, leaving the adminis¬ 
tration of provinces in Northern India in charge of second-rate 
officers with limited resources and insufficient troops, ushered in dis¬ 
astrous consequences for the empire. Centrifugal forces were let 
loose by the emperor’s long absence from the capital and the lack 
of a strong administration at the centre. Besides the risings in the 
Jat territories, Rajasthan, Bundelkhand and Malwa, rebellions 
broke out in Gondwana, Bihar and Bengal, resulting in utter law¬ 
lessness and anarchy which ultimately sapped the foundation of 
the Mughul empire. 

289 

m.e.— iy 



THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


II. NORTH INDIA 

After Aurangzib’s departure to the Deccan the Mughul officers 
continued to be in possession of the cities and strategic places of 
Marwar, but the Rathor patriots who occupied the hills often came 
down to the plains, attacked the Mughul outposts, cut off their con¬ 
voys, and rendered communication and cultivation almost impos¬ 
sible. From 1681 to 1687 it was a people’s war in Marwar carried 
on by the Rathor patriots under different leaders without any cen¬ 
tral authority and common plan of action, as Ajit Singh was a minor 
and Durga Das absent in the Deccan. Their primary aim was to 
wear out the imperialists by their guerilla tactics. Durga Das re¬ 
turned from the Deccan in 1687 and then conducted the operations 
against the imperialists. With the aid of Durjan Sal Hara of Bund!, 
the Rathors not only obtained some brilliant successes in Marwar, 
but also defeated the governor of Ajmer and raided the Mughul 
territories in Mewat and the neighbourhood of Delhi. But it was 
not possible for them to recover Marwar whose Mughul governor, 
Shuja‘at Khan, maintained the imperial hold on it by arms as well 
as by his clever policy of paying the Rathors clnauth or one-fourth 
of the imperial custom-duties on merchandise. 

The emperor was anxious to bring back Akbar’s daughter Safiyat- 
un-nisa and son Buland Akhtar, both of whom had been left with 
the Rathors by their father in 1681. After successful negotiations 
by Shuja‘at Khan with the intermediary of the historian Is war 
Das Nagar, Safiyat-un-nisa was delivered to her grandfather in 
1696, and the emperor was delighted to learn that Durga Das had 
made necessary arrangements for her education in Islamic theology 
by appointing a Muslim mistress from Ajmer. In 1698 Buland 
Akhtar was also delivered to his grandfather. As a result of all 
these, Durga Das was appointed a mansabdar of three thousand 
and the commandant of Patan in Gujarat, and Ajit Singh received 
the pargands of Jhalor, Sanchor and SiWana as his jdglr , with a 
man§ab in the imperial army, but did not get back his kingdom. 

The last stage of the struggle lasted from 1701 to 1707, at the 
end of which Ajit Singh marched in triumph to Jodhpur, the capi¬ 
tal of Marwar. Although a reconciliation had been made between 
the Mughuls and the Rathors, as mentioned above, it did not last 
long as the two parties were distrustful of each other. Aurangzib 
ordered the governor of Gujarat either to arrest Durga Das or kill 
him. Alarmed at this information, the Rathor hero rode away to 
Marwar, and joining Ajit Singh, again took up arms against the 
Mughuls. But they could not achieve anything to their credit and 


290 


AURANGZIB 


there were serious disagreements between Durga Das and his 
master for the imperious temper and want of tact of the latter. 
On the other hand, surrounded by enemies on all sides, Aurangzib 
made peace with Ajit by giving him Merta as his jdgir (1704). In 
the following year Durga Das also offered his submission to the em¬ 
peror who gave him back his rank and post in Gujarat. But in 
1706, taking advantage of a Maratha invasion in Gujarat, followed 
by a serious defeat of the Mughuls, Ajit and Durga Das once more 
raised the standard of rebellion. Unable to cope with his enemies, 
the latter fled to the Koli country, but Ajit defeated Muhkam Singh 
of Nagaur who had fought on behalf of the Mughuls. Receiving in¬ 
formation of Aurangzlb’s death in March, 1707, Ajit Singh rode 
with his forces to Jodhpur, and defeating the Mughul army of 
occupation, took possession of it. The Rathor army also recovered 
Sojat, Pali and Merta, and thus after long and sustained efforts, 
the valiant Rathors succeeded in getting back their motherland from 
the clutches of the Mughul imperialists. 

The effect of the Rajput wars of Aurangzib was disastrous to 
the empire. They not only cost heavy losses of men and money 
but the imperialists could not also eventually achieve the desired 
success. “Damaging as this result was to imperial prestige, its 
material consequences were worse still.” 9 It was an act of poli¬ 
tical indiscretion on the part of the emperor to provoke the two 
leading Rajput clans into hostility and thus lose their devoted and 
gallant service in the north-west frontier or in the Deccan. The 
examples of the Rathors and Sisodlas were followed by the Haria 
and Gaur clans and the trouble then spread to Malwa also, endan¬ 
gering the most important Mughul road through Malwa to the 
Deccan. 

The spirit which Gokla had infused among the Jats did not 
go in vain. Capable leaders like Rajaram of SinsanI and Ram 
Chehra of Soghor stepped into his place. They trained their men 
in open warfare, built mud-forts in inaccessible forests and carried 
on plundering raids even in the suburbs of Agra. Rajaram attack¬ 
ed and killed the famous Mughul commander Uighur Khan (1687). 
He also plundered the tomb of Akbar at Sikandra, and according 
to Manucci, dug out the bones of the great emperor and burnt 
them. 10 In July, 1688, while fighting for a party in an internecine 
war between two Rajput clans, he was killed by a Mughul mus¬ 
keteer fighting under the Mughul jaujddr of Mewat who had taken 
up the cause of another rival party. The Jat strongholds of Sin- 
sanl and Soghor were then captured by the imperialists in 1690 
and 1691 respectively. 


291 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Rajaram's place was occupied by his nephew Churaman who 
strengthened his army, and committing daring raids on the 
Mughuls, increased his resources. About 1704 he re-occupied Sin- 
sanl but lost it again in October, 1705. He continued his resist¬ 
ance against the imperialists with great patience and courage even 
after the death of Aurangzib. By uncommon tenacity and firm de¬ 
termination, the Jats eventually founded a powerful kingdom of 
their own, viz., that of Bharatpur which the Mughuls were unable 
to subdue. 

Another outbreak of a serious nature was led by Chhatra Sal, 
the son of Champat Rai of Orchha, in Bundelkhand. He had served 
as a petty captain in the Mughul army under Raja Jay Singh and 
fought creditably in the Deccan. But inspired by Shivajfs ex¬ 
ample, he made up his mind to follow a similar adventurous life 
and carve out an independent kingdom for himself. He sought 
service under the Maratha hero, but according to his advice, re¬ 
turned to his own country where the Hindus had been seething 
with discontent against Aurangzib’s religious policy of intolerance 
and destruction of temples, and were in need of a strong and cap¬ 
able leader. They received him cordially and elected him king of 
Bundelkhand. 

He defeated the Mughuls and raided Dhamoni and Sironj and 
began to realize chauth from the neighbouring Mughul territories. 
The emperor’s preoccupation in the Deccan gave him an opportunity 
to further his designs and he captured Kalinjar and Dhamoni. His 
raiding activities extended throughout Malwa and finding it diffi¬ 
cult to check his rebellious movements, the emperor made peace 
with him, appointing him a mansabdar of 4,000 with a post in the 
Deccan. But after the death of Aurangzib in 1707, he came back 
to Bundelkhand to resume his activities for the establishment of 
an independent kingdom. 

Pahar Singh, a Gaur Rajput petty chieftain in Western Bundel¬ 
khand, raised the standard of rebellion in 1685 and plundered the 
villages of Malwa. Although he was defeated and slain, the rising 
continued under his sons Bhagwant and Devi Singh, and then by 
other leaders. The hostile activities of this Gaur family were 
eventually stopped by granting them service under the imperial 
government (1692). 

In Bihar, a rebellion was led by Ganga Ram Nagar, the re¬ 
venue officer of the estates of Khan Jahan, in Allahabad and Bihar, 
while the Khan was serving in the imperial army in the Deccan. 
Sacking the city of Bihar, Ganga Ram besieged Patna, but was ulti- 


292 


AURANGZIB 


mately forced to leave Bihar. He then went to Malwa and looted 
Sironj in October, 1684, but died soon after. 

About the middle of the seventeenth century two kingdoms, 
Deogarh and Chanda, came into importance in Gondwana. Both 
these States had enormous wealth which roused the greed of the 
emperor whose religious bigotry, moreover, influenced his policy 
towards them. Even conversion of the Deogarh Raja to Islam did 
not improve his position. At last he raised the standard of rebel¬ 
lion, and in alliance with the Marathas, fought against the imperia¬ 
lists in 1701, and though defeated, did not submit. On the death 
of Aurangzib, he was successful in extending his kingdom. 

In Bengal the English East India Company rose in arms against 
the Mughuls. The grievances of the English included the demand 
by Mughul authorities of an ad valorem duty of 3^ per cent, on 
the actual merchandise imported, in lieu of the lump sum of 
Rs. 3,000 per annum into which it had been commuted during the 
viceroyalty of prince Shuja‘, unauthorised and illegal exactions and 
oppressions of the local officials. The English, unable to redress 
all these alleged grievances, resolved to protect themselves by 
force. The war broke out in October, 1686. After a few skir¬ 
mishes the English left Bengal for Madras (February, 1689). 
Eventually, in 1690 peace was concluded between the Mughul gov¬ 
ernment and the English; and at the invitation of Ibrahim Khan, 
viceroy of Bengal, Job Charnock, the new English Agent, settled at 
a place now known as Calcutta (24 August, 1690). 

III. THE TRIUMPH OF THE MARATHAS 

It is a pity that Aurangzib could never gauge the real strength 
of the Marathas, neither in the early stage of their rise nor in the 
subsequent stage of their growth. He had been acquainted with 
the uncommon audacity and daring exploits of ShivajI as far back 
as 1657. The Maratha chief then raided not only the Mughul dis¬ 
tricts of Ahmadnagar and Junnar but also sacked the rich city of 
Junnar. He was then routed and Aurangzib got him within his 
reach but did not take necessary steps to prevent his future growth. 
Even after his accession to the throne, Aurangzib did not proceed to 
the Deccan till 1681, although, in the meantime, alarming news of the 
subversive activities of the Maratha chief had reached him on many 
occasions. His long dependence on his officers in that faroff 
region against such a subtle adversary was not at all justified and 
ShivajI thus got ample opportunities to fulfil his cherished ambi¬ 
tion of establishing a powerful national State. It does not also 


293 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


speak well of the efficiency of the Mughul government that such an 
inveterate enemy of the empire could escape from the vigilance of 
the imperialists! It was not till the flight of prince Akbar to the 
court of Shambhuji that the emperor considered it necessary to 
proceed to the Deccan in person. But by that time the Marathas 
became too powerful to be subdued and, in spite of the execution 
of Shambhuji, the Marathas were up in arms against imperial 
aggression for the preservation of their national independence. 
Aurangzib was slow to realize their unusual potentiality and dug 
his own grave, fighting against them. 

In 1690 and 1691 the emperor devoted his attention chiefly to¬ 
wards taking possession of the southern and eastern portions of the 
late Bijapur and Golconda States. But he was soon faced with the 
‘people’s war’ in Maharashtra. After the flight of Rajaram to the 
fort of Gingee, it became the centre of Maratha activities in the 
east coast, while in the west, Maharashtra proper, resistance to the 
Mughuls was organized by the leaders there. In the eastern 
theatre of war Prahlad NirajI was the King’s supreme agent, and 
in the west, the Maratha leaders were Ramchandra N. Bavdekar, 
Shankarjl Malhar and Parashuram Trimbak. Ramchandra Bavde¬ 
kar was created dictator ( Hukumatpandh ) with full authority over 
the commanders and other officials in Maharashtra. Two generals 
of outstanding ability, Dhana Jadav and Santajl Ghorpare, con¬ 
ducted operations against the imperialists, moving from one theatre 
of war to another in the Deccan. By their guerilla tactics, they 
inflicted heavy losses on the Mughuls who, being unable to ascer¬ 
tain the movements of their enemies, were thrown into great con¬ 
fusion. “The difficulties of Aurangzib”, says Sir Jadunath Sarkar, 
“were multiplied by this disappearance of a common head and a 
central government among the Marathas, because every petty Mara¬ 
tha captain now fought and plundered in a different quarter on his 
own account. The Marathas were no longer a tribe of banditti or 
local rebels, but the one dominating factor of Deccan politics, and 
an enemy all-pervasive throughout the Indian peninsula, elusive as 
the wind, the ally and rallying point of all the enemies of the 
Delhi empire and all disturbers of public peace and regular adminis¬ 
tration throughout the Deccan and even in Malwa, Gondwana and 
Bundelkhand. The imperialists could not be present everywhere 
in full strength; hence, they suffered reverses in places.” 31 

Rajaram had been besieged in the fort of Gingee by the 
Mughul commander Zu-’l-Fiqar Khan in September, 1690. But the 
latter could not blockade this vast fort completely and hence sup¬ 
plies to it could not be prevented. On the other hand, the Mara- 


294 


AURANGZIB 


tha bands roving around cut off the supplies of the Mughuls and 
harassed them in all possible manner. Finding the position intoler¬ 
able, Zu-’l-Fiqar Khan gave up the siege and asked for reinforce¬ 
ments which reached him in December, 1691. The siege was un¬ 
successfully renewed in the following year, and it was abandoned 
on two more occasions under 1 difficult circumstances, the imperia¬ 
lists having suffered awfully due to repeated attacks of the Mara- 
tha army under Dhana and Santa. Zu-’l-Fiqar renewed the siege 
in earnest in November, 1697, and captured it on 8 January, 1698. 
Rajaram escaped and fled first to Vellore and afterwards to 
Vishalgarh. 

But the Mughul-Maratha war did not cease with the fall of 
Gingee, and it continued in the western theatre. 

Despite the severe shock to the Marathas caused by the capture 
and execution of Shambhuji and flight of Rajaram to Gingee, they 
ere long recovered from despondency and, on 25 May, 1690, gained 
their first important success near Sataria where the Mughul general 
Sharza Khan was captured with his family and entire camp and 
baggage by the joint actions of Ramchandra, Shankarjl, Santa and 
Dhana. After this, Ramchandra and Shankarji regained the for¬ 
tresses of Pratapgarh, Rohira, Rajgarh and Torna in the same year 
and Parashuram recovered Panhala in 1692. By surprise attacks, 
Santa and Dhana harassed the imperialists with a view to wearing 
them out as far as possible. After dividing his forces Santa sent 
4,000 cavalry under Amrit Rao to raid Berar and he himself pro¬ 
ceeded with 6,000 cavalry towards Malkhed, collecting chautln. 
The Maratha roving bands were active throughout 1694 and 1695, 
making the position of the Mughuls very miserable. In December, 
1695, Santa surprised the Mughul general Qasim Khan who had 
been directed to intercept him while carrying a rich booty to north¬ 
western Mysore. Inflicting a severe defeat upon him, the Mara¬ 
tha general plundered his camp, and one-third of his army fell 
during the encounter or retreat. Qasim Khan committed suicide 
and the rest of his army had to give up all they possessed and pro¬ 
mised a ransom of twenty lakhs of rupees. In January, 1696, 
Santa achieved another success over the Mughuls by defeating and 
slaying the Mughul general Himmat Khan and plundering his 
baggage. 

But a civil war between Santa and Dhana weakened the 
strength of the Marathas and gave the Mughuls a temporary respite. 
Both these generals were rivals for the post of the commander-in¬ 
chief ( Sendpati ). Though Santa was a general of extraordinary 


295 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


capacity and dash, he was ill-tempered and insubordinate which 
gave great offence to Rajaram and his nobles at Gingee, the result 
of which was that he (Santa) was attacked by his king and Dhana 
near Conjeevaram (May, 1696). But Santa succeeded in defeating 
both of them. Unfortunately, in another battle between the two 
rival generals in the Satara district, Santa was defeated owing to 
the defection of most of his followers for his insolence (March, 
1697). Deserted by his followers, he fled from the battlefield, but 
was murdered in June while taking his bath near the Mahadev hill 
(in the Satara, district). 

In July, 1697, the imperialists suffered great misery due to the 
heavy flood of the Bhima river which washed away their camps 
at Pedgaon and Islampurl, and except the fall of the fort of 
Gingee in January, 1698, nothing of importance happened in re¬ 
gard to Mughul-Maratha contest for some time more. In 1699 
when, after making plans for raids through Khandesh and Berar, 
Rajaram marched out of the fort of Satara, he was intercepted four 
miles off Parenda by the imperialists under Bidar Bakht, and after 
a sanguinary battle, was defeated and driven towards Ahmadnagar. 
Although the Mariatha king’s raid into Khandesh and Berlar was thus 
nullified, one division under the leadership of Krishna Savant plun¬ 
dered certain places near Dhamoni. 

Rajaram died at Sinhgarh on 2 March, 1700, and a dispute over 
succession arose between Shivajl III, the son of the senior widow 
Tiara Bai, and ShambhujI II, the son of Rajas Bai, another wife of 
the late King. Through the ability and influence of his mother, 
Shivajl III was recognized as King, but he was a minor, and the 
real power passed into the hands of his mother whose uncommon 
bravery, strength of character, power of organization, and admi¬ 
nistrative ability saved the Maratha State from the awful crisis. 

Although during the past decade the Mughuls had conquered 
Kalyfan and some other places in the northern Konkan, they could 
not achieve as much success as they should have gained in view 
of internal dissensions in the Maratha State. Aurangzib could not 
see any end of his war in Maharashtra, and so, in May, 1695, he 
sent his son Shah ‘Alam to northern India to take over charge of 
the Punjab, Sind and Afghanistan, while he established his own 
headquarters at Brahmapuri in the heart of the Maratha country 
for more vigorous operations against the enemies. But even then 
he was unable to attain the desired result. By their guerilla 
tactics the Marathas made the life of the Mughuls extremely misera¬ 
ble and forced them to be on the defensive in Maharashtra and 


296 


AURANGZIB 


Kannada. Unable to follow the rapid movements of the enemies, 
the imperialists became bewildered and terror-stricken. Many 
Mughul officers were compelled to agree to pay chauth to the Mara- 
thas, while some others entered into private understanding with 
them for sharing the plunder of the imperial territories. Sir Jadu- 
nath Sarkar correctly depicts the Mughul position when he says, 
‘'The Mughul administration had really dissolved and only the 
presence of the emperor held it together, but merely as a phantom 
rule.” 12 

In these circumstances Aurangzlb decided to besiege and cap¬ 
ture the Maratha forts in person, one after another, but this policy 
also did not succeed, as when he occupied one fort, another went 
out of his possession, and this continued till the rest of his life, 
undoing his labours and huge expenditure of money and loss of 
lives. “His soldiers and camp-followers suffered unspeakable hard¬ 
ship in marching over flooded rivers, muddy roads and broken hilly 
tracks; porters disappeared, transport beasts died of hunger and 
overwork, scarcity of grain was ever present in the camp and the 
Maratha and Berad ‘thieves’ (as he officially called them) not far 
off. The mutual jealousies of his generals ruined his cause or de¬ 
layed his success.” 13 Five years and a half (1699-1705) he spent 
in besieging the eight Maratha forts, Satiara, Parll, Panhala, Khelnia 
(Vishalgarh), Kondhana (Sinhgarh), Rajgarh, Torna, Wagingeha, 
and five other places of less importance. 

After making necessary arrangements for fighting the Maratha 
roving bands, he proceeded to Satiara, capturing Basantgarh on the 
way. The fort of Satiara fell on 21 April, 1700. After this, Parli 
and Panhala were captured by bribery in June, 1700, and May, 
1701, respectively. Khelna (Vishalgarh) and Kondhlana (Sinh¬ 
garh) were also captured, not by arms but by gold, and they fell 
in June, 1702, and April, 1703, respectively. Rajgarh, Torna and 
Wagingera were taken possession of between 16 February, 1704, and 
27 April, 1705. 

The long and continuous hard labour of the emperor even in 
the ripe old age was too much for him to bear and he fell very 
ill while encamped at Devapur, on the bank of the Krishna, after 
the capture of Wagingera. But he recovered from this illness, and 
proceeded slowly to Ahmadnagar, arriving there on 21 January, 
1706. 

His long warfare in the Deccan for a quarter of a century 
resulted in utter desolation of the country and caused indescrib¬ 
able misery to the people. Manucci, an eye-witness, says, “Aurang- 


297 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


zib withdrew to Ahmadnagar, leaving behind him the fields of 
these provinces devoid of trees and bare of crops, their places be¬ 
ing taken by the bones of men and beasts. Instead of verdure all 
is black and barren. There have died in his armies over a hun¬ 
dred thousand souls yearly, and of animals, pack-oxen, camels, 
elephants, etc., over three hundred thousand. In the Deccan pro¬ 
vinces from 1702 to 1704 plague (and famine) prevailed. In these 
two years there expired over two millions of souls.” 14 

The Marathas followed the emperor during his journey to 
Ahmadnagar, attacking his men from the rear and cutting off their 
food supplies. By this time they became very powerful and were 
no longer a band of plundering light horsemen; they were equip¬ 
ped with artillery, musketry and other necessaries of a regular army 
like the Mughuls. They succeeded in establishing their mastery 
not only over nearly the whole of the Deccan but also in some 
places of Central India. Unable to cope with them, the imperialists 
were forced to be on the defensive. In 1706 the Marathas raided 
Gujarat and plundered Baroda which was then a rich trading cen¬ 
tre. Even the emperor’s camp at Ahmadnagar was not immune 
from attack, and it was besieged in May, 1706, when they were 
driven back with great difficulty. The province of Aurangabad 
was ravaged on many occasions, and a large Mughul convoy was 
plundered on the way from Aurangabad to Ahmadnagar; Dhana 
attacked Beriar and Khjandesh. Thus the long and continuous en¬ 
deavours of the emperor to crush the Marathas proved futile and 
Maratha nationalism flourished with all its vitality as a triumphant 
force. In the midst of these confusions and disorders, suffering 
from bereavements due to the death of two beloved daughters, one 
daughter-in-law / one sister and two nephews, and deep anxieties 
for the gloomy future of the empire, specially because of an appre¬ 
hended civil war among his sons, Aurangzib breathed his last in 
his nineteenth year at Ahmadnagar in the morning of 3 March, 1707 
(Friday). 

He was interred near the tomb of saint Shaikh Zain-ul-Haqq at 
Khuldabad, four miles west of Daulatabad. 

IV. GENERAL REVIEW 
1. The Empire 

Before the death of the emperor in 1707, the Mughul empire 
consisted of twenty-one provinces or subas, of which one was Kabul, 
fourteen were situated in northern India and six in the Deccan. 
The provinces in northern India were Agra, Ajmer, Allahabad, 


298 


AURANGZSB 


Awadh, Bengal, Bihar, Delhi, Gujarat, Kashmir, Lahore, Multan, 
Tatta (Sind), Malwa, Orissa; and those in the Deccan were Berar, 
Khandesh, Aurangabad, Bidar or Telingana, Bijapur and Hyderabad. 
The empire extended from Kabul and Kashmir on the north-west 
to Chittagong and the Monas river (west of Gauhati) on the north¬ 
east; on the west coast, it extended to the northern frontier of Goa 
and on the south, its boundary stretched to the Coleroon river 
((north of Tanjore), but the emperor’s authority was disputed in 
Maharashtra, Kannada, Mysore and eastern Karnataka. Excluding 
Kabul (Afghanistan) the land revenue of the empire about 1690 
was nearly thirty-three crores and forty five lakhs of rupees. Other 
important sources of income to the government were zakdt (tithe 
from the Muslims), jizya (poll-tax from the Hindus), customs duty, 
salt tax and spoils from war. Aurangzlb was a believer in the 
Islamic theory of taxation and hence remitted those taxes which 
were not sanctioned by the Islamic law. The imposition of the 
jizya on the Hindus compensated to a certain extent the loss of 
revenue on account of the abolition of many illegal taxes and 
abwdbs. 

The volume of foreign trade of the Mughul empire was too 
inconsiderable to form an important factor in its economy. The 
principal exports from India were common cotton cloth (called 
calicoes), plain or printed, muslin or very fine cotton fabrics, silk, 
indigo, saltpetre and pepper. Small quantities of white sugar from 
Hooghly and slaves from Bengal and Madras were also exported. 
Besides, towards the end of the seventeenth century “silk taffetas 
and brocades begajn to be exported in large quantities, and a dis¬ 
tinct improvement in the dyeing and weaving of silk was effected 
in Bengal by the English Company.” 15 The main imports into the 
country were silver and gold (in specie), copper, lead, high-class 
woollen clothing from Europe (specially France), glass-ware, spices, 
viz., cloves, nutmegs, cinnamon and cardamom from the Dutch In¬ 
dies, superior variety of tobacco from America, horses from Persia 
and Khurasan, slaves from Abyssinia and wine and curiosities from 
Europe. Besides, fresh and dried fruits from Central Asia and Persia, 
musk and porcelain from China, pearls from Bahrein (Persian Gulf) 
and Ceylon, and elephants from Pegu and Ceylon were also imported 
into this country. But, on the whole, the total volume of import 
trade was small and the government income from import duty was 
about thirty lakhs of rupees only per annum. Indian economy was 
basically self-sufficient and India had a favourable balance of trade. 
Whatever was imported was paid for by export of cotton goods 
supplemented by a small variety of raw produce. The traders had 


299 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


to import precious metals into India to pay for commodities export¬ 
ed from India. 


2. Personality of Aurangzib 

Aurangzib was a man of small stature with olive-coloured skin 
and a large nose. I,n his old age he had white round beard. He 
led a very simple, well-ordered and pious life, slept little and worked 
so hard even in his extreme old age that it was a wonder to his con¬ 
temporaries. He held daily courts, sometimes twice a day, besides 
Wednesday trials, and worked to the minute details, even personally 
writing orders on letters and petitions and dictating official replies. 
The Italian physician, Gemelli Careri, who came to India during his 
reign and saw him in 1695, “admired to see him endorse the petitions 
[of those who had business] with his own hand, without spectacles, 
and by his cheerful smiling countenance seem to be pleased with 
the employment.” 16 

He had a wonderful memory and retained almost all his facul¬ 
ties intact to the end of his life, except slight shortage in hearing 
and lameness of the right leg due to an accidental dislocation in Octo¬ 
ber 1700, and unskilful treatment of the doctor. 

He was an expert calligraphist, had a passion for reading books 
and maintained his studious habit till the last day of his life, utiliz¬ 
ing the meagre leisure that he could get in the midst of his ex¬ 
tremely busy official duties. He was not only a master of Arabic 
and Persian but could also speak Turk! and Hindi fluently. “His 
extensive correspondence proves his mastery of Persian poetry and 
Arabic sacred literature, as he is ever ready with apt quotations for 
embellishing almost every oine of his letters.... To his initiative 
and patronage we owe the greatest digest of Muslim law made in 
India, which rightly bears his name,—the Fatawa-i-Alamgiri and 
which simplified and defined Islamic justice in India evein after. 

“Besides book-learning, Aurangzib had from his boyhood culti¬ 
vated control of speech and action, and tact in dealing with others. 
As a prince, his tact, sagacity and humility made the highest nobles 
of his father’s Court his friends; and as Emperor he displayed the 
same qualities in a degree which would have been remarkable even 
in a subject.” 17 

He was free from the habit of drinking wine, and other habi¬ 
tual vices of his contemporaries. The number of his wives was 
within the Qura’nic limit of four; of them Dilras Banu and Auran¬ 
gabad! Mahal died in 1657 and 1685, respectively; Nawab Bai led a 


300 


AURANGZIB 


retired life at Delhi after 1660, and Udaipurl was his only com¬ 
panion after the death of Aurangabad! in 1685. He was ever faith¬ 
ful to his conjugal love, and weakness for women never tarnished 
his name. He was a devout Muslim and followed all the precepts 
and observances of his religion with sincerity and strictness. His 
stern a/nd austere mode of living according to the injunctions of 
Islam was highly admired by his co-religionists who looked upon 
him as zinda plr or living saint. 

But the way in which he secured the throne is hard to defend. 
It is true that, possessed of financial and military resources, and 
in the absence of the law of primogeniture, the Mughul princes 
were generally eager to establish their claim to the throne by the 
trial of strength, and instances of cruelties to vanquished claimants 
are not wanting; but such precedents do not in any way exonerate 
Aurangzib from severe condemnation for his treatment to his bro¬ 
thers and father. Only this much may be said in his favour that he 
did not kill his father, instances of which, though rare, are not 
altogether wanting in history. 

He possessed uncommon physical strength ajnd unusual bra¬ 
very, of which he gave proof even at the age of fifteen when he 
faced a furious elephant alone. Added to these, he had dogged 
tenacity, coolness of temper, presence of mind, rapidity of move¬ 
ment and a calculating spirit which are so necessary for an efficient 
general, and these gave him success in the battles against his bro¬ 
thers. He braved all risks with a cheerful mind and coolness of 
temper, and encouraged his men even in the midst of thickest dan¬ 
gers. When, on the night previous to the battle of Khajuha, Jasvant 
Singh deserted him with his Rajput followers, committing depreda¬ 
tions, he received the information with coolness, and without the 
least excitement, took steps to maintain his own position and pre¬ 
vent confusion spreading among the rest of his army. In the thick¬ 
ness of fight inext day he extricated himself and his men from critical 
situations with his unusual coolness of temper and eventually came 
out successful. 

As an expert strategist, he took advantage of any opportunity 
which he could get out of the mistakes and weaknesses of his ad¬ 
versaries. He did not also hesitate to take recourse to stratagem 
and political cunning to serve his own end, as was found during 
the Rathor-Sisodia alliance with his rebellious son Akbar. By a 
false letter to the latter and contriving to let it fall into the hands 
of the Rajputs, he turned the whole table against his enemies. He 
was a skilful diplomat whose subtle activities were too much for 


301 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


his enemies to cope with. A man of inflexible determination, he 
used to cling to his object with extraordinary patience till his en¬ 
deavours were crowned with success. 

An indefatigable worker like him never felt satisfied without 
personally accomplishing the duties of the State even to the minute 
details as best as he could, according to his owln ideas and likings, 
with the least dependence on others. But in doing so, he forgot 
the limitations of his own capacity for work and such a spirit more¬ 
over engendered in him too much of self-confidence and suspicion 
of others, even of his own sons. The inevitable result of this sus¬ 
picious nature was over-centralization of power and excessive inter¬ 
ference by the emperor which destroyed the initiative and sense of 
responsibility of his ministers and other high officers, and reduced 
them to the position of clerks, merely to register his will and follow 
his dictates. As a natural consequence, deterioration in efficiency of 
administration crept in, specially with his growing old age. 

He retained the military character of his government from the 
beginning to the end, and did not chalk out any well-planned pro¬ 
gramme either for the social and economic welfare of his subjects or 
for their cultural regeneration by the advancement of learning and 
development of arts, such as music, painting and architecture. He 
ought to have realized that such an empire resting on mere physical 
force cannot last long, and signs of its decay and dismemberment 
were visible even during his lifetime. 

As a tool of the orthodox reform movement, and obsessed by 
a narrow conception without due consideration for the welfare and 
stability of the empire consisting of men of diverse castes, creeds 
and religions, he adhered to the policy detrimental to it, paving the 
way for its downfall. He cannot be called a benevolent despot as 
he had no solicitude for the well-being of all his subjects, irres¬ 
pective of caste, creed or religion. In utter disregard of the interests 
of the overwhelming majority, he performed his duties in a way 
which showed that, as an emperor, his main consideration was for 
the Sunni Muslims only. Such discriminatory policy proved fatal 
to the empire. He never understood “the eternal truth that there 
cannot be a great or lasting empire without a great people, that 
no people can be great unless it learns to form a compact nation 
with equal rights and opportunities for all.” 18 

“In spite of his untiring labours”, says Dr. Yasin, “Aurangzib 
was a colossal failure and we find that during his time people were 
neither good men nor good Muslims; he being the only good Musal- 
man but a bad ruler of a state of composite races, creeds and cultures. 

302 


v 


AURANGZIB 


Aurangzib’s recipe might be excellent from the view-point of a 
Mujaddid; but it killed the patient nevertheless. In striving after 
the substance of Islam, Aurangzib reduced the Muslim empire to a 
shadow before he breathed his last leaving a legacy of communal 
bitterness to posterity.” 19 

Aurangzib was not a political genius and lacked the qualities of 
a true statesman who could initiate a policy and enact laws for 
moulding the life and thought of his contemporaries as well as of 
future generations. He could realize the futility of his work be¬ 
fore his death and, full of remorse, he wrote to prince A‘zam: “The 
days that have been spent except in austerities have left only re¬ 
gret behind them. I have not at all done any (true) government 
of the realm or cherishing of the peasantry. 

“Life, so valuable, has gone away for nothing.” 20 

3. India at the end of Aurangzib’s reign 

Taking a broad view of the state of things at the death of 
Aurangzib, with which the period dealt with in this volume comes 
to an end, it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that in spite of 
brilliant qualities of head and heart which enabled that emperor to 
extend the Mughul empire over the whole of Deccan and South 
India, the grave defects of his character are mainly responsible for 
the sudden collapse of the mighty empire which then included nearly 
the whole of India and Afghanistan. Like waves in the ocean the 
Mughul empire reached the highest point only to break down, and 
Aurangzib must share both the credit and discredit for the same, 
at least to a very large extent. But it was not merely the fall of an 
empire but also the end of an epoch which ushered in a period of 
decline and distress after a century of peace and prosperity—gene¬ 
rally speaking—“under the strong and wise government” of three 
generations of emperors before Aurangzib. Peace and security— 
“the sole justification of the Mughul empire”—no longer existed 
in India at the time of Aurangzib’s death. Political unrest and 
insecure roads ruined agriculture, trfade and industry in a large 
part of the country. “The financial exhaustion of the empire in 
these endless wars left Government and private owners alike too 
poor to repair buildings and roads worn out by the lapse of time.” 
“The labouring population suffered not only from violent capture, 
forced labour, and starvation, but also from epidemics which were 
very frequent during these campaigns.” “The starving and exas¬ 
perated peasantry took to highway robberiy as the only means of 
living.” “Trade almost ceased in the Deccan during the unhappy 


303 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


quarter of a century.” When Aurangzib retired from his last cam¬ 
paign in the Deccan in 1705 “the country presented a scene of utter 
desolation”, of which a vivid picture has been drawn by two eye 
witnesses, the foreign traveller Manucci, a passage from whose writ¬ 
ings has been quoted above, and Bhimsen. Arts and crafts 
could flourish only in the walled cities, and in some regions, 
both in Deccan and South India, “village industries and industrial 
classes together died out.” Even the provinces in North India, where 
peace prevailed, in Bengal for example, the absence of a strong 
central Government gave a golden opportunity to the Provincial 
Governors to make their fortune by fleecing the traders, merchants 
and craftsmen in various ways, and few of them failed to make 
good use of it. The sad picture, of which this is merely an outline, 
has been brilliantly drawn by the greatest Indian historian, Sir 
Jadunath Sarkar, in the last two chapters of his monumental work, 
the History of Aurangzib, in five volumes. The readers may form 
from them a fair idea of the state of things in India in the year 
1707 with which this volume closes. 21 

1. J. N. Sarkar, A Short History of Aurangzib, p. 279. 

2. J. N. Sarkar, History of Aurangzib, Vol. IV (1930), p. 368. 

2a. Ibid, p. 405. 

3. Mountstuart Elphinstone, The History of India (6th Edition), p. 649. 

4. V. A. Smith, The Oxford History of India (3rd Edition), p. 421. 

5. J. N. Sarkar, History of Aurangzib, Vol. IV, pp. 5-6. 

6. Ibid, pp. 6-7. 

7. Ibid, p. 479. 

8. Ibid, p. 484. 

8a. J. N. Sarkar, Studies in Mughal India, p. 50. 

9. J. N. Sarkar, History of Aurangzib, Vol. Ill, p. 424. 

10. Storia do Mogor, N. Manucci, translated by W. Irvine, II. 320. 

11. CHI, IV, p. 290. 

12. Ibid, p. 296. 

13. Ibid. 

14. Quoted in CHI, IV, p. 300. 

15. J. N. Sarkar, A Short History of Aurangzib, p. 458. 

16. ChurchilVs Voyages, IV, 222. 

17. J. N. Sarkar, History of Aurangzib, Vol. V, (1924), p. 475. 

18. Ibid, p. 495. 

19. Mohammad Yasin, A Social History of Islamic India, p. 171. 

20. J. N. Sarkar, History of Aurangzib, Vol. V, p. 259. 

21. The Editor is responsible for this para which is based on Chapter LXII of 
the last volume of the History of Aurangzib by Jadunath Sarkar. The passages 
within quotation marks are from pp. 440-45. For the account of Manucci, 
cf. Storia do Mogor, Vol. IV, p. 252. Two passages from the Persian work, 
Nushka-i-Dilkushd by Bhimsen are quoted in CHI, Vol. IV, p. 300. 


304 


CHAPTER XI 


THE SIKHS 


I. The Muslim Oppression in the Punjab at the time of Nanak 

Reference has been made above 1 to the religious doctrines 
preached by Nanak (1469-1538) and other medieval saints like 
Chaitanya, his contemporary, and Kabir whom he acknowledged as 
his spiritual guide. All of them founded separate religious sects 
which flourish even today. But there is one fact of great significance 
which distinguishes the followers of Nanak from those of the other 
two. These latter have all along been members of purely religious 
sects, but the political and military achievements of the Sikhs, as the 
followers of Nanak are called, have largely overshadowed their re¬ 
ligious outlook and spiritual character. The latter aspect, namely 
the religious evolution of Sikhism which took place under Nanak 
and the Gurus who succeeded him as the leader, will be discussed 
in the Chapter on religion, while the rise and growth of the political 
and military power of the Sikhs under the same Gurus form the 
subject-matter of this Chapter. 

Broadly speaking, the political-cum-military power of the Sikhs 
may be regarded as a reaction against the intolerance and bigotry 
of the Muslim rulers leading to the oppression of the Hindus. 2 As 
such, this requires a little elaboration, with special reference to the 
Punjab. 

The Muslims of Central Asia had been invading and ruling over 
the Punjab, the homeland of the Sikhs, for nearly five hundred years 
before the foundation of Sikhism. The Punjab suffered the most 
as all the foreign invading hordes passed through it to the rich plains 
of the Ganga or to the south. Nearly seventy Muslim invasions 3 
had taken place during five hundred years preceding Nanak. The 
lot of the Hindus during this long period was one of great misery 
and suffering. Forcible conversion, destruction of Hindu temples, 
imposition of taxes like the jizya and pilgrimage tax upon the 
Hindus, and restrictions upon the building of new temples and re¬ 
pairing old ones were only some of the disabilities under which the 
Hindus were groaning. “Throughout the journey from the coast to 
Fatehpur, for instance, the Fathers found that the Hindu temples 
had been destroyed by the Mohammedans.” 4 

As a rule, Hindus were not given generally any post of respon¬ 
sibility in civil and military administration. They could be employ- 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


ed only in the lowest posts in the revenue department, because they 
were familiar with the intricacies of local record-keeping. Hindus 
were called Kafirs or infidels. At times, restrictions were imposed 
upon them in the matters of diet, dress and transport, so that they 
could easily be distinguished from Muslims and could be treated ac¬ 
cording to their inferior status. They were required to put marks 
on their foreheads or clothes. Even during the reign of Akbar, 
Husain Khan, Governor of Lahore, had decreed that “the Hindus 
should stick patches of different colours on their shoulders, or on the 
bottom of their sleeves, so that no Muslim might be put to indignity 
of showing them honour by mistake. Nor did he allow Hindus to 
saddle their horses but insisted that they use packsaddles when rid¬ 
ing.” 5 In general, Hindus could not wear rich clothes and ride on 
fine horses. In Dera Ghazi Khan district a Hindu could ride only 
on a donkey. , 

Nanak was twenty years old when Sikandar Lodi (1489-1517) 
ascended the throne. Even as a prince, Sikandar wished to prohibit 
the Hindus from bathing in the sacred tank of Thaneswar. 6 As a 
king, he broke into pieces the idols of the temples of Jwalamukhi 
and Kangra and gave them to butchers to be used as weights. He 
forbade Hindus from bathing at the ghats on the Yamuna. Barbers 
were ordered not to shave Hindus. Hindu temples were destroyed 
on a large scale and Hindus were forcibly converted to Islam. 
Justice was publicly denied to them. Law of blasphemy was strictly 
enforced, and for any criticism of Islam capital punishment was in¬ 
flicted. Bodhan, a Brahmin, was executed by Sikandar Lodi for say¬ 
ing that Hinduism was as good as Islam. 7 Bribery and corruption 
were rampant. Nanak observed: “Justice hath taken wings and 
fled.” 8 “This age is like a drawn sword, the Kings are butchers; 
goodness has taken wings and flown.” 9 “There is no one who re- 
ceiveth or giveth not bribes; the King administers justice only when 
his palm has been greased (filled).” 10 

Guru Nanak was also an eye-witness to the treatment meted out 
to the people by Babur when he invaded India in 1521. Nanak was 
at Sayyidpur, now called Eminabad, 80 kilometres from Lahore, in 
the Gujranwala District. Babur ordered a general massacre of the 
people and thousands of persons were taken prisoners. The bar¬ 
barous treatment of prisoners, in the camp, particularly of women, 
broke the tender heart of Nanak. In his agony he even took God to 
task. He said: 

“Thou, O Creator of all things, 

Takest to Thyself no blame; 


306 


THE SIKHS 


Thou hast sent Yama disguised as the great Moghal, Babar. 

Terrible was the slaughter, 

Loud were the cries of the lamenters. 

Did this not awaken pity in Thee, O Lord? 

Thou art part and parcel of all things equally, O Creator: 
Thou must feel for all men and all nations. 

If a strong man attacketh who is equally strong, 

Where is the grief in this, or whose is the grievance? 

But when a fierce tiger preys on the helpless cattle, 

The Herdsman must answer for it.” 11 

Babur exempted Muslims from the payment of stamp duties 
which Hindus alone paid. 1,2 His officers demolished Hindu temples 
and constructed mosques in their places at Sambhal, 13 Chanderi and 
Ayodhya, and broke to pieces Jain idols at Urva near Gwalior. 14 

II. Martyrdom of Guru Arjun 

During the pontificate of the third Guru, Amar Das (1552-74), 
the Sikhs had to suffer a great deal of annoyance and oppression 
from the local Muslim population. But though urged by his dis¬ 
ciples to stand up against the tyranny, the Guru refused, saying, 
“it is not proper for saints to take revenge.” The liberal-minded 
Akbar was very sympathetic to the Sikhs, but far different was 
the attitude of his successors. It has already been related how the 
fifth Guru, Arjun (1581-1606), 15 was executed by Jahangir for help¬ 
ing his rebellious son Khusrav with money. This event proved to 
be the turning point in the attitude of the Sikh Gurus towards the 
Muslim rulers. They resolved not to submit meekly to their op¬ 
pressions but to defend their rights by arms, and thus began the 
process of transformation of the Sikhs into a military power. In 
view of this, the whole incident must be described in some detail, 
even at the risk of some repetition, 16 with special reference to the 
attitude of Jahangir towards the Sikhs. 

Khusrav had already met Guru Arjun in the company of his 
grandfather, Akbar, and when after the unsuccessful rebellion 
against his father, Jahangir, he fled to the Punjab, he waited on 
Guru Arjun at Taran Taran. The interview is thus described in 
the autobiography of Jahangir: 

“In these days when Khusrav passed along this road, this 
foolishly insignificant fellow (Arjun) proposed to wait upon him. 
Khusrav happened to halt at the place where he lived. He came 
and met him. He discussed several matters with him and made on 


307 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


his forehead a finger-mark in saffron, which in the terms of Hindus 
is called Qashqa and is considered propitious.” 17 

Applying the tilak implied only honourable reception and not 
blessing the Prince with sovereignty. Mohsin Fani says that the 
Guru offered prayers for the Prince. 18 The prayer indicated a wish 
for the safety of the individual, as the Prince was on his journey, 
and not for his cause. The Guru was an embodiment of moral vir¬ 
tues and could not bless a son in rebellion against his father. He 
could not forget the case of his own elder brother who had revolted 
against his father. The Guru could never contemplate involving 
himself in the struggle for the throne. This was a political matter 
and the Guru had nothing to do with it. 18a 

The Prince then begged the Guru to help him with money. 
Guru Arjun replied that his money was meant for the poor and not 
for princes. Khusrav humbly pleaded that he was also very poor, 
needy, forlorn and in distress, and did not possess even travelling 
expenses for his proposed flight to Kabul. The Guru was moved 
at the Prince’s sad plight, humility and the dangerous state he was 
in, being hotly pursued by the Mughul army and the emperor him¬ 
self. According to Macauliffe, Khusrav was provided with a few 
thousand rupees. Beni Prasad in his History of Jahangir 19 puts 
this amount at Rs. 5,000/-. 

After the capture of Khusrav, Jahangir wreaked his vengeance 
on his supporters and followers. The list of Khusrav’s supporters 
submitted to Jahangir contained the name of Guru Arjun. Accord¬ 
ing to the Sikh tradition, the emperor’s wrath was aroused by 
Diwan Chandu Shah whose offer for the marriage of his daughter 
with the Guru's son, Har Govind, had been earlier turned down. 
This might be one of the factors. Jahangir himself was opposed to 
Guru Arjun, possibly because of his manner of living and the 
deepest devotion of his disciples. He writes in his Memoir: 

“A Hindu named Arjun lived at Govindwal on the bank of 
river Beas in the garb of a saint and in ostentation. As a result 
many of the simple-minded Hindus as well as ignorant and 
foolish Muslims had been persuaded to adopt his way of living 
and he had raised aloft the standard of sainthood and holiness. 
He was called Guru. From all sides cowboys and idiots be¬ 
came his fast followers. This business had flourished for three 
or four generations. For a long time it had been in my mind 
to put a stop to this vain affair (dukan-e-batil) or to bring him 
into the fold of Islam.” 20 


308 


THE SIKHS 


Shaikh Ahmad Sirhindi (1546-1624), the head of the Naqsh- 
bandi order, was extremely jealous of Guru Arjun’s popularity and 
power. He greatly incited Jahangir, when he halted at Sirhind in 
pursuit of Khusrav, against the Guru. 21 

Guru Arjun was summoned to Lahore, fined two lakhs of rupees 
and ordered to efface certain verses in the Adi Granth. The Guru 
declined to do either. Jahangir writes: “I ordered that he should 
be summoned. His residences, camps and sons were given over to 
Murtaza Khan. His property and cash were confiscated. I issued 
instructions that he should be put to death by torture.” 22 Mohsin 
Fani, who was born only nine years later, in 1615 A.D., writes that 
Guru Arjun was tied in the burning sun over hot sand and was tor¬ 
tured. 23 The severest heat of May overhead, hot sand under him 
and boiling water thrown on his naked body caused blisters all over. 
On 30 May, 1606, he took leave to bathe in the cold water of the 
Ravi flowing just below the Fort where he was kept a prisoner. 
Reciting his own composition, Sukhmani, and repeating God’s Name, 
he had a dip, but being exhausted and famished, he collapsed in 
water. He was only 42 years old then. 

The Sikh tradition considers it an act of religious persecution 
only. It is true that the Sikhs at this time formed only a religious 
society. They had no political consciousness. So the question of 
having any political aspirations does not arise. The authority of the 
Mughul emperors was fully accepted and implicitly obeyed. The 
Sikh allegiance to the State was complete. Akbar’s patronage to 
the Sikh Gurus was highly appreciated and their loyalty to the 
Mughul empire was firm. It is also a fact that Jahangir was biased 
against the Sikh religion. In spite of this, in matters religious, he 
held, on the whole, liberal views. If Guru Arjun had not embroiled 
himself in the Khusrav affair, it appears likely that the emperor 
would not have taken any notice of the Sikh movement. He did 
not persecute the Sikhs. Beni Prasad in his History of Jahangir 
declares it a political execution. 23a 

Sir Jadunath Sarkar writes: “Arjun in a weak moment bless¬ 
ed the banners of Khusrau, the rival of Jahangir for the Mughal 
throne, and even gave money help to that prince. On the defeat 
of the pretender, Jahangir fined the Guru two lakhs of rupees for 
his disloyalty to the king de jure. The Guru. refused to pay the 
fine and stoically endured imprisonment and torture which were the 
usual punishments of revenue defaulters in those days. Worn out 
by being forced to sit in the burning sand of Lahore, he died in 
June 1606.” 24 


309 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


III. Guru Har Govind ( 1606-1644) 

But whatever view we might take of Jahangir’s motive and 
action, the martyrdom of Guru Arjun had a profound effect on the 
future history of the Sikhs. His son and successor, Har Govind, a 
lad of eleven years, received his father’s last injunction: Let him 

sit fully armed on his throne and maintain an army to the best of 
his ability.” Har Govind immediately hung by his sides two swords 
signifying Piri and Miri. One symbolised spiritual power and the 
other temporal. He told a follower: “In the guru’s house religion 
and worldly enjoyment shall be combined.” “My seli (rosary) 
shall be a sword-belt and I shall wear my turban with a royal 
aigrette,” he declared. 125 He armed and drilled some of his sturdy 
disciples, and, in due course, from an inherited bodyguard of 52 
soldiers came to possess a stable of seven hundred horses, three 
hundred horsemen and sixty gunners (Topchi). 26 He sanctioned 
and encouraged the use of meat and took to hunting. 27 He was a 
fine hunter, for he understood the ways of the beasts of the forest. 
He loved to chase and stalk wild boar. He excelled in hunting deer. 
Directly the affairs of the community were over, he would mount 
his charger and go into a dense jungle. At nightfall he would re¬ 
turn home with the carcases of the animals he had killed. These 
he caused to be distributed among his disciples and the poor people 
living near his place. 

The young Guru preferred gifts of arms and horses. He built a 
fort at Amritsar, called Lohgarh, or the steel fortress. In front of 
Hari Mandir, in 1609, he constructed Akal Takht or God’s throne. 
There he sat on a throne in princely attire, administered justice like 
a king in court and accepted presents. He narrated stories of death¬ 
less bravery, while some professional bards sang ballads of unrival¬ 
led heroism, especially of Rajput chivalry. The tales of the valour 
of Jaimal and Patta of Chitor being of recent origin, were sung with 
zeal and zest. 

This was the beginning of militarism or the transformation of 
Sikhism. To the symbols of sainthood was added the paraphernalia 
of sovereignty including the umbrella and the crest. With medita¬ 
tion and preaching were included riding, wrestling and hunting. 
“The genial disposition of the martial apostle,” says Cunningham, 
“led him to rejoice in the companionship of a camp, in the dangers 
of war, and in the excitements of the chase.” 28 The Guru created 
a government of his own like that of the Mughuls. All his disciples 
formed a separate and independent entity, and had nothing to do 
with the agencies of the Government of the day. Thus, the Sikhs 


310 


THE SIKHS 


came to occupy a kind of a separate State within the Mughul State, 
the position of which was securely established by the fiscal policy 
of Guru Amar Das and Guru Arjun and his own armed system. 

Har Govind established congregational prayers which not only 
added to the religious fervour of the Sikhs, but also strengthened 
the spirit of amity and cooperation among them. According to 
Mohsin Fani, when a Sikh wished for God’s favour or gift, he would 
come to an assembly of the Sikhs and request them to pray for him. 
Even the Guru himself asked the Sikh congregation (Sangat or 
Anjuman-e-Sikhan ) to pray for him. 29 

The royal style and warlike activities of the Guru once more 
aroused the anger of Jahangir. Mohsin Fani writes: “He (Har 
Govind) had to contend with difficulties. One of them was that he 
had adopted the soldierly life, wore a sword against the practice of 
his father, kept a retinue, and took to hunting. The Emperor de¬ 
manded the balance of the fine which he had imposed on Arjun 
Mai. He sent Har Govind to Gwalior and kept him there for 
twelve years. Even saltish food was not allowed to him. During 
that period Sikhs and Masands used to go there and pay homage 
below the walls of the fort. At last the Emperor graciously set him 
free.” 30 This legend of twelve years’ period of the Guru’s captivity 
is not accepted by some writers on the ground that six children were 
bom to him by his three wives in 1613, 1615, 1617, 1618, 1619 and 
1621. 31 They hold the view that though he was sentenced to twelve 
years’ imprisonment, he was set free after three years in 1612. His 
fellow-prisoner in the Gwalior fort, the Raja of Kahlur (Bilaspur), 
had offered shelter to the Guru’s family in his State. Har Govind’s 
disciples selected a site between the Siwalik Hills and river Sutlej 
and named it Kiratpur. Here they constructed some buildings, and 
it was to this place that the Guru returned immediately after his 
battles with the Mughuls. 

During his captivity Guru Har Govind had learnt some ele¬ 
mentary lessons in the art of diplomacy from his fellow prisoners, 
all of whom belonged to high aristocratic families. After his re¬ 
lease in 1621, therefore, we find Har Govind playing the role of a 
friendly collaborator of Jahangir. Mohsin Fani says: “Hargovind 
was always attached to the stirrup of the victorious Jahangir.” 32 It 
is surmised that the Guru was invested with some sort of supers 
visory powers by the emperor over the Punjab affairs and was given 
command of a Mughul contingent consisting of 400 horse, 1,000 
foot and 7 guns. In addition to this, Har Govind’s personal contin¬ 
gent swelled considerably. Pathan mercenaries from the north-west 


311 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


under their leader Painda Khan joined the Guru’s banners in large 
number. There seems to be no doubt that Jahangir would have con¬ 
ferred upon Har Govind a high Mansabdari rank, but the Guru could 
not accept it owing to his position as the religious leader of a great 
community. Guru Har Govind accompanied the emperor in his visit 
to Kashmir. While returning via Rajauri, Jahangir died in 1627. 
According to Mohsin Fani, Har Govind offered his allegiance to the 
new Emperor, Shah Jahan, and was allowed to return to Amritsar. 33 

Shah Jahan was an orthodox Muslim. In 1632, while returning 
from Kashmir, he found that some Hindus of Rajauri, Bhimbar and 
Gujarat accepted Muslim girls as wives and converted them to their 
own faith. The emperor stopped such marriages and Muslim women, 
already married, were seized from their husbands who were fined 
and, in certain cases, even executed. They could retain their wives 
only on their embracing Islam. As many as 4,500 such women were 
recovered. In 1635, it was reported to the emperor that a Muslim 
girl, Zinab, had been converted, given the new name of Ganga and 
was taken as a wife by Dalpat, a Hindu of Sirhind. The woman, 
along with her seven children—one son and six daughters—was taken 
away and the man was executed. 34 Kaulan, a daughter of the qdzi 
of Lahore, had also run away from home, embraced Sikhism and 
taken shelter with Guru Har Govind, who immortalised her by con¬ 
structing a new tank at Amritsar named after her, Kaulsar. 

The Sikh Gurus alone had provided leadership to the down-trod¬ 
den Hindus of the Punjab. Such men as had suffered for having con¬ 
verted wives looked up to Har Govind for guidance and support, and 
he was not a man to shirk his duty and responsibility. The Guru de¬ 
cided to defy the emperor’s authority, and an opportunity soon 
offered itself. About 1634 Shah Jahan was busy hunting in the 
jungles of Jallo lying between Lahore and Amritsar. Guru Har 
Govind was also hunting there. According to Sir Jadunath Sarkar, 
. - the guru entered the same area in pursuit of a game, and his 
Sikhs quarrelled with the servants of the imperial hunt about a bird. 
The two parties came to blows, and in the end the imperialists were 
beaten off with slaughter.” 35 

Shah Jahan was not going to tolerate such an effrontery, and re¬ 
garded it as an act of rebellion. Har Govind’s supervisory office was 
taken away and the Mughul contingent was called back. “An army 
was sent against the audacious rebel, but it was routed with heavy 
loss, at Sangrana, near Amritsar, 1628.” 36 Under emperor’s orders 
“larger and larger armies were sent against the guru.” 37 The Guru 


312 



THE SIKHS 


‘‘gained some success at first.” 38 About this time the Guru was to 
celebrate the marriage of his daughter. Enormous quantities of 
sweets were prepared on this occasion. Just then a Mughul force 
attacked him. After a sharp scuffle the Guru retired to Jhabal, eight 
miles south-west of Amritsar, where he performed the nuptial cere¬ 
mony in haste on the fixed day of the marriage. The Mughuls fell 
on the sweets like a bird of prey. When they were surfeited, Guru 
Har Govind suddenly fell on them, killing many including their com¬ 
mander Mukhlis Khan. 

The Guru’s fame spread far and wide. “Many men came to 
enlist under the guru’s banner. They said that no one else had 
power to contend with the Emperor.” 39 Har Govind retired to the 
northern parts of Amritsar district. There he selected a site for his 
residence. A township sprang up soon after and was called Sri 
Hargobindpur. 

The matter remained at a standstill for a couple of years when 
Har Govind v/as again involved in trouble with the Lahore Gover¬ 
nor. One of the Guru’s most devoted disciples, named Sadh or 
Sadhuram, had been sent to Central Asia to bring horses. 40 On his 
return journey he was accompanied by Mohsin Fani from Kabul to 
Punjab. Sadh had three fine Iraqi horses with him. Two of them, 
named Gulbagh and Dilbagh, were seized by Khalil Beg, 41 the Lahore 
Governor. A devoted Sikh, Bidhi Chand, in disguise took up service 
in the Lahore fort as a groom. In course of time he managed to 
escape with both the horses. A force was despatched against Har 
Govind who retired to Lahara and repulsed the Mughul contingent. 
Expecting reprisal, the Guru took shelter in the Lakhi Jungle lying 
between Firozpur and Bhatinda. As anticipated, a strong contingent 
of the Governor of Jullundur pursued the Guru into the impenetrable 
retreat. The Sikhs lay in ambush and defeated the enemy, but at the 
loss of 1,200 Sikh soldiers. 

This victory emboldened the Guru, who now returned to Kartar- 
pur near Jullundur. 42 Painda Khan deserted the Guru and took up 
service under the Lahore Governor. An expedition under the com¬ 
mand of Mir Badehra and Painda Khan was despatched against the 
Guru. They were joined by the Jullundur troops. The Guru had 
only 5,000 soldiers with him. 43 In a hard-fought battle both the 
enemy commanders were killed. One soldier with a drawn sword 
rushed upon the Guru. He warded off the blow and then assaulted 
him exclaiming, “not so, but the sword is used thus,” and with one 
stroke cut off his head. 


313 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


It was impossible for Guru Har Govind with his slender resour¬ 
ces, to remain for long in open defiance of the Government. “What¬ 
ever he possessed was lost,” 44 says Mohsin Fani. “After the battle 
of Kartarpur he went to Phagwara. As this place also was not far 
from Lahore, it was difficult for him to stay there. He hurried to 
Kiratpur situated in the Punjab hills. This territory belonged to 
Raja Tarachand who had thrown off allegiance to Emperor Shah 
Jahan.” 45 


Guru Har Govind had remained fully busy in warfare from 1634 
to 1640, a fairly long period if we consider his meagre resources. 
Several Rajput princes of the Kangra and Chamba hills had also re¬ 
volted against Shiah Jahan. The Guru was not disturbed at Kiratpur. 
He spent the remaining two years of his life in converting Musalmans 
to Hinduism. Mohsin Fani writes that “in those hills up to the bor¬ 
ders of Tibet and Khotan the name Musalman had disappeared.” 46 
Mohsin Fani, who met the Guru at Kiratpur, further says that the 
ambassadors of the hill rajas waited upon Har Govind, and they did 
not know even the name of Shah Jahan though Delhi was known to 
them. 47 

Guru Har Govind died on 3 March, 1644. 48 His activities were 
not appreciated and properly understood by the upper classes. They 
hinted that he had fallen short of the lofty ideals of his predeces¬ 
sors in matters religious and spiritual, and pointed out that he had 
not composed and added a single verse to the Holy Granth. He was 
dubbed as one who had been lured by the glamour of arms and love 
of politics. They complained that he was occasionally cooperating 
with the enemies of their faith. Most of the Hindus considered it be¬ 
neath the dignity of a religious preceptor to indulge in hunting 
and sport. His encouragement of meat diet and travels in Muslim 
countries deeply offended caste-ridden orthodox Hindus. The Sikhs 
grumbled that the Guru did not stay continually at Amritsar and 
led a roving life. As the people of the Punjab could not think of 
any opposition to the mighty Mughuls, they considered Guru’s war¬ 
like acts as wasteful and useless. They said that in spite of his 
so-called victories the Guru was driven from pillar to post, and 
eventually forced to seek refuge in the hilly region at Kiratpur. 

The fact was generally ignored that the Guru was trying to 
change the age-long mentality of the Hindus of meekly submitting 
to the oppressor, and that after six hundred years of bondage he 
was awakening his fellow countrymen to the realisation that irres¬ 
pective of consequences the people should rise against a Govern¬ 
ment to get their wrongs redressed. His acceptance of the high 


314 


THE SIKHS 


office under Jahangir and Shah Jahan was a fine stroke of diplo¬ 
macy and political sagacity. It disarmed suspicion of the local Go¬ 
vernment and afforded him an excellent opportunity to augment his 
military resources. The organisational evolution of Sikhism from 
the standpoint of religion and spiritualism was almost complete dur¬ 
ing the time of Guru Arjun. The execution of Guru Arjun and 
Guru Har Govind’s imprisonment had clearly shown that a hard lot 
was in store for the new religion. Guru Har Govind had a clear 
conception of the changing circumstances, and had realised the 
necessity of playing an active role in the political life of the com¬ 
munity. He had a clear conception that militarily he had little 
chance of success against the unlimited resources of the Mughul 
empire. Yet he considered it beneath his dignity to accept a passive 
role, which was nothing short of degradation. He inaugurated a 
policy which was sure to lead the most down-trodden people slowly 
but surely to political and military advancement. But his contem¬ 
poraries failed to comprehend it, and they misunderstood him and 
misrepresented his work. In reality, Guru Har Govind rendered a 
unique service to his country by showing the true path of deliver¬ 
ance from political bondage. After all, spirituality must inspire a 
person to resist the wrong with courage and boldness. 

Not much is known of the next two Gurus, Har Rai (1644-61) 
and Har Kishan (1661-64), grandson and great-grandson, respective¬ 
ly, of Har Govind. 

IV. Guru Tegh Bahadur ( 1664-75 ) 

Tegh Bahadur, the youngest son of Har Govind, succeeded Har 
Kishan in 1664. At this time, Aurangzlb was determined to esta¬ 
blish an Islamic State in India and took various repressive measures 
against the Hindus, which have been mentioned in detail in Chapter 
VIII, Section III. Kalimdt-i-Tayyibdt says that a Sikh temple in a 
village in the Sirhind Division was turned into a mosque. 49 Many 
other Gurdwards were demolished. 50 During Aurangzlb’s stay in the 
Punjab in 1674-5 local officials terrorised the Hindu population and 
converted them to Islam in large number. In Kashmir thousands of 
Pandits were forced to embrace Islam. This aroused the intensity 
of Gurus love for religious freedom. In order to infuse courage in 
the hearts of the Hindus and his disciples he undertook a tour of the 
East Punjab telling them neither to fear nor frighten others. This 
created confidence and courage in the minds of the people. Some of 
the Kashmiri leaders in sheer helplessness called on Guru Tegh 
Bahadur and told him of their sad plight. He advised them to inform 
the emperor, through their governor, to convert Tegh Bahadur first 
and then all of them would embrace Islam. 51 


315 


TIIE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Aurangzlb’s mind was already prejudiced against the Sikhs. 
It was now reported to him that the Guru was infusing the spirit 
of rebellion among the Kashmiris as well as the sturdy Jat peasant¬ 
ry of the Punjab. The Guru was also accused of making Mussal- 
rnans his disciples. It was further alleged that Tegh Bahadur claim¬ 
ed to have possessed the power of performing miracles which was 
opposed to the tenets of Islam. Aurangzlb had just suppressed one 
of the most terrible revolts of the frontier tribes and was not pre¬ 
pared to witness another rising in the Punjab. He therefore decid¬ 
ed to teach the Sikhs a lesson and summoned Tegh Bahadur to Delhi. 
When he arrived together with five disciples 52 he was asked either 
to perform miracles or embrace Islam. The Guru denied that he 
could perform miracles and rejected the latter, repeating “Give thy 
life, but do not give up thy faith” (Sar diya par sir na diya). In 
order to terrorise the Guru into submission, one of his disciples, Bhal 
Mati Das, was tied to two posts, and thus making him stand erect, 
his body was sawn across from head to loins. Another disciple was 
boiled alive. The other three fled away, but Guru Tegh Bahadur 
remained firm in his resolve. He was put in chains and then behead¬ 
ed on 11 November, 1675. 

V. Guru Govind Singh ( 1675-1708) 

Guru Govind, the son and successor of Tegh Bahadur, ushered 
in a new phase of the Sikh movement. The murder of his father 
and great-grandfather, the imprisonment of his grandfather, and the 
wretched condition of the Hindus made him realise that the people 
must themselves find their own salvation against the tyranny of a 
cruel and corrupt Government. 

So Guru Govind was determined to put an end to the religious 
oppression of the Mughul Government. His fight was with the Go¬ 
vernment and not against Islam. Its clear proof is that he recruited 
Pathans in his service and won the support of Muslim saints like 
Pir Budhu Shah of Sadhaura. Sa‘Id Beg and Maimu Khan fought 
on his side against the Mughuls, while Nabi Khan and Ghani Kh[an 
saved him from capture by the Mughul army. QazI Pir Muhammad 
did not confirm Guru’s identity and Rai Kalha looked after him. 
He wanted to create national awakening in the Punjab as it had 
been done in Maharashtra by Shivaji. The time chosen was oppor¬ 
tune. Aurangzlb was involved in a life and death struggle in the 
Deccan with the Marathas. The Punjab was in the charge of Prince 
Mu‘azzam who lived in Kabul. The Governors of Lahore and Kan- 
gra had failed to crush him. The Government at Delhi was in a 
state of disorganisation. The hill rajas were in revolt against the 


316 


THE SIKHS 


Mughuls. A better time could not be expected to fulfil his life's 
mission, and the Guru was not the man to miss it. He had first 
tried to instill his ideas into the heart of the warrior class of Rajputs 
of the Siwalik Hills. He soon discovered that the caste-ridden and 
class-dominated Rajputs would not respond to his appeals and would 
not fit in his ideology. He therefore turned his attention to the down¬ 
trodden masses. He believed that he would be able to achieve his 
objective by stirring the latent faculties of the human will which 
possessed the elasticity of rising to the loftiest height as well as sink¬ 
ing to the lowest depth. The Guru made full use of the strong senti¬ 
ment which had been manifesting itself in the Sikh community in 
the form of sincere devotion and loving obedience for the person of 
the Guru. 

The Guru, while reading the Puranas had been deeply struck by 
the idea that God had been sending a saviour at critical times to save 
the virtuous and destroy the evil-doers. 53 He believed he had been 
sent for the same purpose. This is proved by two sayings of the 
Guru in Bichitra Ndtak. According to one, 54 the Guru was in a state 
of communion with God when he heard the divine command, and the 
other contains his acceptance of the mission and admonitions to his 
disciples to fulfil it. 55 In the Chandl Charitra the Guru says that in 
the past God had deputed Durga to destroy the evil-doers, 56 and this 
duty had now been assigned to him. He was eager to get her bless¬ 
ings. He sang “the praises of Chandl so that they might be chanted 
for warlike purposes, and that even cowards on hearing her story 
might obtain courage and the hearts of the brave beat with fourfold 
enthusiasm. Such being the achievements of a woman, what ought 
not a brave man to accomplish?’' 57 The learned Pandits in the ser¬ 
vice of the Guru advised him to perform the grand ceremony of 
Homa. “He invited Pandit Kesho from Benares to conduct the cere¬ 
mony on the hill of Nainadevi,” 58 close to Anandpur. The ceremony 
began on the Durga Ashtami day, two days before Dusehra festival 
in October, 1698, and lasted for full six months. At the close of this 
period the sacred days of the worship of goddess ( Navrdtras ) began 
on 21 March, 1699. “When all the ghee and incense had been burnt, 
and the Pandit had tired himself out by mumbling mantras by the 
million without being able to produce the goddess, the Guru came 
forward with a naked sword and, flashing it before the assembly, 
declared: ‘This is the goddess of power!’ ” 59 This took place on 28 
March, 1699, the Durga Ashtami day. 

The congregation was then asked to move to Anandpur where 
on the New Year Day of 1st Baisakh , 1756, Vikrama Samvat, (30 
March, 1699), he would create a new nation. All the persons would 


317 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


be fed from Guru ha Langar and after the grand function they would 
be entertained to a sumptuous feast. Thousands of persons assembled 
there. The Guru remained absorbed in meditation and contempla¬ 
tion. On the morning of 30 March y he sought God’s blessings and 
entered a specially constructed canopy where a huge congregation 
was seated. The Guru delivered the most stirring speech on saving 
religion which was in great peril, and about his divine mission. The 
Guru first dwelt on the Government policy of religious persecution. 
He then explained why, in order to safeguard their spiritual and tem¬ 
poral rights, the people should not depend on the sovereign or princes, 
but take up this duty themselves. They should individually feel for 
the national wrongs done, and collectively organise means to with¬ 
stand it. “The Kal (Age) had reached such a stage that success 
would come only if a brick could be returned with a stone.” 60 Humi¬ 
lity and service alone were not adequate in this age. To goodness 
was to be added not only condemnation of evil but also destruction 
of the evil-doers. Love of a neighbour must accompany the punish¬ 
ment of the trespasser. Service of saints implied annihilation of 
tyrants as well. Helping friends meant harming enemies too. God, 
Guru , and the Sword formed the Holy Trinity in place of Brahma, 
Vishnu and Siva to lead to victory. The age when salvation was 
needed after death had passed. Salvation was to be obtained in this 
very life, here and now. 

In his ecstasy the Guru sang the praises of the sword. “God 
subdues enemies, so does the sword; therefore the sword is God, and 
God is the sword.” 61 Addressing the sword he said: 

“I bow with love and devotion to the Holy Sword. 

Assist me that I may complete this work. 

Thou art the subduer of countries, the 

Destroyer of the armies of the wicked. 

* * * 

I bow to the Sword and Rapier which destroy the evil. 

* Hs 

Thy greatness is endless and boundless; 

No one hath found its limits. 

Thou art God of gods, King of kings, 

Compassionate to poor, and Cherisher of the lowly.” 62 

After this stimulating oration, the Guru flashed his sword, and 
said that ‘every great deed was preceded by equally great sacrifice; 
the Holy Sword would create a heroic nation after supreme sacrifice/ 
He then inquired if anyone in the congregation would offer his head 


318 


THE SIKHS 


in the service of God, Truth and Religion. This sent a thrill of hor¬ 
ror in the audience, and there was no response to the first and even 
to the second call, repeated in a sterner voice. At the third call one 
Dayaram, a Khatri of Lahore, rose in his seat and expressed his will¬ 
ingness to lay down his life. He was led into the adjoining tent and 
asked to sit there quietly. The sword-blade was dipped in a caul¬ 
dron of blood of goats, and the Guru, returning to the assembly with 
the dripping sword in his hand asked for another head. Dharamdas, 
a Jat, offered his head and the same procedure was repeated. After 
five men 63 had offered to make the sacrifice and been taken away, 
the Guru re-entered the assembly room with all of them, dressed 
in the same kind of fine clothes, and gave them a baptism called 
pahul of water sweetened with sugar cakes and stirred with a double- 
edged dagger. They were designated Five ‘Beloved Ones’ and 
termed ‘Khalsa.’ 

Each of the five letters in the Persian word Khalsa has a signi¬ 
ficance. The first two, kh and a, stand, respectively for Khud or one¬ 
self and the Akal Purkh (God). The third letter, l, signifies Labbaik, 
meaning the following questions of God: “What do you want with 
me? Here am I. What would you have?,” and the reply of the 
Singh (devotee): “Lord, give us liberty and sovereignty.” The 
fourth letter, s, signifies Sahib (Lord or Master). The last letter is 
written either as a or, more usually, h. The former signifies Azadi 
or freedom and the latter refers to Huma, a legendary bird. 

Guru Govind Singh provided his followers with five jewels 
which were within reach of everybody. They were five K’s— Kesh 
or long hair, Kangha or comb, Kirpan or sword, Kara or steel brace¬ 
let, and Kachcha or a pair of knicker-bockers. 64 Their salutation 
was to be 

Wah-e-Guru ji ka Khalsa 

Wah-e-Guru ji ki Fateh. 65 

Guru Govind Singh enjoined that every Sikh must fight against 
cruelty and tyranny, and should help the poor and protect the weak. 
He inspired them with the belief that every Singh serving the Panth 
was bound to be victorious, and while engaged in a righteous cause 
was to consider himself a tower of strength equal to the power of 
one lakh and a quarter hosts. He must always be prepared to lay 
down his life because his victory lay in the moment of his death. 

The creation of the Khalsa was an epoch-making event in the 
religious and political history of the country. It marked the begin¬ 
ning of the rise of a new people, destined to play the role of defenders 


319 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


against all oppression and tyranny. The severities of the high caste 
people over their brethren, the Sudras, were set at naught as soon as 
one joined the ranks of the Khalsa, where all were equal and ready to 
render one another all help and useful service. Their main problem 
was to destroy the organised oppression and the tyrannical despotism 
of the Mughul Government. It was a gigantic task for the small 
community of the Khalsa. Under the direction of the Guru, the 
Khalsa took up the profession of arms and the results were most 
surprising. The people, lowliest of the low, who had lived for cen¬ 
turies in a state of servility now turned into doughty warriors, the 
praises of whose physique and valour were sung by all the world, 
including their bitterest foes. 

In order to enhance the feelings of self-respect and the spirit of 
human dignity, Guru Govind Singh severely dealt with the institu¬ 
tion of Masands, or tithe-collectors, on this occasion. For some time 
past they had become haughty, corrupt and greedy, and treated the 
Sikhs with contempt and insolence. Many of them acted as Gurus 
and kept all the offerings for themselves. With this money they in¬ 
dulged in personal trade or other lucrative business. Guru Govind 
did not believe in dismissing some and reforming the others. He 
also ignored the prospect of financial loss for the time being. Nor did 
he feel afraid of the united opposition of the Masands. He forth¬ 
with abolished this office and instructed the Sikhs to make offerings 
personally to the Guru on the occasion of a visit or at the time of 
general gathering on the days of Baisdkhi and Diwdli. 66 Thereby not 
only were the Sikhs freed from humiliation, but a close personal con¬ 
tact was established betv/een the Guru and his disciples. 

Then began a series of battles 67 in which the Guru had often to 
face heavy odds, but in many cases the victory was on the side of the 
Khalsa. Anandpur was five times invested. 68 The most serious siege 
took place in the autumn of 1704. Under orders of Aurangzib, Vazlr 
Khan, the Governor of Sirhind, made full preparations to wipe out 
the Khalsa. The Governor of Lahore, several rajas of the Kiangra 
hills, and a host of neighbouring Nawabs and Jiagirdars joined the 
expedition. Anandpur was besieged. Provisions ran short and there 
were frequent desertions. At this juncture Vazlr Khan opened ne¬ 
gotiations for Guru’s safe evacuation. Solemn assurances were given 
on the Qur’an, and an autograph letter from Aurangzib was produced 
as a proof of the Governor’s sacred oath 69 Final agreement was 
arrived at about the middle of December, 1704. The Guru sent 
ladies and his two younger sons under proper escort towards Nahan 
in Sirmur State. The second batch of evacuees along with his two 


320 


THE SIKHS 


elder sons and a small number of followers under the Guru himself 
came out of the fort. 

Unluckily torrential rain began. The river Sarsa was heavily 
flooded. Both the parties were held up on its bank amidst bitter 
cold and rain and wind. The enemy considered it a Godsend to 
efface the Guru and his followers. They threw their solemn pledges 
to the winds, and made a vehement assault on the Guru at nightfall. 
In the confusion and darkness, the Guru’s mother and his two 
younger sons, Zorawar Singh (born 1696) and Fateh Singh (born 
1699) were separated. They fell into the hands of the Governor 
of Sirhind. The children were pressed to embrace Islam. They 
spurned the offer and were bricked up alive in the fort wall, and 
then beheaded on 27 December, 1704. 

The Guru and his two elder sons, Ajit Singh (born 1686) and 
Jujhar Singh (born 1690), managed to cross the river Sarsa, with 
only forty followers. 70 The current swept away many of them as 
well as a large number of the Guru’s manuscripts and his own com¬ 
positions, not to speak of other property. They took shelter at 
Chamkaur in a mud-built house which was immediately besieged. 
In the struggle that ensued on 22 December, 1704, the Guru lost 
both of his sons, three of the ‘Beloved Ones’ and thirty-two other 
followers. Govind Singh was left with only five Sikhs, who in ac¬ 
cordance with his earlier commandment assumed the role of the 
Guru in the interest of the Panth and ordered him to escape. The 
Guru did so in the disguise of a Muslim saint. 

His wanderings from Chamkaur to Nander, about 1500 miles 
away, present a tale of many hairbreadth escapes, unparalleled 
sufferings, marvellous courage and inflexible determination. Near 
Machiwara, he was found lying hidden in bushes, exhausted with 
hunger and fatigue, by two Pathans, Nabi Khan and Ghani Khan. 
They entertained him and escorted him safely to a distance of about 
40 miles. Rai Kalha of Jagraon kept him as a guest and then let 
him pass through his territory in safety. Sikh stragglers began to 
join him. A short engagement, the last, was fought in the wastes 
of Firozpur district. In it forty deserters from Anandpur, smitten 
with remorse, fought desperately, and were all killed. A tank was 
constructed in their memory called Muktsar or the reservoir of sal¬ 
vation. While at Dina, the Guru received a letter from Aurangzlb 
demanding his presence at his Court in the Deccan to account for 
his doings. To this he gave a spirited reply in Persian verse con¬ 
taining 111 couplets called Zafarndma or Epistle of Victory. In it 
he bitterly criticised the emperor for the persecutions, wrongs and 

321 

M.E.—21. 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


sufferings inflicted upon him and his father. He justified his revolu¬ 
tionary activities by saying: “When all the remedies have failed, it 
is lawful to resort to the sword.” 

Guru Govind Singh halted at Talwandi Sabo, now known as 
Damdama Sahib, for nine months. At this place he completed Adi 
Granth by adding 116 hymns composed by Guru Tegh Bahadur, 
including one couplet alleged to be his own composition. His own 
Granth called the Dasam Granth was also given a shape here. The 
Guru was a prolific writer. Many of his manuscripts were lost while 
crossing the river Sarsa. The rest were included in the Dasam 
Granth. It consists of several parts, each in a different language 
but all in Gurmukhi script. The Hikdyats and Zafarndma are in 
Persian. Jap, Akal Ustat, Chaubis Avtdr, Brahma Avtdr, Rudra 
Avtdr, Krishna Avtdr, Rama Avtdr, Sri Mukhilak Swayyas, Pakhyan 
Charitra and Bichitra Natak are in Brajbhdshd, i.e. pure Hindi. 
Chandi ki Var is in Lanhde Punjabi, while a number of hymns are 
in pure Punjabi. 

At Talwandi, Guru Govind received a reply to his letter address¬ 
ed to Aurangzlb. The emperor expressed regret for the Guru’s suffer¬ 
ings and invited him to meet him. The Guru was anxious to get 
Vazir Knan punished for his atrocities, and also wanted to study 
on the spot in what manner the Marathas under Tara Bai were 
harassing the emperor. He conveyed his acceptance of the invita¬ 
tion and set out on his long journey. He was in Rajasthan when 
he heard that Aurangzlb had died on 3 March, 1707. He turned back 
towards Agra. 

Aurangzib’s eldest son, Mu‘azzam, 65 years old, had come from 
Kabul to Delhi and declared himself emperor under the title of 
Bahadur Shah. The Guru pressed Bahadur Shah to punish Vazir 
Khan. “The Emperor asked him to wait for some years until his 
government was fully established.” 71 The Guru was asked to go 
with the emperor to the Deccan. He, therefore, joined his camp 
accompanied by his wife, Sahib Devi, some infantry and two to three 
hundred cavalry. 72 Finding the emperor unyielding, the disappoint¬ 
ed Guru left him in despair at Nander, the headquarters of Madho 
Das Bairagi, alias Banda Bahadur. He reached there in August, 
1707, and stayed for over a year. Banda was sent to the Punjab to 
chastise Vazir Khan of Sirhind, while Mata Sahib Devi returned to 
Delhi. 

On the other hand, Vazir Khan was also plotting against the 
Guru’s life. Two Pathan boys, who were in the service of the Guru, 
were set on him. One day finding him alone, they severely stabbed 


322 


THE SIKHS 


him in August, 1708. The condition of the wounds grew worse in 
October, 1708. The Guru realized that his end had come. He call¬ 
ed together his disciples and gave them his last injunctions. He 
told them that everything in this world happened according to the 
will of the Almighty. He expressed satisfaction at the fulfilment of 
his mission. As the Guruship was hereditary in his family, and he 
had lost all his children, Guru Govind Singh thought it best, in order 
to avoid all possible family feuds as well as impostors in future, not 
to vest this high office in any person, and abolished it as summarily 
as he had done in the case of Masands. He declared that he was 
entrusting the Khalsa to the care of Akal Purkh (God). In matters 
spiritual the Holy Granth would be their guide, while their secular 
affairs would be regulated by holy panchayats meeting before the 
sacred Granth . He instructed them that whenever any important 
question affecting the Panth was to be decided, a Sikh congregation 
was to be held, and from the whole assembly five persons 73 were to 
be elected to settle the issue. In the counsels of Five Beloved Ones 
he would be present in spirit. Their verdict called Gurumata was 
to be regarded as the judgment of the Guru. It was to be passed by 
the whole assembly, and its execution was binding upon the whole 
Panth. Any infringement was to be considered sacrilegious. He 
asserted that God had destined the Khalsa to be the future rulers of 
the country, and for the realisation of this object they must continue 
the struggle unabated. 

Following the practice of Hindu saints and sages who at the 
divine call would sit in a samadhi and expire, the Guru had prepared 
a funeral pyre within an enclosure. He banned admission into it. 
With folded hands he bade a dramatic farewell by uttering the 
salutation which he had himself coined, “Wah Guru Ji ka Khalsa, 
Wah Guru Ji ki Fateh,” quietly walked away, entered the walled 
fence and bolted its door from inside. The congregation stood aghast. 
In a while the pyre was seen ablaze, 74 and amidst tears and sobs of 
the assemblage softly rose the dirge of Sat Sri Akal (The Immortal 
Almighty is True). This happened on 7 October, 1708 The Guru 
had not yet completed forty-two years of his life. 

“Thus we see,” says Sir Jadunath, “that the Mughal Govern¬ 
ment under Aurangzib did succeed in breaking up the guru’s power. 
It robbed the Sikhs of a common leader and a rallying centre.” 76 

It should be remembered, however, that immediately after Guru 
Govind’s death, equally dynamic leadership, of course in affairs mun¬ 
dane, and with much greater success, was provided by Banda Baha¬ 
dur. Guru Govind Singh’s desire, “Mother dear, I have been con- 


323 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


sidering how I may confer empire on the Khalsa, ’ was realized, 
though for the time being, temporarily, in nineteen months. On 12 
May, 1710, Vazir Khan was dead and gone. The entire province of 
Sirhind between the Sutlej and the Yamuna lay at the feet of the 
Khalsa. They set themselves up as rulers and issued their own coins. 
They rose again within forty years, and then ruled over the Punjab 
for nearly a hundred years. It was indeed a miracle of the highest 
magnitude! 

Though the Guru could not break the shackles of bondage and 
slavery in his own lifetime, as he died young, yet he had freed the 
souls of his followers and filled their minds with love for freedom 
and democracy. He had dispelled the fear of authority and destroy¬ 
ed the awe of an alien Government. He had the satisfaction that 
in the hearts of his disciples the seeds of a general revolution were 
germinating, and that it would break forth with greater fury if the 
sanctity of their rights was not admitted, and if they were not allow¬ 
ed a free hand in matters of their conscience. He was sure that he 
was leaving behind in Khalsa, an army of free, brave, selfless and 
sacrificing soldiers who would smile in sufferings, laugh in misfor¬ 
tunes, support the weak and innocent, fight against tyranny like 
lions in war and act as lambs in peace. 


1. Vol. VI, pp. 561-71. 

2. These have been discussed in Vol. VI, pp. 625-636. 

3. Nearly seventy Muslim invasions had taken place up to the time of Nanak, as 
follows: 

Arabs, 6—Sind in 636-7, Arabs in the Kabul Valley in 664, Broach, Debal, Balu¬ 
chistan, Sind in 711. 

Alptigln, 1. 

Sabuktigln, 3. 

Mahmud, 17. 

Shihab-ud-dln Ghuri, 10—Multan 1175, Anhilwara 1178, Peshawar 1179, Lahore 
1181, Sialkot 1185, Lahore 1186, Tarain 1191 and 1193, Kanauj 1194, Kho- 
khars 1206. 

Mongols, 25—Chingiz Khan 1220, Lahore 1250, Multan 1270, Prince Muhammad 
killed 1286, Jalal-ud-dln Khaljl defeated them 1292, in the reign of ‘Ala- 
ud-dln Khaljl 12 invasions, Ghiyas-ud-dln Tughluq defeated them 1324, 
in the reign of Muhammad bin Tughluq 6 invasions, Timur 1398-99, 
Babur 4. 

4. Sir Edward Maclagan, The Jesuits and the Great Mogul, p. 28. 

5. Sri Ram Sharma, Religious Policy of the Mughals (1962), p. 14. 

6. Abdulla, Tdrikh-i-Daudi, HIED, IV. 439-40. 

7. Macauliffe, The Sikh Religion, I. 170. Cf. above, Vol. VI, p. 147. 

8. Tarikh-i-Firishta, I. 281. 

9. Selections from the Sacred Writings of the Sikhs (London, 1960), p. 82. 

10. Macauliffe, op. cit. 

11. Rag Asa, Adi Granth, p. 360. Selections from the Sacred Writings of the Sikhs, 
pp. 86-7. 

12. Tuzuk-i-Baburi, II. 281. 

13. ASI, XII. 26-7. 

14. Memoirs of Babur, II. 340. 

15. The name is also written as ‘Arjan.’ 

16. For a short account of this episode, see p. 179. 

17. Tuzuk-i-Jahangirx (Naval Kishore Press, Lucknow), Persian Text, p. 35. 

324 



THE SIKHS 


18. The Dahistan, p. 234. 

18a. As the Sikh Gums did not always eschew politics, this explanation is not very 
convincing (Editor). 

19. Beni Prasad, History of Jahangir , p. 130. 

20. Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri (Persian Text), p. 35. 

21. Khushwant Singh, A History of the Sikhs, I. p. 59, f.n., 25. 

22. Tuzuk-i-Jahdngiri, p. 35. 

23. The Dabistan, p. 234. 

23a. Cf. p. 193. 

24. Sir Jadunath Sarkar, A Short History of Aurangzib, 1954 edition, p. 156. 

25. Macauliffe, op. cit., IV. p. 2; Sir Jadunath Sarkar, op. cit., p. 156. 

26. The Dabistan , pp. 235-6. 

27. Guru Har Govind’s contemporary, Mohsin Fani, v/rites: “At last Hargobind, 
son of Arjun Mai, took to meat eating and hunting, and most of his disciples 
adopted his way.” He narrates a story. A Pratabmal admonished his son 
who was inclined to become a Musalman thus: “If you want to get full free¬ 
dom in eating, you may better join Sikhism where there is no restriction about 
food.” ( The Dabistan, p. 223). 

28. Cunningham, A History of the Sikhs, p. 50. 

29. The Dabistan, p. 239. 

30. Ibid, p. 234. 

31. But the wives of the Guru might have been allowed to stay with him (Editor). 

32. The Dabistan, p. 239. 

33. Ibid. 

34. Abdul Hamid Lahorl, Badshah-Nama, ii, 57-58; Aminai Qazvini, Bddshdh- 
Ndma , ms., 444-45, 562; Muhammad Salih, ‘Amal-l-Salih, ii, 64, 246-47; Khafi 
Khan, Muntakhab-ul-Lubab, i, 510. 

35. Sir Jadunath Sarkar, op. cit., 1954 edition, p. 156. 

36. Ibid. Sir Jadunath’s date, 1628, is obviously wrong. 

37. Ibid. 

38. Ibid. 

39. Quoted with approval by Sir Jadunath Sarkar, Ibid. 

40. Mohsin Fani says that while going on his mission Sadh had not reached far 
beyond Amritsar, when he was informed that his only son was lying seriously ill, 
and he was requested to return. Such was his devotion to the Guru that he 
replied; “If he should die, there is wood enough in the house for his cremation. 
I am going on Guru’s business and I will not return.” His son passed away, 
but he did not come back. The Dabistan, p. 239. 

41. Mohsin Fani says! “Khalil Beg’s high-handedness did not bring him pros¬ 
perity. The same year his son who was responsible for this act died, and he 
himself suffered insults, and disgrace.” Ibid. 

42. Ibid, p. 235. 

43. M’Gregor, History of the Sikhs, I. 59. 

44. The Dabistan, p. 235. 

45. Ibid. 

46. Ibid. 

47. Ibid. 

48. Ibid. The author gives the date on the authority of Mohsin Fani (ibid. p. 237). 
But both Sir Jadunath Sarkar (op. cit., p. 156) and CHI (IV. 245) give the 
date as 1645 (Editor). 

49. Kalimdt-i-Tayyibdt, p. 115. 

50. Khafi Khan, II. 651-2. 

51. Sukha Singh, Gur Bilas, p. 81. 

52. Macauliffe, op. cit., IV (1909 Edition), pp. 373-4. 

53. There is a well-known verse in the Bhagavad-Gita (IV. 8) exactly to this effect 
(Editor). 

54. Bichitra Natak, VI; Macauliffe, op. cit., V. 299. 

55. Bichitra Naitak, VI; Macauliffe, op. cit., V. 300-301. 

56. Macauliffe, op. cit., V. 82. 

57. Ibid, p. 83. 

58. Teja Singh and Ganda Singh, A Short History of the Sikhs , I. p. 68. 

59. Ibid. 

60. Gur Bilas, quoted by I. B. Banerjee, Evolution of the Khalsa, II. p. 95. 

61. Macauliffe, op. cit., V. 83. 

62. Ibid, pp. 286, 287, 289. 


325 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


63. The third was Sahib Chand, a barber of Nangal Shahidan of Hoshiarpur District. 
The fourth was Himmat Chand Kahar (water-carrier) of Sangatpura in District 
Patiala, and the fifth was Mohkam Chand Chhimba of Buria in Ambala District. 
(Ganda Singh, Makhiz-i-Tawarikh-i-Sikhdn, i, 8). 

64. In many of these external observances a deep purpose can be traced. Guru 
Govind Singh wanted to make the Sikhs a fighting people, and therefore he 
deemed it necessary that their heads should be properly guarded from sword 
cuts and lathi blows by means of long hair and turbans. Comb was required 
to keep beards in proper shape so that they would look impressive and manly. 
The steel bracelet was a constant reminder to a Sikh that his spirit was equally 
strong and unbending. Kirpan was for self-defence as well as for the protection 
of the weak and the oppressed. The Kachha was more suitable and more con¬ 
venient for fighting purposes than the long dhoti of Hindus and loose trousers 
of Muslims. Above all, the Guru aimed at giving his Sikhs a separate identity 
which he could not conceal for fear of death, and would remain steadfast and 
stable. 

65. It means: “This Khalsa is Thy Own, O Lord, and so is the Victory.” The idea 
was to keep the Sikhs in a buoyant spirit, because by this mode of salutation a 
strong link was established between the Khalsa and Victory, these two being 
the offspring of the Lord. 

66. Khazan Singh, History and Philosophy of the Sikh Religion, i. 181. 

67. Ten battles are recorded by the author of the Battles of Guru Gobind Singh, 
which were fought by the Guru after creating the Khalsa. Of these, five took 
place at Anandpur, two at Chamkaur, and the rest at Nirmoh, Basali and Muktsar. 
Cf. Sunder Singh, 32-68. 

68. Sir Jadunath Sarkar, op. cit., p. 158. 

69. Guru Govind Singh hints at it in his letter addressed to Aurangzib, called 
Zafarnama. 

70. This number is given by Guru Govind Singh in Zafarnama. 

71. Khazan Singh, op. cit., I. 196-7. 

72. Khafi Khan, 652; M’Gregor, i, 99. 

73. In India ‘five’ has been the sacred number from time immemorial. “ Panchon 
men Parmeshwar hai” is an old saying, indicating the presence of Divinity in 
five. Panchdyats, or councils of five elders, were common in northern India. 

74. Khazan Singh, op. cit., i, 201-4. 

75. The date is given by I. Banerjee as 18 October, 1708 ( Evolution of the Khalsa, 
II, p. 151), and November, 1708, by Jadunath Sarkar (CHI, IV. p. 322) [Editor]. 

76. J. N. Sarkar, op. cit., p. 159. 


326 


CHAPTER XII 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 

I. ME WAR 
Their finest hour 

With the death of Mahdrdnd Sanga, a new chapter opens in the 
history of Mewar. The unfortunate country suffers from weak ad¬ 
ministration, disputed succession, and invasion, first by Gujarat and 
then by a far more formidable foe, Akbar, who after winning over 
a few chieftains of Rajasthan, sets out to conquer Mewar, the last 
bastion of Hindu power in North India. Here the great Emperor 
is faced by the determined resolution of one man, Pratap Singh, 
and all the resources of the vast Mughul empire cannot force this 
great Mahdrdnd of Mewar to bow his head to the alien Mughul 
ruler. The Mahdrdnd loses battles, but never gives up the principle 
for which he stands—independence, and he regains for posterity the 
soul of India. The great Shivaji will be proud to claim him as his 
ancestor, and the revolutionary movement in Bengal in the twentieth 
century will draw inspiration from his untiring fight against foreign 
domination. With Mahdrdnd Sanga the pomp and splendour of 
Mewar as a political power passes away—under Mahdrdnd Pratap it 
blazes into a glory that can never fade. 

Ratna Singh (1528-1531 ) 

Mahdrdnd Sanga had seven sons (by different wives), four of 
whom had predeceased him and his eldest surviving son, Ratna Singh, 
succeeded to the throne (1528). But before his death Mahdrdnd 
Sanga had promised Karmavati, the step-mother of Ratna Singh, the 
fort of Ranthambhor to her sons, Vikramaditya and Uday Singh, and 
she took possession of that fort in the name of her minor sons, with 
her brother Surya Mai of Hada (or Hara) clan as their guardian. 
She also took away with her the golden crown and belt which the 
Mahdrdnd had taken from the Sultan of Malwa. 

Soon after his accession, Ratna Singh demanded the golden 
crown and the belt and also requested Karmavati and her sons to 
return to Chitor. She refused to do either and opened negotiations 
with Babur. 1 She offered Blabur Ranthambhor and the golden crown 
and belt in exchange of Bayana and agreed to accept his overlord- 


327 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


ship. Later on Babur records that he agreed to help Vikramaditya 
to gain his father’s kingdom. 2 

These negotiations led to no other result than to increase the 
hostility between Ratna Singh and Surya Mai. But other events de¬ 
manded his attention. 

Chand Khan, the brother of Sultan Bahadur of Gujarat, was 
given asylum at Malwa, and Sultan Mahmud of Malwa refused to 
surrender him to Bahadur. He worsened his position by attacking 
Mewar at this time to regain some territories lost to Malwa during 
Mahdrdnd Sanga’s time. Ratna Singh had little difficulty in throw¬ 
ing out the invaders, after which he invaded Malwa and reached 
Sarangpur. In the meantime, Sultan Bahadur of Gujarat had started 
his campaign against Malwa and opened negotiations with the Mahd¬ 
rdnd. Later, the Mahdrdnd visited Bahadur’s camp and received 
from the latter “thirty elephants, many horses and one thousand five 
hundred dresses of gold brocade.” 3 Thereupon the Mahdrdnd re¬ 
turned to Mewar, leaving some of his officers and soldiers with Baha¬ 
dur, to help him against Sultan Mahmud of Malwa. 

But the trouble with Surya Mai, the guardian of Ratna Singh’s 
step-brothers, increased, and ultimately the latter began to hatch 
plans to murder him. 4 He is said to have invited Surya Mai to a 
hunt near Bundi. One day they went out for pig-sticking with a few 
attendants. Suddenly Ratna Singh attacked Surya Mai and in the 
scuffle that followed both of them died (1531). 

Vikramaditya ( 1531-1536 ) 

After Ratna Singh’s death, his step-brother Vikramaditya as¬ 
cended the throne of Mewar. He is described in all the Rajasthan 
chronicles and traditions as a stupid young man, who replaced body¬ 
guards with wrestlers, and so insulted the nobles that they left the 
court in disgust. The tales of his stupidity may be exaggerated, but 
his ineptitude soon showed itself with fateful consequences for 
Mewar. 

Sultan Bahadur of Gujarat, determined to punish Silahdi for 
having Muslim women in his seraglio, invested the fort of Raisen. 5 
When their condition became precarious, Silahdi’s son Bhupat went 
to Mewar for help and Vikramaditya advanced with a large force. 
Bahadur Shah first sent a force under two officers to contain the 
Rand, but later thought his presence absolutely necessary and left 
Raisen and joined his force which was opposing Vikramaditya. 
Vikramaditya seems to have taken alarm, and sent two persons to 


328 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


Bahadur’s court, ostensibly to parley, but in reality to find out the 
Muslim strength. On their reporting that the Gujarat army was 
greatly superior, Vikramaditya lost heart and immediately fled to 
Chitor. He was closely pursued by the Gujarat army, but Bahadur 
decided to capture Raisen first, which he did soon after. Chanderl, 
Bhllsa, Gagraun and other places fell to Bahadur after the conquest 
of Raisen, while Vikramaditya allowed his army to be immobilized 
in the fort of Chitor. All this time Bahadur was actively preparing 
for the siege of Chitor by collecting troops, arms, artillery and am¬ 
munition. 

Bahadur sent an advance army under his officers (1532) and 
when this advance force arrived at Mandasor, they were met by 
Vikramaditya’s envoys, who agreed to cede to Bahadur whatever the 
Rdnd held of Malwa and further stipulated that “whatever tribute 
may be imposed on him he will pay; whatever duty is imposed 
on him he will perform, and he acknowledges himself a subject of 
the Sultan, and will never be disobedient.” 6 

In the meantime, stung by Vikramaditya’s insult, some of his 
nobles, headed by Medini Riai of Chanderl and Narsing Dev (a nephew 
of Mdhdvdnd Sanga) had joined Bahadur, and the latter, apprised of 
the division among the Mewlar nobles and remembering the Rand’s 
attempts to help the besieged garrison of Raisen, refused to accept 
the terms 7 and ordered his general to advance. This he did, ex¬ 
pecting an attack by the Rand , 8 but he was allowed to invest Chitor 
without any opposition (1533). Soon the Muslims carried forays 
near the fort and captured two of its outer gates. In vain did 
Karmavatl send envoys to Humlayun for help. 

Ultimately, in desperation, Karmavatl, who had saved Bahadur’s 
life when as a prince he was in exile at Mewar, appealed to him, 
promising to cede the conquered districts of Malwa, and surrender 
the golden crown and belt of Malwa kings, and give him ten ele¬ 
phants and 100 horses and one hundred lakhs of tankahs. 9 Bahadur 
accepted these terms and returned to Gujarat (24 March, 1533) 
which had during his absence been invaded by Nizam Shiah. 

Peace between Mewar and Gujarat was, however, short, as 
faced with a hostile Mughul power, Bahadur felt the urgency of 
possessing the strong fort of Chitor, or at least to crush the power 
of Mewar to such an extent that there could be no combination of 
Mughuls and Sisodias against him. Thus he sent a strong force 
under Tatar Khan Lodi (a grandson of Sikandar Lodi) and others 
towards Agra and the Punjab and himself proceeded to invest 
Chitor. The energetic measures adopted by Humayun foiled Baha- 


329 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


dur’s ambitious plans. Humayun moved through Malwa to Sarang- 
pur, capturing on his way the fort of Raisen. At this point Bahadur 
took counsel of his officers as to whether to raise the siege of Chitor 
and face Humayun, or continue the siege. His counsellors correct¬ 
ly advised him to concentrate his energies on capturing Chitor, as 
Humayun was not likely to attack him while he was fighting a 
‘holy war’ against the infidels. This prediction proved remarkably 
accurate, and Humayun, after advancing up to Gwalior, calmly 
awaited there the result of the grim tragedy that was unfolding at 
Chitor, for reasons discussed in the next chapter. 

The Rajput soldiers were not prepared for the second siege of 
Chitor. The nobles, alienated by the buffoonery of Vikramaditya, 
had retired to their fiefs. So when the news of the Gujarat army’s 
advance towards Chitor came, the fort was hardly in a state of de¬ 
fence. In this grave predicament, the Queen-mother issued a stir¬ 
ring appeal to the nobles. “Up to now Chitor has remained in the 
possession of the Sisodias”, Karmavatl wrote to the nobles, “but 
now it seems the day of her destruction has arrived. I am handing 
over this fort to you, preserve it if you can, deliver it if you must. 
Remember, even if your king is worthless, the destruction of the 
royal dynasty can only bring disgrace to you.” 10 

The nobles gallantly responded to this call. They found, how¬ 
ever, that the provisions could not last for more than a few months, 
and a council of war decided to defend the fort to the last, but to 
remove Vikramaditya and his younger brother Uday Singh to 
Bundi. 

This flight of Vikramaditya from the besieged fort has been a 
matter of reproach but there is no doubt that the decision to re¬ 
move him to a place of safety was the correct one. Chitor was 
doomed, and if he had died sword in hand, in a final sortie, the 
Sisodias would have for ever perished as the Chahamana Hammir 
of Ranthambhor. Indeed, one of the fatal defects in Hindu defence 
had been up to now their suicidal reliance on the so-called impreg¬ 
nable strongholds. As Klauswitz remarked, a besieged garrison is 
as helpless as a marooned man-of-war. This dictum was fully rea¬ 
lized later by Mahdrdnd Pratap, who never allowed the mobility of 
his action to be impeded by the fear of losing a fortress. For the 
present, the Mewar nobles stuck to their ancient military tradition, 
but forbore from sacrificing the life of the king and the next heir, 
around whom alone, in case of defeat, the nation could rally again. 11 

The rest of the story can be briefly told. Bahadur’s artillery, 
directed probably by Turkish gunners, breached part of the bastion. 


330 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


The garrison defended bravely, but when they found all further re¬ 
sistance helpless, the women under Rani Karmavati performed the 
jauhar and the soldiers rushed out of the fort and died fighting to 
a man (1535). 

Chitor thus fell to Bahadur, but it is significant that the Muslim 
historians do not speak of his capturing any spoils. Possibly the 
treasures had been removed from the fort when Vikramaditya left 
it. However, soon Bahadur had to flee before the advancing 
Mughul army, and the Sisodias recaptured Chitor, and Vikrama¬ 
ditya returned to his capital. 

However, Vikramaditya had learnt nothing, and while the 
nobles were alarmed at his conduct of government, he took into his 
confidence, Vanavir, the natural son of Mahardna Sanga’s eldest 
brother Prithvlraj. He had been banished from Mewar by Maha- 
rand Sanga and had taken refuge at Gujarat, but now finding the 
time propitious returned to Chitor. Soon he gained the confidence 
and favour of Vikramaditya and one day finding an opportunity 
murdered him (1536). 

Vanavir next went to the room of prince Uday Singh to murder 
the last rightful claimant to the throne. But here he was foiled 
by the devotion of a woman whose name has become a byword for 
loyalty. Uday Singh, at this time a boy of fourteen, was under 
the care of his childhood nurse Panna. As soon as Pannia came to 
learn of Vikramaditya’s murder, she managed to send Uday Singh 
out of the fort and placed on the bed her son who was of the same 
age. Soon after, the regicide entered the room, sword in hand, and 
asked Panna where Uday Singh was. Silently she pointed at the 
bed on which her son was sleeping, and Vanavir murdered the boy. 
Panna then left Chitor and took Uday Singh to Kumbhalmer. 

Vanavir ( 1536-1540 ) 

Vanavir’s usurpation lasted for about four years (1536-40). 
The Rajasthan chronicles are silent about his achievements, if in¬ 
deed he had had any to his credit. His heinous deed and low origin 
must have made him odious to the proud nobles, and ultimately 
trouble broke out due to his crude insistence in proclaiming his 
equality with the high-born nobles by attempting to force them to 
eat the left-over food from his plate (uchchishta ). 

During this time, Pannia had enlisted several nobles to Uday 
Singh’s cause, and arranged his marriage with the daughter of 
Akhairaj. This added to Uday Singh’s prestige and gave a lie to 
Vanavir’s propaganda that he was not the real prince. Uday Singh 


331 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


then issued an appeal for help and soon not only the nobles of 
Me war, but some other chieftains, too, joined under his banner. 

Vanavlr sent an army to stop Uday Singh’s progress. At a 
battle fought near Maholi, this army was routed, and Uday Singh 
proceeded towards Chitor, which surrendered after a brief resist¬ 
ance. There are conflicting reports about Vanavir’s end; according 
to some sources he died fighting, while others relate that he escaped 
into obscurity (1540). 12 

Uday Singh ( 1540-1572) 

The early years of Uday Singh’s reign were spent in fruitless 
wars with Maldev of Marwar. This struggle between Mewiar and 
Marwar may have been caused by an attempt to establish ultimate 
authority in Rajasthan, but the events which led to these wars were 
as petty as the battles were futile. 

Rao Maldev of Marwar wanted to marry his beautiful sister-in- 
law, but her father objected and had her married to Uday Singh. 
A war followed in which Maldev was defeated. 

However, Mewar and Marwar soon after had to face a formid¬ 
able foe, Sher Shah. He first defeated Maldev, and then turned to¬ 
wards Chitor. While he was a few miles from Chitor, Uday Singh 
sent him the keys of the fort as a token of humble submission. This 
satisfied Sher Shah, who left Mewar in virtual possession of the 
MahdrdndP 

Uday Singh’s next war also concerned a woman. After Sher 
Shah’s death, his governor of Mewat, Haji Khan, driven away by the 
Mughuls, found refuge at Ajmer, where he was attacked by Maldev. 
He appealed for help to Uday Singh who immediately responded, 
and rescued Haji Khan. Uday Singh, however, then demanded his 
price, which was the favourite mistress of the fugitive Afghan. He 
refused to surrender her, and made a bold stand with his few thou¬ 
sand followers, and defeated Uday Singh. 

In spite of these seemingly stupid warfares, Uday Singh did 
turn his attention to establishing a second capital, and to excavating 
a lake which still bears his name. He had apparently understood 
the danger of staking the fortunes of his country on the defence of 
a fortress, which could not be defended in the face of a determined 
foe. 

In the meantime, Akbar had ascended the throne (1556). Six 
years later, he married the daughter of Raja Bharmal of Amber and 
his grandson, Man Singh, joined the Mughul army. Thus began a 


332 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


memorable policy as a result of which pilgrim tax on the Hindus 
was abolished in 1563 and the hated jizya in 1564. This undoubtedly 
ameliorated the condition of the Hindus within the empire, and won 
him the friendship, esteem and devotion of many Hindu chiefs of 
Rajasthan. But Akbar, unlike Sher Shah, aimed at the complete 
subversion of the independence of Rajasthan. 14 

Abu-’l-Fazl’s narration of the causes which led to the Mewar 
campaign are too naive and may be rejected.t 5 It is definite, how¬ 
ever, that Akbar started on his famous campaign in 1567, and on 
October 23 of the same year formed his camp near Udaipur. With¬ 
in a month the investment of Chitor was complete. 

According to Kaviraj Shyamaldas, when Uday Singh received 
the news of Akbar’s approaching invasion, he called a council of war. 
The nobles pointed out the condition of the army, which had not 
yet recovered from the Gujarat wars, and was not in a condition 
to fight the Mughuls. They, therefore, advised the Mahardna to 
take refuge, along with the princes, in the hills, leaving a garrison 
at Chitor. After some discussion, Uday Singh accepted the advice 
of his councillors, and leaving 8000 soldiers to guard Chitor, left 
for the hills, and ultimately reached Rajpipla, the capital of the 
Guhilots of Rewakanta. 16 Akbar sent Husain Qull Khan to capture 
the Mahardna, but he failed. 17 

It was found impossible to capture Chitor by assaults which 
were repulsed with heavy losses; so Akbar raised batteries and laid 
mines to breach the walls. 

However, “on Tuesday, February 23, 1568, Akbar noticed at 
the breach a person wearing a chiefs cuirass who was busy direct¬ 
ing the defence.” Akbar aimed at him and his shot struck the 
chief, who was Jaimal, the commander of the garrison. 

According to the Muslim historians, Jaimal died and the other 
officers, despairing of success, had their women and children per¬ 
form the right of jauhar, and opened the gates of the fort the next 
morning and died fighting. 18 According to Kaviraj Shyamaldas, 
however, Jaimal was wounded in the leg, and called a council of 
war. He explained to them that the stores were exhausted, so it 
was preferable for the women and children to perform the jauhar 
and the men to fall on the enemy and die fighting. 19 Most pro¬ 
bably, the provisions in the fort were exhausted, the Mughul pre¬ 
parations were almost complete, and on the top came Jaimal’s acci¬ 
dent. All these factors seem to have influenced the decision of the 
besieged generals. 


333 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


During the night the women and children performed the jauhar 
rites. Akbar saw the flame which was explained to him by Bhag- 
wan Das, who warned that the Rajputs would open the gates and 
launch a final assault the next morning. So the Mughul army was 
alerted, and the next morning as the Rajputs opened the gates ot 
the fort, the Mughuls rushed in. 

Then followed a short but ferocious fighting till all the Rajput 
soldiers fell sword in hand (25 February, 1568). Akbar then gave 
the order for the mass execution of 30,000 non-combatants, for 
which all modern historians have condemned him. According to 
Kaviraj Shyamaldas, however, out of 40,000 peasants who were in 
the fort, 39,000 had died fighting, and Akbar ordered the remain¬ 
ing 1000 to be executed. 20 

Akbar’s Chitor campaign has been made memorable by Col. 
Tod’s vividly imaginative description and its results have been un¬ 
duly exaggerated. It is therefore necessary to remember that 
Akbar’s primary aim was to force the Mahdrdnd into submission. 
Capture of Chitor was a means to achieve this end, but though he 
captured the fort, he failed in his main objective. Indirectly, how¬ 
ever, he profited largely by the display of Mughul power. Ran- 
thambhor capitulated next year (1569), and in 1570 Bikaner and 
Jaisalmer entered into matrimonial alliance with Akbar. 21 Thus 
the fabric of unity imposed on Rajasthan by Kumbha and Sanga, 
shattered at Khanua, disappeared for ever. Henceforth their proud 
descendants would struggle valiantly, but alone, not only against 
the Mughuls but also against the Rajputs. This is the measure 
of the greatness of two men—Akbar, who could transform the poli¬ 
tical situation in Rajasthan so that soon, in the words of his cour¬ 
tier Badauni, a Hindu would wield the sword of Islam, 22 and Pratap, 
undaunted by the odds against him, would carry on the struggle. 

Uday Singh survived the fall of Chitor by four years. He 
lived mostly at Kumbhalmer, and it was remarkable that Akbar 
never attempted to conquer the stronghold till much later. He 
died on 28 February, 1572. 

It is difficult to form a proper estimate of Uday Singh’s cha¬ 
racter. The historians of his country, the bards of Rajasthan, used 
to singing the valorous exploits of the warrior chieftains, had con¬ 
tempt for this man, whom fate had taught from early childhood 
that sometimes survival is as important as fighting, and under cer¬ 
tain circumstances it can only be achieved by flight. Naturally he 
suffers in comparison with his great father and greater son, but 
this man, who by no account was a hero, refused to surrender to 


334 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


the Mughuls, while the other chiefs of Rajasthan were sending their 
daughters to the Mughul harem. 23 

Pratap Singh ( 1572-1597) 

Uday Singh left twenty wives and twenty-five sons, of whom 
the eldest was Pratap Singh. Before his death, however, he nomi¬ 
nated his ninth son Jagmal as his successor. Jagmal actually as¬ 
cended the throne while Pratap and the other nobles went to per¬ 
form the funeral rites of the deceased monarch. 24 On their return, 
however, the nobles forced Jagmal to abdicate and offered the 
throne to the rightful successor, Pratap Singh, and he accepted it. 
Jagmal went to Ajmer, joined Akbar, and received a portion of 
Sirohi, but later died fighting with its rightful chieftain. 

Mahdrdnd Pratap Singh ascended the throne on 1 March, 1572, 
and the famous battle of Haldighiat was fought in June, 1576. We 
do not know what measures he adopted to meet the Mughul menace 
during these four years of real peace which he was to enjoy as a 
king. If, however, his later operations are any indication, he uti¬ 
lized this period to consolidate his regime and prepare for the in¬ 
evitable struggle. We have therefore to anticipate the future events 
in order to form an idea of his activities during this period. 

The Mewar army at the battle of Haldlighat was quite formid¬ 
able and in every way a match for the Mughul army. Evidently 
long time must have been spent to raise and equip this army, and 
get the support of Afghans like Hakim Sur Pathan, who fought for 
Mewar at Haldfghat. But even more important was gaining the 
support of the Bhils, who from now on steadfastly helped the 
Mahardnds of Mewar, and made possible the guerilla warfare after 
the battle of Haldighat. 25 This broad imaginative policy not only 
served the cause of Mewar’s independence, but made its young king 
a real national leader. One can only imagine the flush of enthusiasm 
among the Bhils when for the first time they were recognized as 
fighting partners by the proud ruling Kshatriyas. 

During this period the Mahdrdnd was *also planning the war 
against the Mughuls. It is remarkable that after the battle of Haldi¬ 
ghat, Man Singh could find no trace of the Mahdrdnd , his family or 
his nobles. Actually when Man Singh reached Gogunda, Mahd- 
rdnd’s temporary capital, the day after the battle, the town was 
deserted, and soon the supply of the Mughul army was cut off and 
the soldiers had to subsist mainly on fruits. It is no doubt possible 
that from the battlefield the Mahdrdnd had rushed to Gogunda, col¬ 
lected his family, found out an inaccessible hide-out, and then col- 


335 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


lected his men and begun to harass the Mughul army. It is, how¬ 
ever, not unlikely that the Mahardna had carefully planned his course 
of action in case he lost the battle of Haldlghat. That is, he had learnt 
not to stake a kingdom on the outcome of a single battle, and this 
alone can satisfactorily explain the reason of his leaving the field 
before the battle was over at Haldlghat. 26 

Another point is the Mahdrana s consolidation of his financial 
resources. Tod has given wide currency to the story that after the 
battle of Haldlghat, he was fleeing from one place of concealment 
to another in conditions of abject poverty. MM. Ojha has shown 
that these stories are myths. Not only the Mahardna but Amar also 
had enough financial resources to continue the struggle till 1614. It 
is remarkable indeed, as MM. Ojha points out, that though Chitor 
was occupied by Bahadur and later by Akbar, no Muslim historian 
describes any treasure having fallen into their hands. The obvious 
inference is that Uday Singh had secreted the wealth accumulated 
by Kumbha and Sanga and the Mahardna made judicial use of it. 27 

It may thus be concluded, that from 1572 to 1576, the Mahd- 
rdnd attempted to consolidate his position, marshal his resources, 
build an army and make adequate arrangements for defence in case 
the Mughuls defeated his field force. As long as Akbar sent him 
diplomatic missions, he behaved with them correctly, but refused to 
surrender any of his sovereign rights. 28 Akbar therefore decided 
to declare war against him, and selected Man Singh as the command¬ 
ing general. 29 

The battle of Haldlghat was fought on 21 June, 1576. The 
Mahardna had originally taken his position in the ghati which could 
be reached by a narrow and rugged path about a mile and a half 
long. Man Singh waited for him in the plain below, and in the 
morning of 21 June the Mahardna came out and attacked the Mughul 
army. As Man Singh had arranged his army in battle array, it is 
evident that the Mahdrdnd’s attack had lost the element of surprise. 
Still, in the first flush of attack, his army practically broke through 
the Mughul army, but the rout was stopped by Man Singh and a 
few intrepid officers. There was a personal encounter between the 
Mahardna and Man Singh. But while Man Singh, on an elephant, 
ducked and avoided the Mahardna s javelin, Pratap’s famous horse, 
Chetak, which had placed its forelegs on Man Singh’s elephant was 
struck by the sword which the huge beast carried in its trunk. 
Chetak immediately turned and fled, and with his last breath car¬ 
ried his master out of danger. 

The Mahdmnd’s army seems to have followed him, but we do 
not hear of captives. The total number of dead was, according to 

336 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


Badauni, five hundred, of whom 120 were Muslims and the rest 
Hindus. As considerable number of Hindus fought on the Mughul 
side, it would appear that the casualties on each side were almost 
equal. 

The day was so hot that pursuit of the Mewar army was im¬ 
possible. Next day Mian Singh occupied Gogunda, the Mahamna’s 
temporary capital. The town had already been evacuated, still 
about twenty soldiers who had been left to guard the palace and 
the temple died fighting to satisfy their honour. “The Amirs, as 
security against a night-attack on the part of the Rana, barricaded 
the streets and drew a trench and a wall of such a height that horse¬ 
men could not leap over it, round the city of Kokandah, and then 
settled down quietly.’’ 30 But the danger to the Mughul army came 
from another side. The Malndrdnd cut all supplies to Gogunda, and 
soon they were reduced to living on meat and mangoes. 

Akbar was not satisfied with the results of the battle. He was 
vexed with Man Singh for “having abandoned the pursuit of the 
Rana, and so allowing him to remain alive.’’ 31 Later (September, 
1576) when “news arrived of the distressed state of the army of 
Kokandah (Gogunda), the emperor sent for Man Singh, Asaf Khan 
and QazI Khan, to come alone from that place and on account of 
certain faults which they had committed, he excluded Man Singh 
and Asaf Khan (who were associated in treachery) for some time 
from the court.” 32 

Though Man Singh was restored to favour, the condition in 
Mewar being far from satisfactory, Akbar himself left for Gogunda 
from Ajmer on 11 October, 1576, with a large army. 33 But before 
he left, “the roads of ingress and egress from the Rana’s country 
were closed.” 34 The Maharand retired before the Mughul army in¬ 
to the hills and Qutb-ud-din Khan, Raja Bhagwan Das, Man Singh 
and other imperial officers were sent in pursuit to capture him. As 
Narayan Das of Idar had joined the Malndrdnd, another army was 
sent against him. idar was occupied after a stubborn fight. 35 

Akbar himself came to Mohi (near Nathdwara) and appointed 
officers to guard that place and Madariya (near Chitor). “Similar¬ 
ly, brave men were appointed to other places in order that when¬ 
ever that wicked strife-monger (Rana Partab) should come out of 
the ravines of disgrace, he might suffer retribution.” 36 But the 
army which was sent against the Mahdrdna was unsuccessful, and 
its two commanders, namely, Qutb-ud-din Khan and Raja Bhagwan 
Das returned to Akbar who was at this time in Udaipur. They 
were at first censured but later pardoned, 37 and soon after another 

337 

M.E.—22. 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


force was despatched to Gogunda under Bhagwan Das, Man Singh, 
Mirza Khan (the future Khan Khanan) and others. Presumably 
the Mahdrdnd had recaptured Gogunda. However, Abu-’l-Fazl 
adds: “By the great attention of the Shahinshah that country was 
cleared from the thorn-brake of rebellion, and adorned by just sub¬ 
jects.” 38 But from subsequent events it appears that this expedi¬ 
tion, though it may have cleared the Gogunda region for the time 
being, had produced little effect on the adversary. 

Apparently, after occupying the Gogunda region the comman¬ 
ders returned to the court but Akbar could not be satisfied so long 
as the Mahdrdnd was not captured or killed. So in March, 1578, 39 
he sent another army under the overall command of Shahbaz Khan, 
Mir Bakshi, to capture the fort of Kumbhalgarh, where the Mahd¬ 
rdnd was living at the time. Shahbaz Khan sent back to court 
Raja Bhagwan Das and Man Singh, and unexpectedly arrived near 
the fort, 40 and occupied Kelwara, a town about three miles from 
Kumbhalgarh and at the foot of the mountain. According to 
Abu-’l-Fazl, “a large gun inside the fort burst, and the harvest of 
his ( Mahdrdnd 9 s ) equipment was reduced to ashes.” 40 * The fort 
fell on 4 April, 1578, and even he describes the gallant fight put 
up by the Rajputs. But the Mahdrdnd had already left the fort. 
Next day Shahbaz Khan captured Gogunda and at midnight Udaipur. 
Apparently, these places were not defended. 41 

Shahbaz Khan returned a few months later but was again sent 
with several other officers and “much treasure” against the Mahd¬ 
rdnd who, as Abu-’l-Fazl puts it, “had raised the head of turbu¬ 
lence.” 42 From this campaign Shahbaz Khan returned after March, 
15,81, and apparently reported that the Mahdrdnd 9 s power had been 
crushed for ever. 43 

By the end of 1584, however, the Mahdrdnd had succeeded in 
regaining his lost territories to such an extent that another expedi¬ 
tion had to be sent under Raja Jagannath. 44 Abu-’l-Fazl’s descrip¬ 
tion of this campaign is more vague than usual, but from his state¬ 
ment that, “though there was no victory, yet the oppressed were 
relieved,” it is permissible to conclude that some relief was given 
to the scattered Mughul garrisons, but the Mahdrdnas activities 
could not be curbed. Late in 1585, Jagannath attempted to sur¬ 
prise the Mahdrdnd, but the latter got timely information, and when 
Jagannath reached his residence, he found it empty. But Abu-’l- 
Fazl, curiously enough, remarks: “From foresight they (the raid¬ 
ing party) did not judge it proper to return by the same way, and 
so proceeded towards Gujarat.” 45 This indicates that the mountain 


338 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


passes and roads were under Mahdrdnd’s control to such an extent 
as to strike terror in the Mughul army. 

This was practically the last expedition undertaken during 
Akbar’s reign against the Mahdrdnd. 

The most powerful monarch of the world relentlessly attempted 
to destroy one man, and he braved all adversities to emerge trium¬ 
phant. It is related in the Rajasthan chronicles that the Mahdrdnd 
adopted extreme measures to deny the Mughuls all forms of provi¬ 
sions. Death was the penalty for anyone who cultivated land for 
supplying the Mughul army. The result of this order was that the 
peasants left Mewar, and the Mughul garrisons had to get their 
provisions from Ajmer. It is related that a Mughul garrison com¬ 
mander induced a peasant to grow some vegetables for him. At 
night the Mahdrdnd went there and executed the man. 46 The Raja¬ 
sthan chronicles also tell of many exploits of the Mahdrdnd and his 
officers. Of these the most notable was 25 lacs of rupees and 20,000 
ashrafis looted from Malwa 47 On another occasion, Prince Amar 
Singh attacked a Mughul camp and captured the wife of the Khan 
Khanan, but after treating her with due honour returned her to 
her husband. 48 

These incidents are not corroborated by any Mughul source, 
which is not surprising. Nor do the Mughul historians give any 
account of the Mahdrdnd’s activities for gradually extirpating the 
Mughul garrisons, and freeing his country from the invaders, so 
that before his death, all Mewar except Ajmer, Chitor and Mandal- 
garh was in his hands. But the country was devastated, first, by a 
decade of constant fighting and deliberate destruction by the Mughul 
army, and secondly by the Mahdrdnd’s stern order, according to 
the Rajput chronicles, for not cultivating the land. We may also 
imagine that a large number of people died of hunger, malnutrition 
and disease, and many peasants must have left MewSr and settled 
in peaceful neighbouring countries. These effects were felt keenly 
in the next reign. 

It is related that one day while hunting, the Mahdrdnd struck 
his own bow and was wounded. This wound proved to be fatal, 
and he died on 11 Mdgh Shukla, 1653 V.S. (29 January, 1597), at 
the age of fifty-eight. 49 

Thus died the greatest hero of medieval India, the bravest of 
the brave whose sturdy frame was exhausted by almost two de¬ 
cades of constant fighting. We may here quote V. Smith’s fitting 
epitome of his reign: “The emperor desired the death of the Rana 
and the absorption of his territory in the imperial dominions. The 


339 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Rana, while fully prepared to sacrifice his life if necessary, was re¬ 
solved that his blood should never be contaminated by intermixture 
with that of the foreigner, and that his country should remain a land 
of freemen. After much tribulation he succeeded, and Akbar 
failed.” 50 


Amar Singh ( 1597-1620) 

Mahardna Pratap had eleven queens and seventeen sons, of 
whom the eldest, Amar Singh, succeeded him. His was a proud 
legacy, but beset with innumerable difficulties. He had to fight 
the Mughuls and at the same time maintain a machinery of admi¬ 
nistration which alone could provide him the means to prosecute 
the struggle for freedom. Ultimately he had to compromise, but 
that does not tarnish his honour. 

Amar Singh began his reign by introducing certain necessary 
administrative reforms mainly intended to strengthen his hands 
against too powerful nobles. 51 But soon he had to face the enemy. 
Akbar sent an army under Prince Salim and Man Singh in 1600. 52 
But Salim failed to accomplish anything, due, possibly, as Abu-’l- 
Fazl remarks, to his indolence. Soon after, Salim rebelled, and 
after his reconciliation with Akbar he was again entrusted with the 
conquest of Mewar. In October, 1603, 53 on the Dussera day, Akbar 
sent him off from Agra at the head of a well-equipped army. But 
arriving near Fathpur Sikri, Salim began to send demands for more 
troops and equipments, and ultimately gave up the venture. Thus 
we see that Akbar did not give up the idea of the destruction of 
the Mahardna from any chivalrous motive, but because of commit¬ 
ments elsewhere and the failure of his son. Still he made one more 
attempt to crush his old enemy. Towards the end of his reign, he 
invested Sagar, a son of Mahardna Uday Singh, with the title of 
Rand and designed to set him on the throne of Chitor. 54 Akbar was 
actually preparing to send a force under Khusrav to instal Sagar, 
but before this could be done, he died. 55 

For reasons not difficult to guess, Jahangir, immediately after 
his accession, sent his son Parviz to conquer Mewar. Parvlz, who 
had with him 20,000 horse, was aided by several experienced com¬ 
manders such as Asaf Khan and others, and Sagar, the pretender, 
also accompanied him. Jahangir’s instructions to Parviz were: “If 
the Rana himself, and his eldest son who is called Karan, should 
come to wait upon you (Parviz) and proffer service and obedience, 
you should not do any injury to his territory.” 56 It is interesting 
to note here, that three cousins of Man Singh and grandsons of 


340 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


Bhagwan Das, at this time were plotting to join Amar, but their 
plans leaked and Jahangir ordered them to be arrested. All of 
them died resisting arrest. 57 

Some time in March, 1606, came the news that Parvlz had suc¬ 
ceeded in dislodging Amar from Mandal. 58 But then Khusrav’s re¬ 
bellion broke out and Jahangir ordered Parvlz to return to the capi¬ 
tal leaving the direction of the campaign in the hands of officers. 59 
However, before Jahangir’s letter of recall had reached Parvlz, 
Amar opened negotiations on the basis that instead of himself and 
his eldest son Kama, one of his younger sons should wait upon 
Parvlz, and due to the exigencies of the situation Parvlz agreed, 
and brought Bagha Singh, a younger son of Amar, with him and 
presented him to Jahangir at Lahore. 60 However, nothing seems 
to have come out of Bagha Singh’s visit for, soon after, Jahangir ap¬ 
pointed Mu‘izz-ul-Mulk bakshi of the army against the Mahardna 
and sent him there. 61 

Nothing, however, came out of these expeditions. According 
to the Rajasthan chronicles, Parvlz had set up Sagar at Chitor as 
the Rana, but he could attract only a few followers, and ultimately 
had to leave Chitor ignominiously. 62 So in 1608, Jahangir selected 
Mahabat, one of the most famous Mughul generals, to lead an ex¬ 
pedition against the Mahardna. Mahabat had under him 12,000 
horse, 500 ahdis, 2000 musketeers, with an artillery of 70 to 80 guns 
mounted on elephants and camels. Two million rupees were order¬ 
ed to be sent with this army. 63 Mahabat’s rank was also raised 
and he was honoured with a robe of honour, a horse, a special ele¬ 
phant and a jewelled sword. 64 

Evidently, Mahabat Khan’s campaign was unsuccessful, and he 
was recalled in March, 1609, and 'Abdullah Khan, who was exalted 
with the title of “FIruz-jang” sent in his place. 65 The Rajasthan 
sources claim that a night attack took Mahabat Khan completely 
by surprise and he had to flee leaving his camp and equipment 
which were looted by the Me war soldiers. 66 

‘Abdullah opened his campaign with some initial success, and 
occupied Chavand and Merpur. 67 His rank was raised to 5000 
personal. 68 He was, however, sent as governor of Gujarat in 1611 
and at his request Raja Basu was appointed to the command of the 
Mughul army in Rajasthan. But apparently he also did not meet 
with any striking success. 69 He was recalled and Khan A‘zam 
Mlrza ‘Aziz Koka sent in 1613 to replace him. 

Khan A‘zam apparently felt the need of assistance, so at his 
instance Jahangir sent Khurram with 12,000 horse to take the nomi- 


341 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


nal command against the Mahdrdnd and himself advanced to Ajmer 
to “defeat and beat back the rebel Rana Amar Singh.” 70 Soon, 
however, the old courtier fell out with Khurram, and Jahangir’s 
remonstrations being of no avail, Khan Azam was recalled and 
Khurram left in charge of the operations. Some time before March, 
1614, Khurram obtained some notable success against the Mahd¬ 
rdnd and sent Jahangir seventeen captured elephants including one 
called “ ‘Alam-guman, of which the Rana was very fond.” 71 

About Khurram’s campaign, Jahangir writes: “My son of 
lofty fortune, Sultan Khurram, by dint of placing a great many 
posts, especially in some places where most people said it was im¬ 
possible to place them on account of the badness of the air and 
water and the wild nature of the localities, and by dint of moving 
the royal forces one after another in pursuit, without regard to the 
heat or excessive rain, and making prisoners of the families of the 
inhabitants of that region, brought matters with the Rana to such 
a pass that it became clear to him that if this should happen to him 
again he must either fly the country or be made prisoner.” 72 

From the Rajasthan chronicles it is learnt that the condition 
of the Mewar army was desperate. All provisions and sources of 
supply were exhausted, and there was even a shortage of weapons. 
For food they mostly had to depend on fruits. But what hurt them 
most was, as Jahangir relates, Khurram’s inhuman practice of 
making prisoners of the women and children. Shyamaldas relates 
that one day the nobles represented to the crown-prince, Kama, 
that they had been fighting for forty-seven years, under hard con¬ 
ditions. Now they were without food, dress or even weapons, and 
the Mughuls were capturing their children and forcing them to be¬ 
come dancing girls or slaves. They were prepared to die; each 
family had lost at least four members in the war; still they would 
fight, but it seemed to them that even their death could not pre¬ 
vent their family honour from being stained; it was therefore pre¬ 
ferable to come to some arrangement with the Mughuls, on the 
basis of Kama’s personal submission to the Mughul Emperor. As 
in the Mewar order of precedence, the crown-prince occupies a 
position lower than that of the chief nobles, such submission would 
not be too dishonourable. Kama agreed with the nobles, but ac¬ 
cording to Shyamaldas, he was afraid that Amar would not enter¬ 
tain any proposal of initiating peace talks. So it was decided to 
send two nobles, namely, Subhakarna and Jhala Haridas to Khur¬ 
ram without the knowledge of the Mahardnd. 131 

Khurram immediately sent the two Mewar envoys to Ajmer 
with his personal dhvdn, Mulla Shukra-Ullah and his major-domo, 


342 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


Sundardas, who, after the treaty with the Mahdrdnd was concluded, 
were honoured with the title of Afzal Khan and Ray Ray an. Jahangir 
readily ratified the terms and issued a farmdn with the mark of his 
palm. 74 Khurram sent the farmdn to Amar, and according to 
Shyamaldas it was at this time that he came to learn that the nobles 
headed by Kama had been negotiating with the Mughuls. The 
Mahdrdnd at last realized the realities of the situation and accepted 
the terms. 75 

On 18 February, 1614, Amar with some of his nobles visited 
Khurram and gave him a large ruby and seven elephants. 76 Khur¬ 
ram, in return, gave him a “superb dress of honour, a jewelled 
sword, a horse with a jewelled saddle, and a private elephant with 
silver housings,” and the Mahdrdnd’s hundred nobles who had 
accompanied him received one hundred robes of honour, fifty horses 
and twelve jewelled daggers. 77 After Amar had left, Prince Kama 
arrived at Khurram’s camp, and received various presents. The 
same day Khurram and Kama started for Ajmer. 

Jahangir received Kama as gracefully as possible, and tried to 
soothe his feelings by heaping on him all kinds of presents. Hardly 
a day passed when he did not give the Prince some present as a 
token of his favour. 78 Kama even had the unique honour of being 
present in the “darbar in the female apartments” when Nur Jahan 
presented him a rich dress of honour, a jewelled sword, a horse 
and saddle, and an elephant. 79 In addition to what Khurram and 
Nur Jahan gave him, Kama received from Jahangir cash and jewel¬ 
lery worth 200,000 rupees, besides 110 horses, five elephants and 
ten Arabian hunting dogs. 80 After Kama left, his son Jagat Singh, 
then a boy of twelve, came to represent him while Jahangir was 
still in Ajmer, and Jahangir had to be satisfied with that. 81 

Shyamaldas compares the Mughul-Mewar war with the Anglo- 
Afghan war, and in many respects the comparison is an apt one. 
The Mahdrdnd regained the whole of Mewar, parts of which ever 
since the days of Uday Singh had been under the Mughuls. The 
only restriction to his sovereignty was that the fort of Chitor could 
not be repaired. The obligation on the Mahdrdnd’s part was to 
send a contingent of troops, but it was sent on rare occasions. 
Mahdrdnd Pratap had fought for independence; his son retained the 
substance of independence by sacrificing some of its external attri¬ 
butes. In exchange, he gained the much-needed peace to restore 
the country to the level of civilized existence and gather strength 
for Mahdrdnd Raj Singh to fight against Aurangzlb. It has some¬ 
times been questioned whether Mahdrdnd Pratap would have accepted 


343 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


this treaty; it is equally open to question as to whether Akbar would 
ever have offered such terms. As Shyamaldas remarks, the land 
between Chitor and Udaipur was soaked with the blood of Mewar 
and Mughul heroes. Both sides were eager to come to terms, and 
the treaty does honour to both the parties who can claim to have 
displayed statesmanship of the highest order. 

The remaining years of Amar Singh’s reign were uneventful. 
It is said that he felt the insult of accepting a Mughul farmdn so 
keenly, that he retired to his private chamber, leaving the adminis¬ 
tration in the hands of the heir-apparent, Kama. He died on 26 
January, 1620. 82 


Kama Singh ( 1620-1628 ) 

Kama was in charge of the administration during his father’s 
reign when it had been his endeavour to resettle the villages and 
set up again the regular administrative machinery by appointing 
local officials. He also took in hand the reconstruction of palaces 
and temples. In short, his entire energy was applied to improving 
the condition of war-devastated Mewar, and in this he was highly 
successful. 

His relations with the Mughul court continued to be normal 
till the outbreak of Khurram’s rebellion in 1622. It appears that 
his brother Bhlm Singh, who was possibly serving under Khurram 
in the Deccan, joined the Prince at the outbreak of the rebellion. 83 
Bhlm Singh was one of the chief lieutenants of Khurram during the 
rebellion. He captured Patna and later died fighting gallantly at 
the battle of Jaunpur. 84 

After his defeat at the battle fought near Bilochpur (1623), 
Khurram entered Rajasthan and plundered Amber. His subsequent 
movement till he reached Mandu is not recorded by any Muslim 
historian, but the Rajasthan chronicles record that Kama granted 
him asylum at Udaipur, where he stayed for about four months. 85 

After Jahangir’s death, Shah Jahan returned to Agra via 
Gogunda where he met Kama and valuable gifts were exchanged 
(1 January, 1628). As usual, Shah Jahan’s gifts were costly. The 
Mahardnd’s younger brother, Arjun Singh, accompanied Shah Jahan 
to Agra. A few months later Kama died (March, 1628). 

Jagat Singh 86 ( 1628-1652) 

We do not know Kama’s motive in helping the rebel Khurram. 
However, with the accession of his son Jagat Singh a change is per- 


344 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


ceptible in the policy of Me war. Jagat Singh started his reign by 
interfering energetically in the affairs of Deolia, with the result that 
Shah Jahan ultimately intervened and restored it to its rightful 
owner. Jagat Singh then sent an expedition to Dungarpur which 
sacked the capital. He also sent forces to bring Sirohi and Bianswara 
under his control. To please Shah Jahan he sent him a mission with 
some presents, and this seems to have served its purpose. But under 
the terms of the treaty he had to maintain 1000 troops with the 
Mughul army, and this he did after several reminders. However, in 
direct contravention of the terms of the treaty he began to repair the 
fort of Chitor. Thus it appears that Mewar was again preparing to 
renew the struggle. 

Jagat Singh is famous in the annals of Rajasthan for his charity 
and building activities. He died on 10 April, 1652. 


Raj Singh ( 1652-1680) 

Mahamna Raj Singh succeeded his father, Jagat Singh, in 1652 
at the age of twenty-three. He was duly recognized by Shiah Jahan 
but very soon friction arose over the repair of Chitor fort. As has 
been stated above, Jagat Singh had started the repair work which 
was taken up after his death by Raj Singh. Possibly both Jagat 
Singh and Raj Singh counted on the gratitude of Shah Jahan, but 
the emperor of Delhi was quite a different man from the fugitive 
prince. He left Delhi on 24 September, 1654, to visit Ajmer, and 
from there sent Sa’dullah Khan with an army of 30,000 troops to 
Chitor, and ordered Shayista Khan to be ready to come to Mewar 
in case of necessity, and Aurangzlb to post his son Muhammad with 
1000 soldiers at Mandasor. But Raj Singh submitted, and Sa’dullah 
Khan completed the destruction of Chitor’s fortifications without 
any opposition. 87 In the meantime, Raj Singh sought the protec¬ 
tion of Dara, who was possibly instrumental in inducing Shah 
Jahan to send to Mewar a Brahmin envoy called Chandra Bhan. 88 
It appears from Chandra Bhan’s reports to Shah Jahan that 
the Mahardna’s faults had been to have repaired Chitor, to have 
appointed in Mewar service persons who had left the imperial service 
without permission, and to have failed to maintain at full strength 
the contingent of 1000 soldiers which under the treaty Mewar had 
to supply to the imperial army. The result of Chandra Bhan’s diplo¬ 
matic mission was that the Mahdrdnd sent his eldest son, aged about 
six years, to wait on Shah Jahlan. Shah Jahan gave the young prince 
the usual presents and named him Saubhagya Singh, but took away 
from Mewar certain districts and attached these to Ajmer. 89 


345 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Raj Singh could not forget this disgrace which at that time he 
was unable to wipe off. But his opportunity came a few years later 
when Shah Jahan fell ill (6 September, 1657) and his sons rebelled. 
On the Dussera day (18 October, 1657) the Mahdrdnd began to pre¬ 
pare his army, and in November, advancing from Udaipur, sacked 
Khairabad, and imposed levies on Mandal, Pur, Banera, Shahpur and 
several other places which were included in the Mughul dominion. 90 

Soon after, the rebel Aurangzlb started a correspondence with 
the Mahdrdnd, and seems to have received his tacit support in ex¬ 
change for a promise to restore to Mewar the four districts which 
Shah Jahan had taken away from him. 91 When Aurangzlb occupied 
Agra after the battle of Samogarh, the Mahdrdnd sent his son Sultan 
Singh, 92 to wait on him. Aurangzlb received the prince very 
graciously and gave him the usual presents, but what is more im¬ 
portant he issued a farmdn bestowing on the Mahdrdnd the districts 
of Badnaur, Mandalgarh, Dungarpur, Banswara, Basabar and Gyaspur. 
The Mahdrdnds rank was also raised to 6000 of which 1000 personal 
was also do aspa and se aspa , 93 Soon Dara pathetically appealed 
in vain to the Mahdrdnd for help. 94 

But an incident happened (1660) within a few years of the 
accession of Aurangzlb which changed the relation between the two. 
Princess Charumatl of Kishangarh, also known as Rupamatl, was be¬ 
trothed by her brother to Aurangzlb. She, however, hated the idea 
of marrying a Muslim and wrote to Raj Singh to rescue her. Ac¬ 
cordingly Raj Singh came with his army, and forced her brother to 
marry her to him. Aurangzlb’s reaction to this was to detach 
Gyaspur and Basabar from Mewar and assign them to Raval Hari 
Singh of Deolia. The Mahdrdnd appealed against this decision, but 
it had no effect. 95 It is apparent that Raj Singh accepted the deci¬ 
sion of Aurangzlb, and this incident did not lead to any conflict as 
is sometimes supposed, but this took place in consequence of 
Aurangzib’s attitude towards Marwar. 

II. MARWAR 

After the death of Maharaja Jasvant Singh in December, 1678, 
Aurangzlb appointed Muslim officers to administer Marwar and on 
9 January, 1679, himself set out for Ajmer to supervise the annexa¬ 
tion of the Rathor State. High officials were sent to capture the 
treasures of the late Maharaja and destroy the temples. No resist¬ 
ance was offered to these acts of vandalism, possibly because the 
Rathor officers who were capable of defending their country were 
serving with their king in Jamrud and were at this time escorting 


346 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


two of Jasvant’s widows, who were enceinte at the time of his 
death. The two queens gave birth to two posthumous sons at 
Lahore, and the news reached Aurangzlb on 26 February, 1679. The 
Rathor ministers pleaded in vain for the recognition of the succes¬ 
sion of Jasvant’s new born son Ajit, to his father’s dominion, the 
other son having died a few days after birth. Aurangzlb paid no 
heed to these appeals, but having completed the arrangements for 
the occupation of Marwar returned from Ajmer to Delhi on 12 
April, 1679, and on that day reimposed the jizya on the Hindus after 
a century of abeyance. 96 On 26 May, in return for a succession fee 
of 36 lakhs of rupees Indra Singh, a grand-nephew of Jasvant, was 
invested as the Raja of Jodhpur, but the Mughul administrators and 
generals were retained there. 

In the meantime, the faithful Rathors brought their infant king 
and his mother to Delhi (June, 1679) and represented his cause 
to Aurangzlb. Aurangzlb ordered the infant Ajit to be brought up 
in his harem with a promise that he would be admitted to the Mughul 
peerage when he came of age, and, according to one contemporary 
historian, offered the throne to Ajit on condition that he became a 
Muslim. 97 

The Rathors, who claimed to be the descendants of the great 
Rashtrakutas, were seized with consternation, but it was in this 
hour of peril that they proved their noble descent. Fortunately 
they were guided by a brave hero of sturdy spirit, namely Durga 
Das, son of Jasvant’s minister Askaran. With the chivalry and 
courage of his ancestors he added a genius for organisation and 
statecraft worthy of a Mughul minister. He saw through Aurang- 
zlb’s wretched diplomatic promise, and begged for delay promising 
to present Ajit to the court when he came of age. Soon Aurangzlb 
lost patience and on 15 July sent the Provost of Delhi and the 
Captain of the imperial guards to seize the queens and Ajit and 
lodge them in the prison of Nurgarh. 

But the astute Durga Das was ready. The Mughul comman¬ 
ders, who had the wisdom not to provoke the impetuous Rajputs, 
first tried to persuade them to deliver their queens and Ajit peace¬ 
fully. This having been answered with a sharp volley of musket 
fire, the Mughuls also opened fire in self .defence. Then Durga Das’s 
plan—hatched in secret and almost incredible in character—was 
put into operation and took the Muslims by surprise. 

Suddenly a gate of the mansion opened and Raghunath Bhatti, 
with one hundred troopers, rushed out in a wild “death-defying” 
charge, before which the Muslims quailed. Seizing the oppor- 


347 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


tunity, Durga Das with the rest of his followers and the queens in 
male attire, slipped out of the mansion and took the road to Jodhpur. 
For an hour and a half, Raghunath dyed the streets of Delhi with 
blood, but at last he fell with all his comrades. Then the Mughuls 
set out in pursuit but in the meantime the fugitives had covered 
nine miles, when the Mughuls overtook them. Then Ranchhor Das 
Jodha turned round to check the pursuers with a small band of 
troopers. And they too resisted the Muslims to the last man. The 
Mughuls then took up the pursuit again and this time, while the 
rest continued their journey towards Jodhpur, Durga Das turned 
round with fifty troopers and fought till all but seven of them died. 
It was almost evening and at last the tired Mughuls gave up the pur¬ 
suit and wearily made their way back to Delhi, while Durga Das 
and his comrades safely carried the royal party to their destination. 98 

But, as has been related above, Jodhpur was under the effec¬ 
tive control of the Mughuls, so Durga Das turned to the only power 
—Mewar—which could come to their aid. 

Mewar and the Mughuls 

During this period, Raj Singh, who was busy in developing his 
country, tried to maintain cordial relations with Aurangzib. While 
Aurangzib was grabbing Jodhpur, the Maharana did not protest. 
On his way back from Ajmer, Aurangzib sent a jarman on 23 March, 
1679, asking Raj Singh to send his son to the court. 99 Accordingly, 
prince Jay Singh was sent to Delhi where he was received by 
Aurangzib in the usual manner (11 April, 1679). In the meantime, 
however, Aurangzib had imposed the jizya and soon after demand¬ 
ed the Mahdrdnd to impose it in Mewar. 100 

The only path of duty open to a Rajput was, however, shown 
by Aurangzib himself. He had given a foretaste of his religious 
bigotry and fanaticism by breaking some of the most famous temples 
of Rajasthan and then carrying the images to Delhi where they 
were placed before the mosques as steps so that they might be trod¬ 
den by the faithful. 101 Mewar had not yet been invaded by the 
Muslims, but the annexation of Marwar would enable the Muslims 
to outflank the country and enable them to enter Mewar through 
the Aravalll passes. Indeed, the Maharana seems to have envisaged 
some danger and closed the Deobari pass with huge walls and por¬ 
tals as early as 1674. 102 

Last Muslim Invasion oj Rajasthan 

The Rathors on arrival at Jodhpur began their struggle to throw 
out the Muslim invaders, which lasted till the death of Aurangzib 


348 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


(1707), with varying success on either side. It is not possible to 
give here the details of this heroic struggle, and only the main 
points may be noted. 

With the arrival of Durga Das, Marwar burst into flames. 
Aurangzib realized that his hope of ruling Marwar with the supine 
Indra Singh as the nominal king under a Mughul faujdar was no 
longer possible. So he dethroned Indra Singh, recalled the faujdar, 
Tahir Khan, in disgrace, and set up a milkman’s son as the real Ajit 
in Delhi. 

After completing his political preparations, Aurangzib sent 
Sarbuland Khan with a large army (17 August, 1679) and himself 
followed a fortnight later to exercise the overall command from 
Ajmer. Unfortunately, the Muslims were not the only enemy of 
the Rathors. Fissiparous tendencies developed inside Marwar, and 
the Gurjara-Pratiharas, the ancient enemy of the Rashtrakutas, took 
this opportunity to recover their ancestral stronghold of Mandor. 
It was later recaptured by the Rathors. 

But the Mughul invasion backed by resources of the vast em¬ 
pire could not be checked. The great battle of this war took place 
near the Lake Pushkar, where the Mairta Rathors tried to bar the 
advance of Mughul troops and save the Varaha temple. After three 
days of continuous fighting, mounds of dead bodies remained to 
proclaim the valour of the Hindu heroes who had died to the last 
man to save the temple (19 August). Thereafter, no more pitched 
battle was fought. Guerilla warfare began. 

Soon the pretence of ruling Marwar in the name of the im¬ 
postor was given up and the State was divided into regular admi¬ 
nistrative units, each under a Mughul faujdar , and prince Akbar 
was ordered to put down the resistance. This he attempted to do 
by advancing from Ajmer towards Mairta, which route even today 
is marked by the cenotaphs of Rathor soldiers, a mute reminder that 
they were not overawed by the overwhelming odds against them. 
“As the cloud pours water upon the earth, so did Aurangzib pour 
his barbarians over the land. . . .Jodhpur fell and was pillaged; and 
all the great towns in the plains of Mairta, Didwana and Rohit, 
shared a similar fate. The emblems of religion were trampled 
under foot, the temples thrown down and mosques erected on their 
sites.” 103 

Aurangzib then turned to Mewar which indeed had become the 
Rathor base of operations. He wrote three letters to the Mahdrdna 
reminding him of their past good relations, upbraiding him for shel- 


349 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


tering Ajit and threatening him with dire consequences if he con¬ 
tinued to support the Jodhpur prince. The Mahdrdnd sent polite but 
firm replies that the terror of Muslim invasion would not force him 
to swerve from his path of duty. 104 

Aurangzib realized that to crush the determined Sisodia-Rathor 
opposition, quick and decisive action was necessary. So he called 
his son Mu‘azzam from the Deccan, and Muhammad A‘zam from 
Bengal, his other son Akbar being already with him. Tahavvur 
Khan, the governor of Ajmer, Hasan ‘All Khan, the governor of 
Ratanpur, and Muhammad Amir Khan, the governor of Ahmedabad, 
were given subsidiary commands to open the mountain passes and 
maintain the lines of communications. 

The Mahardnd on his part took up his position on the crest of 
the Aravallls ready to pounce on the Mughuls whenever he thought 
fit. The rough circle formed by the massed hills of Mewar, stretch¬ 
ing from Udaipur westwards to Kumbhalmer, and from the Rajsamu- 
dra lake southwards to Salumbra, formed a vast natural fort with 
three gates, opening east, north and west through which the defen¬ 
ders could sally out and fall upon any isolated enemy outpost or 
detachment. In short, the Mughul army was stretched along a long 
arc of which the Mahardnd occupied the short base. To reach him 
it was necessary to break through the three passes of Udaipur, Raj- 
samudra and Deobari. The Mughul armies of Mewar and Marwar 
were divided by the Aravallls, and as the passes were controlled by 
the Sisodias the Mughuls had to make a long and toilsome detour in 
transferring troops from Chitor to Marwar. Thus, while Aurangzib 
attempted to crush the enemy under the weight of his superior num¬ 
ber and artillery, the Mahdrdnd took the fullest advantage of the 
terrain and adopted a strategy which enabled a small number of de¬ 
termined men to hold out against heavy odds. As we shall see later, 
the Mughul soldiers, always ready to fight in the open, would refuse 
to enter the defiles and narrow passes of the Aravalll. The Mahdrdnd 
also evacuated all the big cities and as much of the plains as possible. 

Aurangzib struck the first blow. He left Ajmer on 30 November, 
1679, and met with little effective opposition. The deserted pass of 
Deobari was occupied on 4 January, 1680, and soon after he entered 
the empty city of Udaipur. He systematically destroyed the country¬ 
side and broke the temples. 

♦ 

A detachment under Hasan ‘All Khan was sent into the hills to 
trace the Mahdrdnd. For some time this detachment was lost, but 
ultimately traced and reinforced. They succeeded in inflicting 
a defeat on the Mahdrdnd , and capturing his camp and property. In 


350 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


the meantime, Chitor was occupied, and Aurangzib visited it at the 
end of February, destroying sixty-three temples there. His task 
thus finished, Aurangzib returned to Ajmer on 22 March, leaving 
Akbar in charge at Chitor, satisfied, like the Mughul commanders 
before him, that with the capture of the cities, and establishment of 
some isolated Mughul garrisons, the enemy resistance would come 
to an end. It just began. 

With the departure of Aurangzib, the Mahdrdnd launched his 
attack. The isolated Mughul outposts, always a source of weakness, 
were so harassed that the Mughul officers refused to command them. 
The Mughul supply trains and escorts also were attacked so success¬ 
fully that soon the Mughul soldiers refused to enter any pass. Heavier 
attacks were also launched, including a serious reverse suffered by 
Akbar at Chitor. At the same time raids were carried into the 
neighbouring Mughul provinces of Malwa and Gujarat. The invad¬ 
ing army of Gujarat under prince Bhlm Singh liberated Idar,; and 
plundered Vadnagar, Vishalnagar and some other rich cities of 
Gujarat including Ahmadabad, collecting much booty. In revenge 
for breaking the temples, Bhlm Singh destroyed one big and thirty 
small mosques. 105 

Aurangzib recognized that his plan of defeating the enemy by 
holding on to strategic points and devastating his country had failed. 
He was particularly disappointed by the reverses which Akbar suffer¬ 
ed at Chitor, so the latter was transferred to Marwar and a new plan 
adopted. Prince A‘zam, who had replaced Akbar at Chitor was 
ordered to advance by way of the Deobarl pass and Udaipur—Prince 
Mu‘azzam from the north by way of Rajsamudra, and Akbar from 
the west through the Deobarl pass. It was expected that the con¬ 
certed action would drive the Mahdrdnd out of his mountain strong¬ 
hold and eventually lead to his capture. However A‘zam and 
Mu‘azzam failed to achieve their objective (July, 1680). 

Akbar, goaded by Aurangzib, made progress slowly and at a 
heavy loss. Now the Mahdrdnd and Durga Das adopted new tactics. 
Akbar’s second in command, Tahavvur Khan, had been ordered by 
Aurangzib to win over as many Sisodia and Rathor nobles as possi¬ 
ble. Thus he came into contact with them and formed with them • 
a plot to declare Akbar the emperor of India, and soon the Prince 
was won over. Aurangzib also seems to have opened peace pro¬ 
posals, 106 but while these negotiations were proceeding Mahdrdnd 
Raj Singh died on 1 November, 1680, 107 and was succeeded by his 
son Jay Singh. 


351 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Jay Singh ( 1680-1698 ) 

The death of Raj Singh temporarily stopped the negotiations, 
but soon after it was taken up. On 11 January, 1681, Akbar joined 
the Sisodias and the Rathors, and issued a manifesto deposing his 
father and crowning himself emperor. The next day he started for 
Ajmer to wrest the Mughul crown from Aurangzib. 

If this foolish and indolent prince had not delayed on his way 
to Ajmer in merry-making, the history of India might have been 
different. For, when the news of Akbar’s rebellion reached Aurang¬ 
zib at Ajmer, he had only a few soldiers with him. But every day’s 
delay afforded him time to bring in reinforcements. 

It took Akbar a fortnight to cover 120 miles that separated him 
from his father. Even so, before he could take any decisive action 
his hopes were foiled by an astute trick. Tahavvur Khan’s father- 
in-law wrote him a letter that if he came over to Aurangzib he would 
be pardoned, otherwise his women would be publicly outraged and 
his sons sold for the price of dogs. This unnerved Akbar’s chief 
commander and he secretly left the camp and reached the Mughul 
camp where he was soon murdered. In the meantime, a letter 
addressed to Akbar by Aurangzib was made to fall in Durga Das’s 
hands in which Aurangzib thanked the prince for bringing the Raj¬ 
puts to their doom and gave him further instructions for the next 
day’s battle so that the destruction of the Rajputs might be complete. 
Durga Das went to find out the truth from Akbar but learnt that 
he was asleep. He next sent men to call Tahavvur Khan, but dis¬ 
covered that he had left for the imperial camp. This confirmed 
their suspicion and the Rajputs in a body rode off. 

Durga Das, under the circumstances, was quite justified in leav¬ 
ing Akbar to his fate. But the next morning when the prince woke 
up he found himself left with a few hundred followers. He there¬ 
fore turned round and followed Durga Das, with whom he was able 
to establish contact after about a day. Durga Das also had by that 
time realized the trick that had been played on them and was re¬ 
turning to protect Akbar, for Durga Das’s honour demanded that 
Akbar should be saved at all costs. Akbar first went to Mewar, but 
the MaharcLnd refused to grant him asylum, 108 so Durga Das most 
chivalrously agreed to escort him to the only court in India which 
could afford him protection—that is Shambhuji’s. After many hair¬ 
breadth escapes from the Mughuls, Durga Das conducted Akbar to 
Maharashtra, and there this gallant man stayed till 1687 to help the 
cause of the Mughul prince. 


352 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


Though Akbar’s adventure had failed, in a sense it helped the 
Rajputs. Aurangzlb’s attention was diverted towards the south, and 
he was forced to come to terms with Mewar. 


Mewar ends the war 

While Akbar was proceeding against Aurangzib, a contingent of 
the Mewar army under Dayal Das advanced to attack prince A‘zam’s 
army. Dayal Das was defeated and forced to flee after killing his 
wife, lest she should be captured by the Mughuls. 109 

This action took place in the first week of February, 1681, and 
shortly A‘zam sent the Sisodia prince Shyam Singh, son of prince 
Garib Das and grandson of Mahdrdnd Kama, to open negotiations 
with Mewar. 110 He advised the Mahamnd to conclude peace as Aurang¬ 
zib was most likely to offer favourable terms now in view of Akbar’s 
rebellion and the approaching rainy season. Jay Singh, therefore, 
sent some of his nobles to Ajmer, and by 23 February, the negotia¬ 
tions had so far progressed that Aurangzib sent a conciliatory far - 
man to Jay Singh, accepting his peace offer, and directing him to 
visit Prince A‘zam, thus fulfilling the terms of the treaty entered into 
by Khurram. 111 

According to Shyamaldas, it was at this time, that Akbar was 
cornered by the pursuing Mughul forces and A‘zam wrote a letter 
to Jay Singh asking him to arrest Akbar, and if possible to kill him. 
Therefore Jay Singh decided not to permit Akbar to enter Mewar 
as stated above. 

The terms of the treaty were soon arranged and were as 
follows: 112 

1. The Mahdrdnd would cede to Aurangzib the pargands of 
Mandal, Pur and Bednor in lieu of the jizya demanded from his 
kingdom. 

2. The Mughuls would withdraw from Mewar and the condi¬ 
tion obtaining at the time of invasion was to be restored. 

3. The Mahdrdnd was not to recruit any Rathor or deserter 
from the Mughul army. 

4. Ajit would be recognized as vassal Raj'a and mansahddr when 
he came of age. 

The treaty was concluded between Jay Singh and Prince Mu¬ 
hammad A‘zam on 24 June, 1681, with the usual pomp and ex¬ 
change of presents, and soon after Aurangzfb sent to the Mahdrdnd 
the customary robe of condolence for his father’s death. 

353 

M.E — 23. 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Thus the war in Mewar ended but the war in Mar war continued 
for another three decades which will be described in a subsequent 
section. 

Sir Jadunath Sarkar has stigmatized Jay Singh for his “signal 
incapacity” and the lack of military skill and the organizing genius 
of his great father. But Sir Jadunath also writes that “the Rajput 
war was a drawn game so far as actual fighting was concerned, but 
its material consequences were disastrous to the Maharana’s sub¬ 
jects. They retained their independence among the sterile crags of 
the Aravallis, but their cornfields in the plains below were ravaged 
by the enemy. They could stave off defeat but not starvation. The 
Mughals, on the other hand, might fail to penetrate into the hills of 
Kamalmer; their outposts might be surprised and convoys cut off oc¬ 
casionally but they held the low country and received supplies from 
all parts of the empire.” 113 

It seems that because Mewar had surrendered three districts in 
lieu of jizya, the Mahardnd refused to send the 1000 troopers which 
was Me war’s contribution to the Mughul army. There is a letter in 
the Udaipur archives dated 7 August, 1684, in which Prince Muham¬ 
mad A‘zam informs the Mahardnd that he will get back the districts 
which had been forfeited on account of the jizya if he immediately 
sent 1000 horse to the south. 114 It appears, however, that nothing 
came out of this arrangement, and Pur, Mandal and Bednor were not 
restored to the Mahardnd, 115 possibly because the Mahardnd had not 
sent the contingent. In 1690, the Mahardnd entered into a new 
arrangement under which he agreed to pay one lakh of rupees as 
jizya and receive back Pur and Bednor and his mansab was to be 
increased by one thousand. 116 

With the conclusion of peace, Jay Singh turned his attention to 
the administration of the country and to several irrigation projects, 
of which the most important was lake Jaysamudra, said to be one 
of the largest artificial lakes in the world. 

The last years of his reign were clouded by the rebellion of his 
eldest son Amar Singh, and he had to enlist the help of Durga Das 
and the Rathors to recover his kingdom. The nobles, however, were 
able to effect a rapprochement between the father and the son, but 
the latter had to be granted a considerable independent jdgir (1692). 

Jay Singh died on 9 October, 1698, and was succeeded by his 
son Amar Singh II, whose history really belongs to the period covered 
in the next volume. 


354 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


Marwar and the Mughuls 

In the previous section it has been related that Mewar entered 
into treaty relation with the Mughuls in 1681, but this did not end 
the war in Marwar. For though there was a clause in the above- 
mentioned treaty under which Ajit was to be recognized as the 
vassal chieftain when he came of age, for the present Aurangzib 
persisted in ruling Marwar through his own Muslim officers. The 
people of Marwar refused to accept their rule, resulting in continued 
warfare for practically three decades (1681-1707). 

The history of this warfare can be conveniently divided into 
four periods, namely (i) from 1681 to 1687, during which period 
Durga Das was in the Deccan; (ii) from 1687 to 1696 during which 
period Durga Das and Ajit were fighting against the Mughuls; (iii) 
from 1696 to 1701, a period of truce; (iv) from 1701 to 1707, renewal 
of the struggle and final liberation of Marwar. 

(i) 1681-1687 

Durga Das, as has been stated, felt it to be his duty to escort 
prince Akbar to a place of safety. As Shambhuji was the only king 
who could shelter Akbar, Durga Das and a band of Rathors escorted 
the prince to Maharashtra, eluding his pursuers with great skill. 
Though many Rathors returned to Marwar, Durga Das felt honour- 
bound to guide and help the unlucky prince, and stayed with him 
till the latter, despairing of Maratha help, left for Persia in February, 
1687. Soon after Durga Das returned to Marwar. 

During this period, the Rathor nobles without any central 
authority had been fighting the Mughuls whenever and wherever 
possible. They were joined in 1681 by Mahakam Singh of Mairta 
who left the Mughul service to join the national struggle, and the 
Bhati tribe of Jaisalmer in 1682. The result of this sporadic but 
continuous warfare is graphically described by a bard: ‘‘An hour 
before sunset every gate of Maru was shut. The Muslims held the 
strongholds, but the plains obeyed Ajit. . . .The roads were now im¬ 
passable.” 


(ii) 1687-96 

Durga Das, as stated above, returned to Mlarwar in 1687 and 
was joined by Hada Durjan Sal, the foremost noble of Bund!. To¬ 
gether they slaughtered or drove away most of the Mughul garri¬ 
sons in Marwar and carried their raid into the imperial territory 
menacing even Delhi. However, they declined any engagement with 
the regular army that was sent against them from Delhi, and re- 


355 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


turned to Marwar via Sirhind. Near Mandal, Durjan Sal died in 
action, and Durga Das returned to Marwar, probably after sacking 
Mandal, Pur and Malpura. 

In 1690, Durga Das signally defeated the governor of Ajmer 
and rendered Marwar so unsafe that Shuja‘at Khan, the governor of 
Gujarat (to which province Marwar was now attached), had to take 
personal charge of affairs in Jodhpur. He took reconciliatory mea¬ 
sures, granting land to some Rathor nobles and thus winning them 
over—while strong forces were sent to check the activities of Durga 
Dias. It was, however, impossible to guard adequately the route 
over which trade passed from Gujarat to North India through M3ar- 
war. So Shuja'at Khan first tried to come to an understanding with 
the Rathors by paying them one-fourth of the imperial customs dues 
on all merchandise, and later attempted to divert the trade through 
peaceful Mewjar. 117 

In 1691, the Mughuls gained some respite as Durga Das and his 
Rathors went to help Maharund Jay Singh suppress the rebellion of 
his son, and in 1692 the Mughuls themselves began overtures for 
peace for the return of Prince Akbar’s children (a son and a 
daughter) whom he had left at Marwar. But nothing came out of 
these negotiations as Aurangzlb refused to yield to any of Durga 
Das’s demands. So in 1693 the war began again and Ajit guided by 
Durga Das began to cause disturbance, 118 but Shuja‘at Khan, aided 
by other Mughul officers, forced Ajit and Durga Das to flee back to 
the hills. 

This was the last Mughul victory in Marwar. The situation in 
the Deccan had become desperate and there was no chance of send¬ 
ing fresh troops to the north. Secondly, Aurangzib became extreme¬ 
ly anxious to get back his grand-daughter, Safiyat-un-nisa, and nego 
tiations for this purpose began in 1694. The niggardliness and ob¬ 
stinacy of old Aurangzlb protracted the negotiations till 1696, when 
Durga Das sent her to Aurangzlb unconditionally. When the young 
princess arrived, Aurangzib immediately thought of making arrange¬ 
ments for teaching her Islamic scriptures, but she informed him, 
that that part of her education had been carefully attended to by 
Durga Das, who had secured for this purpose a Muslim woman from 
Ajmer, and that she (the princess) knew the Quran by heart. 

Nothing could please Aurangzib more, who in a rare moment of 
generosity, wanted to grant whatever Durga Das demanded. So it 
was arranged by the intermediary, iswardas Nagar, the historian, 
that Durga Das should get a mansab and a money allowance, to 
which the emperor readily agreed, provided he brought back Akbar’s 
son, Buland Akhtar. 


356 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


The negotiations, however, dragged for another two years as 
Aurangzlb refused to accede to Durga Das’s demand for restoring 
Jodhpur to Ajit. Aurangzlb’s idea was to purchase Durga Das by 
the offer of a rich mansab and money, but the honest Rathor spurned 
all proposals which involved the betrayal of the cause of his 
master’s heir. 

Unfortunately, however, Ajit longed for peace. In 1696, he 
had married the niece of Mahdrdnd Jay Singh and now he became 
eager for a settled home and income. So in 1698, Durga Das agreed 
to surrender Akbar’s son, Buland Akhtar, in consideration of Ajit’s 
receiving the pargands of Jhalor, Sanchor and Siwanla as his jagir 
and a mansab in the imperial army. 

Durga Das, in accordance with the terms of the treaty, escorted 
Buland Akhtar to the court at Islampur on the Bhima. After the 
prince had been presented to his grandfather, Durga Das was called. 
As he was about to enter the audience hall, he was ordered to be 
ushered in unarmed like a prisoner. Without a moment’s hesitation, 
the great soldier unsheathed his sword and the grand Mughul per¬ 
mitted him to enter fully armed. Only, as he approached Aurang¬ 
zlb’s throne a minister tied his wrist with a silk handkerchief, a 
theatrical gesture indicating captivity, and led him to the throne. 
The Emperor “graciously ordered Durga Das’s arms to be untied, 
appointed him a commander of 3,000 horse (nominal rank), pre¬ 
sented him with a jewelled dagger, a gold pendant ( padak ) and a 
string of pearls, and advanced him one lakh of Rupees from the 
imperial treasury.” 119 


(hi) 1696-1701 

This was a period of comparative quiet during which Durga Das 
joined the Mughul service, and in order to keep him out of Mewar, 
Aurangzlb posted him as the faujddr of Patan, that is Anahilapataka, 
the former capital of the Chaulukyas. In October, 1700, Ajit peti¬ 
tioned the Emperor for some cash or jagir, in exchange for which he 
offered to come to the court. But he never came to the court, pro¬ 
bably suspecting treachery though repeatedly summoned to do so. 

As will now appear, Ajit and Durga Das, who also kept himself 
away from the court, had good grounds for their suspicion. After 
the death of Shuja‘at Khan (9 July, 1701), Aurangzlb sent his son 
Muhammad A‘zam as the Governor of Gujarat with instructions to 
send Durga Das to the court, and, if he refused, to kill him. Accord¬ 
ingly, A‘zam summoned Durga Das to Ahmadabad which the latter 


357 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


obeyed and A‘zam made preparations for murdering him on his 
arrival to pay the customary respects. It so happened that the day 
fixed for the interview was a dvddasv, and Durga Das had fasted the 
day before. So he wanted to go to the prince after taking his meals, 
but the latter, impatient of delay, began to send him messengers in 
succession, bidding him to come. This put the wary soldier on the 
alert and without breaking his fast, he set fire to his camp and 
equipage and left for Marwar. 

A force was immediately sent to overtake Durga Das. As this 
body drew near, his grandson begged his permission to fight an action 
to stop the pursuers and receive his first battle scars. Probably the 
gallant boy wanted to emulate his grandfather’s famous rear guard 
action near Delhi. He succeeded in stopping the pursuers at the 
cost of his life. 


(iv) 1701-1707 

On arrival at Marwar, Durga Das joined Ajit and the struggle 
began again. But this time Marwar was exhausted, many Rathor 
nobles took service under the Mahdrdnd of Mewar and some even 
with the Mughuls, and above all, difference broke out between 
Durga Das and Ajit who had no further use for his loyal servant. 
This shows not only Ajit’s stupidity, but the degeneration of the 
Rajasthan princes, who were no match for the Mughuls. Aurangzib 
took the fullest advantage of the situation and when in November, 
1705, Durga Das, unable to maintain himself in barren independence, 
made his submission, Aurangzib promptly restored him his old 
mansab and post in Gujarat. 

However, Durga Das never forgot his life’s cause. Next year 
(1706) the Marathias inflicted a crushing defeat on the Mughuls in 
Gujarat, and Ajit renewed the struggle for independence. Durga 
Das again left the Mughuls and joined Ajit. 

Aurangzib took the usual measure for suppressing the Rathors, 
and while scattered actions were being fought in that unhappy 
country he breathed his last on 3 March, 1707. This happy news 
reached Ajit on 17 March, and he immediately took the road to 
Jodhpur. He expelled the Mughul commandant of the garrison and 
took possession of the city from which the Muslims fled in all direc¬ 
tions in Hindu garb. “The fort of Jodhpur was purified with Ganges 
water and tulsl leaves”. 1120 Ajit Singh sat on his ancestral throne 
and Durga Das’s life-task was crowned with success. 


358 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


III. MAHARASHTRA AFTER SHIVAJI (1680-1707) 

Shambhuji ( 1680-1689) 

The death of Shivaji (1680) was followed by internal dissen¬ 
sions in the newly created Maratha State. He had not named any 
successor and his eldest son, Shambhuji, aged 23 years, was the 
natural choice. But, as mentioned above (pp. 273-4), his licentious 
character, and particularly his defection to the Mughuls, irritated 
his father who virtually kept him a prisoner in the fort of Pan- 
hala. On the other hand, the only alternative to Shambhuji was 
Rajaram, son of queen Soyra Bai, a boy of ten, whose accession 
would mean a long regency of his mother, who did not possess the 
requisite qualification for the task. But as the two highest minis¬ 
ters of Shivaji, namely Moropant Pingle, the Peshwd, (Prime 
Minister) and Annaji Datto, the Surnis, (Finance Minister), both 
supported Soyra Bai, she had not probably much difficulty in con¬ 
vincing most of the generals and ministers, present at the capital, 
that the accession of Shambhuji would mean a great disaster to the 
State. So Rajiaram was proclaimed king and crowned at Raigarh 
on 21 April, 1680. It was, however, soon apparent that the people 
in general and the army outside the capital did not like this change 
in the normal order of succession. Apart from this, there was per¬ 
haps a far more serious—one might say ominous—cause for the split 
in public opinion in regard to the succession. This has been sum¬ 
med up by Sir Jadunath Sarkar in the following words: “The 
council of regency as constituted at Raigarh meant Brahman rule, 
and the commander-in-chief (a Maratha by caste) was not prepared 
to take his orders from a priestly Mayor of the Palace, any more 
than another Sendpati of the Maratha realm, Khande Rao Dhabare, 
was fifty years later.” 121 In any case, ShambhujTs supporters, 
particularly soldiers, daily increased in number and he made him¬ 
self free by killing the Killdhddr of Panhala. He not only made 
himself master of Panhala but consolidated his possession of the 
South Maratha country and South Konkan and openly declared 
himself King. In the meanwhile the two ministers, mentioned 
above, who supported the cause of Rajaram, had advanced towards 
Panhala to check him. They were disheartened to hear of the rapid 
success of Shambhuji and hesitated to attack him. But at the end 
of May, Sendpati Iiambir Rao Mohite, who was near Panhala and 
had joined Shambhuji, arrested the two great ministers, Annaji and 
Moropant and took them as captives to Shambhuji. “There all the 
army chiefs assembled and recognized Shambhuji as their king.” 122 
The Peshwa recanted and Shambhuji took him into favour, while 
Annaji was thrown into prison. Shambhuji then advanced with 


359 



THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


5,000 soldiers, which increased to 20,000 during the march, and 
entered Raigarh without any opposition (18 June, 1680). He treat¬ 
ed Rajaram with kindness and acted for the first few days with 
“combined vigour and thoughtfulness”. 123 He formally ascended 
the throne on 20 July, 1680, and his coronation ceremony was per¬ 
formed with great splendour on 16 January, 1681. 

Shambhuji enjoyed a fairly long respite from the attack of his 
great enemy, the Mughuls, for, as mentioned above, 124 Aurangzib 
had then concentrated “all the military resources of the Mughul 
empire” in Mewar. The Mughul army in the Deccan continued the 
campaign in a somewhat leisurely fashion and Shambhuji showed 
a great deal of activity during the first three or four years of his 
reign. This is all the more remarkable as the new king had to 
face a lot of troubles at home caused by dissensions in his own 
family and the Government at Raigarh. 

As mentioned above, Shambhuji had imprisoned AnnajI Datto, 
one of the chief conspirators who planned to oust him from the throne. 
But he not only released the traitor, but also appointed him Account¬ 
ant-General, a post second only in importance to that of the Peshwa. 
But, far from appreciating the generosity of the king, AnnajI lost 
no time in hatching a conspiracy with Soyra Bai and some other 
leading men to murder Shambhuji by poisoning his food. There is 
also a story to the effect that the conspirators approached the Mughul 
prince Akbar who, as mentioned above, fled from Rajputana and 
was given asylum by the Maratha king. But, so the story runs, 
Akbar not only refused to join, but informed Shambhuji about it. 
Whatever we may think of this story, there is no doubt that there 
was such a nefarious plot but it was detected in time and Shambhuji 
took terrible vengeance upon the conspirators. Eight ringleaders 
were trampled under feet of the elephants and twenty more were 
sentenced to death. Opinions differ regarding the fate of the prime 
mover Soyra Bai. She was “charged with having poisoned her hus¬ 
band (a year and a half earlier), and was put to a painful death, 
through poison (according to the Bombay factory report) or by star¬ 
vation (according to Chitnis)”. 125 All these took place in October, 
1681, and were followed by terrible persecution of the Shirkes, the 
family of Soyra Bai’s father. “Their property was seized, many of 
their members were killed, and the rest fled to Mughal territory, en¬ 
tered the imperial army, and tried to carry on their blood-feud with 
him (Shambhuji) to the end of his days.” 126 

All this was merely a foretaste of what happened almost 
throughout the reign of Shambhuji. This was largely due to the 


360 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


character and personality of the new king. His terrible vengeance 
on the partisans of Rajaram alienated the old officers of the State and 
“his rudeness, caprice and violence of spirit made even the highest 
of his officers feel insecure and unhappy in his service.” The in¬ 
evitable consequence was that conspiracies, desertions of officers and 
rebellion of vassals became almost a permanent feature during his 
whole reign. 

ShambhujI did not trust, far less love, anybody, nor was he 
trusted and loved by any of his officers. There was only one excep¬ 
tion, a learned Brahman from U.P., generally known by his title 
Kavi-Kalash (Pinnacle of Poets), who proved to be a devoted ser¬ 
vant. He had gained the love, esteem and confidence of ShambhujI 
to such an extent that gradually he monopolised all the powers of 
government and was referred to as the “chiefest minister of State”. 
Though opinions differ, we may generally accept the view that the 
king became a roi faineant, blindly following the advice of this up¬ 
start minister and “devoting all his time to wine and women, with 
fitful outbursts of martial vigour.” 127 The evidence of this martial 
vigour was shown by minor clashes with the Mughul troops and also 
by surprise raids into the territory occupied by the Mughuls in the 
Deccan. 

The most notable of these surprise raids was that against Bur- 
hanpur, the capital of Khandesh, at the end of January, 1681. As 
this serves as a typical example of the Maratha raid in future ex¬ 
tending as far as Bengal, more than seventy years later, it may be 
described in some detail. “The surprise was so complete that none 
could conceal or remove a penny worth of property or save his wife 
and children. The smoke of the burning houses first informed the 
governor of the enemy’s presence, but he was powerless to do any¬ 
thing and merely shut himself up in the fort. Lakhs of rupees 
worth of booty was taken in every pur a (ward, seventeen of which, 
besides a rich suburb, were plundered). Many respectable men 
slew their wives and daughters and then fell desperately fighting the 
brigands, rather than see their family honour outraged. . . . For 
three days the Marathas looted the suburbs to their hearts’ content, 
without the least interruption and dug up the floor of every house, 
thus discovering the buried treasure of many generations past. . . . 
They carried off nothing but gold, silver and gems, and left the streets 
littered with the metal and China ware, clothing and spices which 
they had at first seized.” 128 

Similar raids against many other places were attempted, and 
though many of them were unsuccessful, they created terror and 


361 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


panic as may be gathered from the following description of the 
people of Aurangabad on the report of the approach of the Mara- 
thas: “All houses were closed, the men sitting armed and tremb¬ 
ling and the women weeping within doors. The streets and bazars 
were entirely deserted/’ 129 But the timely arrival of the Mughul 
army saved the town. These descriptions are echoed in the Maha - 
rdshtra-PurdV'Ci, a contemporary account of the raids of the Bargis 
(Maratha raiders) in Bengal during the rule of Alivardi Khan 
(1740-56). 

While these raids and minor clashes with the Mughul troops 
were going on, the arrival of the fugitive Mughul prince Akbar 130 
and the protection given to him by Shambhuji (1681) opened a vista 
of romantic military enterprises of both against the Mughul Emperor 
Aurangzlb, including a plan to install Akbar on the Mughul throne 
after removing his father. But though ail these grandiose plans came 
to nothing, Akbar’s presence in Maharashtra had one important effect 
on the history of the Deccan. For it was the immediate cause of 
the arrival of Aurangzlb in the Deccan and his stay there till his 
death, with fatal consequences to the fortunes of Bijapur, Golconda, 
and, to some extent, also of the Marathas. These have been des¬ 
cribed in Chapter X and need not be repeated. The Mughul Em¬ 
peror started with an elaborate plan to conquer Maharashtra but, 
for reasons stated above, he could not achieve any substantial gain 
even after a year of his arrival. 

In the meanwhile, Shambhuji undertook several military ex¬ 
peditions. The first was directed against the Siddis of Janjira. The 
enmity between the Marathas and the Siddis dates back to 1679 
when Shivaji fortified the island of Khanderi and defeated the com¬ 
bined English and Siddi fleet that wanted to capture it. When 
Shambhuji ascended the throne the Maratha fleet consisted of 60 
ships carrying 5,000 soldiers on board, and the number had in¬ 
creased to 135 (120 gallivats and 15 ghurabs) by May, 1682. To¬ 
wards the end of 1681 the Siddi fleet ravaged a large tract of terri¬ 
tory near Chaul and Shambhuji arrived with 20,000 men and a vast 
train of cannon to the coast opposite Janjira. From a hill he bom¬ 
barded that island continuously for 30 days and all the fortifications 
were razed to the ground. But as the Maratha fleet was no match 
for that of the Siddis the Maratha army could not cross the channel, 
800 yds. broad and 30 yds. deep. So Shambhuji intended to fill up 
the channel with stones (according to some authorities with timber 
and bags of cotton). He employed 50,000 men for the purpose, but 
before the work was completed the Mughul invasion of Northern 
Konkan and capture of Kalian about the end of January, 1682, forced 


362 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


him to retire to Raigarh, leaving only 10,000 men to continue the 
siege. As the siege continued without any tangible success, the 
Maratha troops were carried in boats and made an assault on Janjira, 
but they had to retire with heavy loss (July, 1682). On 4 October, 
the Maratha navy of 30 gallivats was defeated by the Siddi squa¬ 
dron of 16 vessels, 8 miles south of Kolaba Point, while another 
Maratha squadron of 80 gallivats lay hiding and did not dare come 
to the assistance of the former. These clearly testify to the hope¬ 
less inferiority of the Marathas to the Siddis as a naval power. 

Shambhuji next launched an attack against the Portuguese on 
the ground that they had helped the Mughuls against the Marathas 
in various ways, which was undoubtedly a fact. Shortly after the 
Mughuls retired from North Konkan, Shambhuji advanced with 
1,000 horse and 2,000 foot and burnt Tarapur and all other towns 
from Daman to Bassein. But he failed in his attempts to take Chaul 
and other forts of the Portuguese, though he gained some success 
in the Portuguese territory on the coast to the north of Bombay. 
The Viceroy of Goa laid siege to the fortified town of Phonda, a 
Maratha possession, 10 miles south-south-east of Goa in October. 
But though considerable damage was done to the fort, the Portu¬ 
guese failed to take it and had to retreat with heavy loss. Over¬ 
joyed at this success Shambhuji next planned to seize the city of 
Goa and advanced with 7,000 cavalry and 15,000 infantry. He cap¬ 
tured the island of Santo Estevao, two miles north-east of Goa (14 
November), inflicting heavy losses on the relieving force under the 
command of the Viceroy in person. The Marathia force also cap¬ 
tured Salsette, immediately to the south of Goa and the Peninsula of 
Bardes, north of Goa. But they were trapped into the small island 
of Kumbarju, immediately to the east of Goa, for as soon as the tide 
set in, the Portuguese flotilla occupied the two wide streams en¬ 
closing the island, and on the remaining side there was a heavy 
bombardment from the fort of Goa. Only “few of the 7,000 Mara¬ 
tha troops escaped alive.” 131 On 5 January, 1684, the Mughul forces 
under Prince Shah ‘Alam which came to the assistance of the Por¬ 
tuguese occupied Bicholim, an important town of Shambhuji, and 
three days later a very powerful Mughul fleet reached the harbour 
of Goa. The disaster at Kumbarju and the news of the approach of 
Shah ‘Alam induced Shambhuji to retire to Raigarh, leaving the 
Mughul prince Akbar who had accompanied him and the minister 
Kavi-Kalash to negotiate a peace with the Portuguese. A peace was 
concluded on 20 January, 1684, on condition of the mutual restitu¬ 
tion of all conquests, and the Portuguese agreeing not to allow 
Mughul ships to pass within gunshot of their forts. But this treaty, 


363 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


forced on Shambhuji by his fear, was not ratified by him and hostili¬ 
ties continued till a peace, or rather truce, was patched up in 
October. “But languid hostilities with the Portuguese continued till 
the end of Shambhujfs reign.” 132 

Reference has been made above to the grandiose schemes plan¬ 
ned by Shambhuji and the Mughul prince Akbar. But instead of 
making preparations for a grand expedition against the Mughul Em¬ 
peror, Shambhuji had merely frittered his energy and resources by 
fights with the Siddis and the Portuguese. Between September, 
1682, and the end of 1685, Shambhuji and Akbar discussed plans of 
invading Northern India through Surat with Akbar at the head of 
the expedition, but nothing came out of all these. The fact is that 
while the object of Akbar was to gain the throne of Delhi, Sham¬ 
bhuji, perhaps rightly, did not like the idea of invading North India 
in the company of Akbar while Aurangzlb was still in the Deccan 
with a mighty force. For there was the great risk that the Mughul 
emperor would conquer Maharashtra during his absence. In any 
case, Akbar gradually realized that Shambhuji did not sincerely 
desire to help him; so he decided to leave Maharashtra and actual¬ 
ly embarked for the purpose, but both Durga Das and Kavi-Kalash 
assured him that Shambhuji would keep his word and help him to 
defeat the army of the emperor (November, 1683). So Akbar gave 
up the idea of leaving Maharashtra, and there are reasons to believe 
that some serious efforts were made to help him. There was a 
rumour in September and November, 1684, that Akbar and Sham¬ 
bhuji would attack Surat. But nothing happened. In October, 
1685, a body of rebels, about 4,000 in number, seized Broach and 
proclaimed Akbar emperor; but the move ultimately failed. In 
June, 1686, taking advantage of the absence of Aurangzlb and major 
part of his forces in Bijapur, Akbar made an attempt to seize Ahmad- 
nagar and then march to Northern India to join the Rajputs; but it 
failed. There were rumours about other attempts of that kind, but 
nothing came out of these. At long last, the disillusioned Mughul 
Prince Akbar left for Persia in February, 1687. 

In the meantime, the Mughul forces made great headway, and, 
as has already been mentioned, even two wives and one daughter 
of Shambhuji were captured by the Mughuls. According to the re¬ 
ports of the Dutch fathers, supported by Manucci, Shambhuji!, after 
his return from the Goa expedition, gave himself to pleasure and 
instead of guiding the military campaigns spent his time in wine 
and women. Manucci further states that “ShambhujI’s victories 
were not the fruit of his own labour, but were due to his officers.” 133 
When Aurangzlb was fully occupied in his campaign against Bijapur 


364 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


and Golconda, ShambhujI neither helped them in the larger in¬ 
terests of the Deccan as a whole, nor utilized the opportunity to im¬ 
prove his own position by any well-conceived plan. The Maratha 
forces were, as usual, engaged in making plundering raids in various 
directions, but these did him no good. The fact is that all the old 
and experienced officers had been removed from the court for one 
reason or another, 134 and he had no competent agent to manage the 
distant parts of his dominions. Kavi-Kalash was the only capable 
minister, but being a northerner he was not liked by the Marathas. 
The situation was rendered worse by conspiracies, one after another, 
followed by the execution or imprisonment of important Maratha 
generals and ministers. 135 Even Madras Karnatak passed out of the 
control of ShambhujI, for his brother-in-law ruled practically as an 
independent ruler with the title of Maharaja. The English factory 
records refer to the economic ruin of Maharashtra, the corruption of 
officers and the chaos and confusion caused by constant rebellions. 
The records ascribe the ruin of trade and industry to the misrule of 
ShambhujI and his absorption in pleasure. 136 After the conspiracies 
in 1680, 1681, and 1684, the Shirke family whose defection has been 
noted above (p. 360) rose against ShambhujI in October, 1688, and 
attacked Kavi-Kalash. ShambhujI defeated the rebels and arrested 
many leading people, including ministers, on mere suspicion of com¬ 
plicity. 137 On his way back to Raigarh he halted at Sangameshwar. 
How he was captured there (1 February, 1689) and put to death 
after prolonged torture on 11 March has been described above 
(pp. 288-9). It was a great tragedy, but just on the eve of his execu¬ 
tion he gave evidence of manliness which he did not show in life. 
The cruel murder of ShambhujI by Aurangzlb undoubtedly evokes 
our pity, but ShambhujTs life and reign hardly deserve our sympathy. 


Rajardm ( 1689-1700) 

At the time of Shambhujl’s death, his son Shahu v being a minor, 
Rajaram, the younger son of ShivlajI, who was kept in prison by 
ShambhujI, was proclaimed king by the ministers and crowned at 
Raigarh without any opposition on 8 (or 9) February, 1689. 138 The 
military campaigns during his reign, both Mughul and Maratha, 
have been briefly described above (pp. 293 ff.) and need not be nar¬ 
rated in detail, but a few general features of the Maratha tactics 
may be stressed. 

When Raigarh was besieged by the Mughul army on 25 March, 
1689, Yesu Bai, the widowed queen of ShambhujI, infused courage 
and enthusiasm among the disheartened people by brave words and 


365 


THE MUGIIUL EMPIRE 


suggested a new tactics which was followed till the end. This may 
be summed up as follows: 

1. That the members of the royal family, including the king, 
and important leaders should not all be concentrated in one place, 
even at the strongly fortified capital, Raigarh, but should scatter 
themselves in different quarters of the kingdom, so that the fall of 
one fort would not jeopardise the fate of the whole Government and 
people. 

2. Able military generals, including those who were unjustly 
kept in prison and set at liberty in the new regime, should be in¬ 
spired by a sense of duty to their motherland and a spirit of supreme 
self-sacrifice, and carry on unceasing guerilla warfare or surprise 
raids on different Mughul posts, and harass the Mughul forces in 
every way. 139 

In accordance with this policy, Rajaram himself left Raigarh 
with his family and, moving from one place to another such as Pratap- 
garh and Panhala, ultimately reached Gingee. “Some of the other 
leaders, Ramchandra Pant Amatya, Pralhad Niraji and Shankaraji 
Malhar Sachiv, also left Raigarh and in mutual consultation from 
different places commenced an unprecedented campaign of fire, 
plunder and brigandage into the Mughul territory, using a network 
of spies to obtain information of the enemy’s movements.” 140 Two 
young chieftains, Santaji Ghorpade and Dhanaji Jadhav, particularly 
distinguished themselves and almost created havoc in the Mughul 
camps. On one occasion they even stealthily approached the im¬ 
perial tent and cut down the supporting ropes so that the whole tent 
came down and crushed the inmates. Aurangzib himself was saved 
by the lucky chance that he spent that night in his daughter’s camp. 
Sir Jadunath Sarkar has paid glowing, but well-deserved, tributes 
to these two heroes in the following words: 

“In the long history of his struggle with the Marathas after the 
sun of Maratha royalty had set in, the red cloud of Shambhuji’s 
blood and the people’s war had begun. Santaji Ghorpade and Dhanaji 
Jadhav were the two stars of dazzling brilliancy which filled the 
Deccan firmament for nearly a decade, and paralyzed the alien in¬ 
vader.” 141 Words like these from one who is not easily carried by 
emotion are very high praises indeed. 

Rajaram’s flight to Gingee gives one more evidence of the great 
political foresight of Shivaji. By a wonderful prescience he had 
felt the necessity of establishing a long line of fortified possessions 
from Maharashtra to distant Tanj ore, via Bangalore, Vellore and 


366 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


Gingee, so as to form a new line of defence which he might utilize 
to his advantage if occasion or necessity arose. In the dire neces¬ 
sity caused by all-round Mughul efforts to crush the Marathas by 
simultaneous invasions from different sides, it proved to be a god¬ 
send and when Rajaram found it impossible to hold Panhala against 
the Mughul attack, he fled to Gingee “after undergoing many perils 
and hair-breadth escapes from the Mughal pursuers on the way.” 142 
After the romantic adventure of more than a month and a half’s 
journey he at last settled in Gingee, far away from Maharashtra, 
in November, 1689, and was joined by his ministers and other 
officials. Henceforth, Gingee became the seat of the royal court 
and centre of Maratha activity against the Mughuls. According to 
contemporary account, “the Chiefs of the Karnatak lands hailed 
Rajaram as an uncommon hero and made his cause their own. They 
brought him presents of money, provisions and materials and having 
been actuated with a spirit of vengeance against Muslims, offer¬ 
ed every kind of service to the Maratha king.” 143 The neighbouring 
city of Tanjore was the capital of a Maratha State ruled by a cousin 
of Rajaram. In Gingee the king administered the affairs of State 
with the help of his Council of eight ministers, a system established 
by Shivaji, to which he added a ninth called the Pratinidhi, a post 
specially created for Pralhad Niraji who had rendered most valu¬ 
able service. As could be expected, Gingee was besieged by the 
Mughuls, but it was captured only after 8 years, on 7 February, 
1698. Rajaram had left the place in preceding December and fixed 
his capital at Satara in October, 1698. 

The Marathas were inspired by high hopes during this long and 
arduous campaign. The Maratha documents clearly state that the 
aim of this war was not only freedom of Maharashtra but “includ¬ 
ed even the conquest of Delhi, so as to make the whole sub-conti¬ 
nent of India safe for the Hindu religion.” 144 This laudable object 
was constantly preached to wean away many Maratha Chiefs who 
had accepted service under the Mughuls. A stirring appeal was 
issued by Rajaram from Gingee on 22 March, 1690, of which an ex¬ 
tract is quoted below: 

“We have enlisted on arrival in the Karnatak forty thousand 
cavalry and a lac and a quarter of infantry. The local Palegars and 
fighting elements are fast rallying to the Maratha standard.... You 
must now put forth the sacrifice required on behalf of our religion. 

. . .Aurangzeb has wronged you by threatening to convert you to 
his religion. He has already converted (names follow ) .... He 
also entertains further deep-rooted motives of a sinister nature 
against our nation, of which you must beware. The Nimbalkars 


367 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


and the Mianes have already deserted him and his ranks are being 
rapidly thinned. God is helping us. We are sure to succeed .” 145 
Many documents of this nature reflect the spirit of the people and 
there cannot be any doubt that during the last one or two decades 
of the seventeenth century Aurangzib was faced with what may be 
truly described as a national war. “Animated by a desire to avenge 
their wrongs, the Maratha bands spread over the vast territories 
from Khandesh to the south coast, over Gujarat, Baglan, Gondvan, 
and the Karnatak, devastating Mughal stations, destroying their 
armies, exacting tribute, plundering Mughal treasures, animals 
and stocks of camp equipage .” 146 Aurangzib began to realize that 
while he could easily win a battle over the Marathas, it was very 
difficult for him, even with his vast resources, to cope with their 
guerilla tactics, particularly as they were very familiar with the lay¬ 
out and communications of the country, had the active and enthu¬ 
siastic support of the people wherever they went and were inured 
to hardships, bad weather and simple food. 

Moreover, Aurangzib’s shrewd attempts to win over the Mara¬ 
thas by temptations of all kinds, though at first successful to a cer¬ 
tain extent, gradually failed, as stern measures were taken to punish 
the wives, children and even other relations of the deserters, and 
the traitors to the cause of the Marathas, if caught, were terribly 
persecuted. The justice or morality of the steps taken may be 
questioned, but they proved successful to a very large extent. 

The guerilla warfare, which was the main cause of Aurangzib’s 
discomfiture in the long run, in spite of brilliant victories against 
Maratha troops in battle, became the typical method of Maratha 
aggressive warfare for more than a century and a half and led them 
to success after success all over India till their dream of establish¬ 
ing a Hindu Pad PddshaM was almost on the point of being realized. 
Though the beginnings of this type of warfare may be traced back 
to the days of Shivaji, it was fully developed in the last stages of 
the Mughul campaign in Maharashtra, particularly during the reign 
of Rajaram. It has been described as follows by Chitnis in his 
Rajaram’s Life in the following words: 

“The Mughal forces are huge in numbers, standing firm only 
in open ground. The Marathas on the other hand suddenly erupt 
at one place today and tomorrow elsewhere some fifty miles away. 
Then they come round again and execute unexpected raids, making 
only a show of a fight, plunder and fly away. They fall upon for¬ 
aging parties, attack weakly held Mughal posts, capture strategic 
points and thus inspire confidence among their followers. They 


368 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


devastate Mughal territory from the river Godavari to Bhaganagar 
(Hyderabad), carrying away pack animals, horses and elephants, 
create confusion among the enemy, and remain concealed in un¬ 
frequented thickets widely apart and make a sudden dash upon the 
Mughal armies proceeding towards Jinji (Gingee), occasionally en¬ 
gaging in an open encounter and anyhow preventing them from 
reaching their destination. The Emperor (Aurangzlb) found him¬ 
self nonplussed how to overcome these pests. They seemed to be 
ubiquitous and illusive like the wind. When the attacking Mughal 
forces had gone back, the scattered Marathas, like water parted by 
the oar, closed again and resumed their attack as before.” 147 Things 
came to such a pass that sometimes the Mughul commanders would 
rather bribe the Marathas than fight them. 

Santaji Ghorpade, the Sendpati, mentioned above, was reputed 
to be a “perfect master of guerilla warfare” and the fame of his 
wonderful achievements reverberated throughout Maharashtra. 
But, unfortunately, his biting tongue and boastful demeanour not 
only irritated his colleagues but even his superiors including Raja- 
ram. The climax was reached when in the course of an altercation 
with his King, Rajaram, he bluntly told him: “Your position is all 
due to me. I can make and unmake Chhatrapati.” This was too 
much even for the mild king. He dismissed Santaji and appointed 
Dhanaji as Sendpati in his place. This led to a quarrel between 
these two; from words they came to blows; and there was a free 
fight between them in June, 1696, in which Dhanaji was defeated 
and one of his prominent partisans was taken prisoner and trampled 
to death under the feet of an elephant. This unfortunate episode 
need not be pursued further and described in detail. Suffice it to 
say that Rajaram issued orders to capture Santaji, who fled from 
place to place, fought with the royal force, was defeated and ulti¬ 
mately killed under circumstances not exactly known. 148 

But this tragic incident did not affect the guerilla warfare of 
the Marathas against the Mughuls. After the fall of Gingee Raja¬ 
ram came back and, as Raigarh was in the Mughul possession, esta¬ 
blished his seat of Government at Satara (1698). The war against 
the Mughuls was carried on with full vigour by several young 
Maratha leaders who were destined to win name and fame in future. 
In a letter dated 22 December, 1699, Rajaram writes: “We have 
launched the full force of our armies against the Emperor.... led 
a furious attack upon the imperial camp . . . captured the Emperor’s 
own daughter; fell upon a convoy of ten thousand pack animals carry¬ 
ing supplies.... The enemy has lost all courage, and can make no 

369 


M.E.—24 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


effect against fort Satara. We now take no account of this powerful 
emperor whom, God willing, we shall soon put to rout.” 149 

Subsequent events proved that Rajaram’s boast was not without 
justification. But, unfortunately, he was not destined to witness the 
final triumph. He died shortly afterwards on 2 March, 1700, at the 
age of thirty. Rajaram’s reign was an eventful one, paving the way 
for the future greatness of the Marathas. But the credit for this 
must be given not so much to the king as to his wise counsellors and 
brave generals. According to Sardesai, “he possessed no dash or 
initiative, nor did he evince any personal valour.. . . There is not 
a single occasion recorded in his life on which Rajaram showed per¬ 
sonal daring or capacity for government. ... His mind and body 
were both weak, due possibly to dissipation and the use of opium 
to which he is said to have been addicted. His virtue was of a nega¬ 
tive kind, non-interference.” 150 

One significant innovation in military administration made by 
Rajaram was big with future consequences. He introduced the 
system of granting lands to military commanders in lieu of cash 
money which was definitely opposed to the policy initiated by Shivaji 
and hitherto pursued. Its origin may, perhaps, be traced to the 
policy of Aurangzib to make grants of lands to the Maratha leaders 
to induce them to join the Mughuls. As a counterpoise the Maratha 
Government probably felt it necessary to offer similar inducements. 
So they encouraged the Maratha leaders to conquer lands from the 
Mughuls by holding out the promise that the lands so acquired 
would be their hereditary property. Perhaps want of funds to pro¬ 
vide for the expenses of the Maratha generals was an additional 
ground for such promise. For it is known that the leaders of 
Maratha troops borrowed money on the mortgage of their prospec¬ 
tive conquests, and it is very natural that the hope of acquiring 
hereditary property would add zeal and ardour to their military en¬ 
terprises. But whatever may be the origin of the new policy, there 
is hardly any doubt that it led to the great Maratha houses like those 
of Sindhia and Holkar, which led to the rapid extension of the 
Maratha dominions in future, and at the same time it was the main 
cause of the disintegration of the Maratha Empire. 

But all these were in the womb of futurity when Rajaram died 
and, as stated above (p. 296), was succeeded by his son, four years 
old, bearing the proud name of his illustrious grandfather, Shivaji 
(III). It did not mean, at least theoretically, the deliberate exclu¬ 
sion of Shahu, the son of ShambhujI, for he was then in confinement 
in the Mughul camp. Tara Bai, the mother of the infant king, was 


370 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


a very capable administrator and “for a time inspired greater vigour 
and enthusiasm among the whole Maratha nation than her husband 
had done.” 151 All the generals and leaders rallied round her and the 
war against the Mughuls was carried on as before. “Tara Bai exhi¬ 
bited wonderful powers of organization and inspired one and all with 
a sense of devotion to the national service.” 152 She managed the 
State with singular ability, a fact testified to even by Muslim writers. 
She herself guided the military operations moving to different forts 
and directing operations. To her belongs, to a large extent, the 
credit of the triumphant emergence of the Marathas from the great 
fight with the Mughuls which practically terminated with the death 
of Aurangzlb in 1707. 


IV THE JATS 

1. Origin and Early History 

The Jats are a hardy tribe, pre-eminently agricultural, and well 
known for their valour, indefatigable energy, martial spirit and un¬ 
tiring perseverance. They are mostly tall, with fair complexion, 
dark eyes, long head, and “narrow and prominent but not very long” 
nose. 153 “The region mainly occupied by them may be roughly de¬ 
fined as bounded on the north by the lower ranges of the Himalayas, 
on the west by the Indus, on the south by a line drawn from Haidara- 
bad (Sindh) to Ajmir and thence to Bhopal, and on the east by the 
Ganges.” 154 

The tribal feeling is very strong among them and although all of 
them do not belong to the same religious fraternity but prefer dif¬ 
ferent religions, viz, Hinduism, Sikhism and Islam, they cling tena¬ 
ciously to their “tribal name as a proud heritage, and with it the 
tradition of Kinship.” 155 Another important trait of their character is 
strong individualism. “The Jat is, of all the Punjab races, the most 
impatient of the tribal or communal control and the one which 
asserts the freedom of the individual most strongly... .He is inde¬ 
pendent and he is self-willed, but he is reasonable, and peaceably 
inclined if ,left alone.” 156 

The system of caste distinction is not in vogue in the Jat society, 
and so all the Jats are on a footing of equality in so far as their 
social status is concerned. In their rural organisation they prefer 
election of headmen to succession by hereditary right. The origin 
of the Jats, like that of the Rajputs, has been a subject of keen con¬ 
troversy. Some regard them as descendants of the nomadic Scythian 
hordes of Central Asia who invaded India through the north-western 


371 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


passes like the Sakas and the Hunas and settled in India. The close 
resemblance of the name alone is perhaps responsible for the theory 
that their forefathers were the nomadic Getae of the Oxus region. 
On the other hand, similarity of physical features, language and, 
to a certain extent, of religious and social institutions, lends support 
to the theory of Aryan origin of the Jats, and eminent authorities 
like Dr. Trumpp, Beames, Sir Herbert Risley and Dr. Qanungo are in 
favour of it on most or all of these scientific grounds. It is on the 
whole more reasonable to regard the Jats as Aryan settlers in India 
and not foreign invaders of a subsequent age like the Sakas and the 
Hunas. 157 

The Jats claim that they are descendants of the ancient Yadavas. 
The Bharatpur princes, for example, regard themselves as of the same 
race as the Yadavas. 158 But we need not attach much historical value 
to such traditions, unsupported by positive evidence. 

From the scanty information which we derive from different 
sources it does not appear that the Jats played any significant role in 
the history of India prior to the reign of Aurangzlb, although stray 
incidents of their undaunted valour are referred to at different times. 

In the third decade of the eleventh century they were bold 
enough to attack the army of Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni on his re¬ 
turn journey from Somnath. It was to punish them that in the 
autumn of A.D. 1026 he undertook his seventeenth expedition to 
India. Both Nizam-ud-din Ahmad and Firishta say that he marched 
to Multan with a large force, and on his arrival there, he constructed 
a fleet of fourteen hundred boats, each of which was furnished with 
iron spikes, projecting from the prow and sides. There were twenty 
archers in each boat, with bows and arrows, grenades, and naphtha. 
On receipt of information of this armament, the Jats sent their 
families, together with their valuable articles, into the neighbouring 
islands, and, with a flotilla of four thousand boats according to some, 
and eight thousand according to others, met the enemies. A serious 
naval engagement followed in which they (the Jats) were defeated, 
and almost all of them were either drowned or slain, and their women 
and children made captives. 159 

After the fall of Prithvlraj in the second battle of Tarain in 
A.D. 1192, the Jats of Hariyana, under their leader Jatwan, invaded 
Hansi and compelled its Muslim governor to take shelter in the 
fortress. Qutb-ud-dln marched post-haste to his relief, and, on his 
approach the Jat leader raised the siege and met him in an engage¬ 
ment in which, after a bloody contest, Jatwan was defeated and 
killed. 160 


372 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


Later on, references are found about their predatory habits in 
different places and in different times. Their activities seemed to 
have been kept in check to a great extent during the strong admi¬ 
nistration of the Surs and the Mughuls. As in the case of the Sikhs, 161 
so in the case of the Jats, the bigotry of Aurangzib and the conse¬ 
quent disabilities, humiliations and sufferings of the Hindus ex¬ 
cited the Jats and caused great discontent among them. 

The Mughul government had been following a policy “which 
left behind it a legacy of undying hatred. 102 One faujdar of Mathu¬ 
ra, Murshid Quli Khan Turkman (who died in 1638) had offended 
the Jats by abduction of women from the villages and religious 
gatherings at Govardhan on the birth day of &n Krishna/ 63 Abdun 
Nabi Khan, another faujdar of Mathura (August, 1660—May, 1669) 
“built a Jama Masjid in the heart of the city of Mathura (1661- 
1662) on the ruins of a Hindu temple. Later, in 1666, he forcibly 
removed the carved stone railing presented by Dara Shukoh to 
Keshab Rai’s temple.’' 164 * All these at last goaded the Jats to break 
out into open rebellion. 

2. Revolt 

(a) Gokla 

In 1669, the Jat peasants rose under their leader Gokla, the 
Zamindar of Tilpat. Abdun Nabi, who opposed them, was slain 
in the action. The rebels then sacked the pargand of Saidabad, and 
disorder and confusion followed in the neighbouring district of 
Agra also. Aurangzib dispatched a powerful army under Radandaz 
Khan to suppress them, but it was of no avail, and the situation 
became so critical that the emperor himself had to proceed to the 
disturbed area. With undaunted courage, Gokla assembled twenty 
thousand men, met the imperialists at a place twenty miles off from 
Tilpat and fought against them most heroically, but his men were 
no match for the disciplined and well-equipped Mughul army led 
by Hasan ‘All Khan, the faujdar of Mathura. Being defeated in 
the sanguinary battle, Gokla fled to Tilpat which was then besieged 
by the imperialists and it fell after three days. The imperialists 
lost 4,000 men while Gokla lost 5,000. Seven thousand Jats, in¬ 
cluding the leader Gokla and his family, were made prisoners. Gokla 
was eventually slain at Agra, and the members of his family con¬ 
verted to Islam. 165 


(b) Rdjdrdm 

But the spirit which Gokla had infused into his men did not 
die with him, and after several years, other capable leaders step- 


373 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


ped into his place. They were Rajaram, son of Rhajja Singh, Chief 
of Sinsani, and Ram Chehra, Chief of Sogor. 1 ' 66 They gave military 
training to the Jat peasants, equipped them with fire-arms, and 
gave them the semblance of an organized and regular army. They 
also built several small forts (garhi) in the midst of deep forests 
and erected mud walls around them for defence against artillery. 
These forts served as refuges in times of necessity, bases for mili¬ 
tary operations and places for storage of their booty. The road 
from Delhi to Agra and Dholpur, and thence via Malwa to the Dec- 
can lay through the Jat country, and the Jats carried on plundering 
raids on this highway and the suburbs of Agra. The emperor’s 
long stay in the Deccan and consequent military weakness in Nor¬ 
thern India had encouraged them to plunder the ill-guarded rich 
convoys passing through their country. Safi Khan, the governor of 
Agra, was unable to check the lawless activities of Rajaram who 
had closed the roads to traffic, sacked many villages, and proceeded 
towards Sikandra, but Mir Abu-1-Fazl, the faujddr of the place, 
succeeded in driving him back only after a stiff fight, thus saving 
the tomb of Akbar from being plundered. 167 

Rajaram became more daring and attacked Aghar Khan, the 
great Tunani warrior, near Dholpur, while on his way from Kabul 
to Bijapur, and not only carried off a booty consisting of carts, 
horses and women but also slew the Khan with his son-in-law and 
eighty followers, when he was pursuing the raiders (1687). 168 Mir 
Ibrahim, entitled Mahabat Khan, was also attacked, near Sikandra, 
on his way to the Punjab, but the raiders were driven back after 
a hard contest. After this, Rajaram sacked the tomb of Akbar, and 
damaging the building, carried away carpets, lamps, precious stones, 
and gold and silver vessels, etc. (1688). 169 

Highly perturbed at the atrocious deeds of the Jats, Aurangzib 
sent his grandson, Bidar Bakht, to take charge of the military ope¬ 
rations against them. Although the prince was a lad of seventeen 
only, he proved worthy of the charge imposed on him, and tried his 
best to improve the situation. An internecine war was then going 
on between the Shekhawat and Chauhan clans of Rajputs in which 
the Shekhawat clan secured the support of the Mughul faujddr of 
Mewat, and the Chauhan clan that of Rajaram. When a severe bat¬ 
tle was going on between the contending parties, the Jat leader was 
killed by a Mughul musketeer (July, 1688). 170 

Bidar Bakht then besieged the fort of Sinsani but the Jats haras¬ 
sed the Mughuls in every possible manner, by cutting off their food 
and water supplies and making incessant night attacks in their 


374 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 

camps. In spite of these hardships, the Mughuls continued their 
siege operations with great tenacity, and at last captured the fori 
(1690). 171 Bishun Singh Kachhwa, Raja of Ambar (Jaipur), who 
had been appointed faujddr of Mathura with special duty of sup¬ 
pressing the Jats, surprised the fort of Sogor when its gate was 
found open to receive its supply of grain (21 May, 1691 ). m 

Thus fell the two important strongholds of the Jats, and their 
power was humbled for the time being but not crushed permanently. 
They remained quiet for some years till another formidable man 
arose to lead them. 


(c) Churaman 

This was Churaman (1695-1721), the son of Bhajja Singh and 
younger brother of Rajaram. Churaman started his career as a free¬ 
booter, and, within a short time, brought under his leadership one 
thousand infantry and five hundred horsemen. At first, he used to 
plunder wayfarers and merchant caravans, but, later on, when his 
strength increased, he sacked pargands also. He built a place of 
refuge in the midst of a thick forest about forty-eight Kos from Agra 
and dug a deep moat around this refuge which was gradually made 
into a mud fort, subsequently known as Bharatpur. 173 

‘‘Being more enterprising than those who had preceded him, 
he not only increased the number of his soldiers, but also strengthen¬ 
ed them by the addition of fusiliers (musketeers) and a troop of 
cavalry, whom he shortly afterwards set on foot and having robbed 
many of the ministers of the Court on the road, he attacked the 
royal wardrobe and the revenue sent from the provinces.” 174 

He re-occupied Sinsah! from the imperialists but could not re¬ 
tain it long and lost it again in October, 1705. 

He had great capacity for organization and was a practical poli¬ 
tician, who made “clever use of opportunities”, whenever possible. 
Many of his activities and the full development of his power were 
seen after the death of Aurangzib when the disturbed political condi¬ 
tions in the Mughul Empire due to the wars of succession among the 
sons of this emperor, and then among the descendants of Bahadur 
Shah, afforded him suitable opportunities to achieve his objective. 

The history of Churaman after the death of Aurangzib will be 
treated in Vol. VIII. 


375 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


V. THE BUNDELAS 
1. Early History 

The origin of the Bundela clan is extremely obscure. They 
themselves claim to be a branch of the Gaharwar clan and to have 
migrated from the country round Banaras. It is said that one So- 
han Pal came down to the Western part of the region, which later 
came to be called Bundelkhand, and about A.D. 1292 he managed 
to establish a small independent principality there. In the begin¬ 
ning of the sixteenth century A.D., one Rudra Pratap, ninth in de¬ 
scent from Sohan Pal, rose to eminence, and in 1531 founded the 
town of Orchha and made it his capital. All the existing Bundela 
ruling families are the direct descendants of Rudra Pratap. 

The Bundelas as a race possess sturdy physique and indomit¬ 
able courage. The environs of their new surroundings greatly en¬ 
couraged and fostered their restless spirit of adventure and enter¬ 
prise. Bundelkhand was an absolutely wild tract and especially 
difficult of access in the rainy season. Its dense forests, the rapid 
streams and the steep hills shielded them from all outside invaders. 

When Akbar ascended the Mughul throne, Rudra Pratap’s se¬ 
cond son, Madhukar Shah, was ruling at Orchha. Under his leader¬ 
ship the Bundelas gathered strength, extended their territories and 
were forged into a formidable force. All this raised Madhukar 
Shah’s political importance. After repeated Mughul expeditions he 
was forced into submission in 1578, but even later, more than one 
expedition had to be sent to keep him under check. 

2. Blr Singh Bundela 

Madhukar Shah’s reckless adventurous spirit was inherited by 
his second son, Bir Singh, who took up the life of a freebooter 
soon after his father’s death in 1592. Later, when Prince Salim re¬ 
volted against his father and set up his own Court at Allahabad, 
Blr Singh took up service with him. Later, in 1602, at the instiga¬ 
tion of Salim, Bir Singh intercepted Abu-’l-Fazl, then returning to 
Agra from the Deccan, and murdered him near Antri (about 16 
miles south of Gwalior). The Mughul forces relentlessly pursued 
Bir Singh for this outrage during next three years but without any 
success. On Akbar’s death, however, when Salim ascended the 
throne as Jahangir, fortune smiled on Bir Singh, who was duly 
rewarded with 3 -hdzdri mansab. Two years later Bir Singh was 
made the ruler of Orchha State, thus replacing his elder brother, 
Raja Rom Chandra (also known as Ram Shah), who had to rest con¬ 
tented with the small principality of Chanderi. 


376 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


Blr Singh was a great favourite of Jahangir and hence ‘he 
acquired such power as scarcely any other of the Rajas of India 
attained to.’ The Bundela power reached its zenith under him. He 
grew in wealth and power, and in later days when the imperial 
administration grew slack, he extended his own territories and 
brought under his rule vast neighbouring fertile tracts and even 
levied contributions from the neighbouring princes. He was a great 
builder as well. The palace-fortress and temple at Orchha and the 
magnificent palace at Datia were all built by him, and are most note¬ 
worthy as marking a definite stage in the evolution of mixed Hindu- 
Mughul architecture with peculiar elaborations characteristic of 
the local style. Blr Singh was permitted by Jahangir to build a 
temple in Mathura at a cost of 33 lakhs of rupees, which was later 
turned into a mosque by Aurangzlb. Blr Singh was a great patron 
of Hindi poetry; the great Hindi poet, Keshav, was a jewel of his 
Court. 

Blr Singh’s reign, glorious as it was, left behind a legacy of 
bitter family feuds, which more than once threatened the very exist¬ 
ence of the premier Bundela State of Orchha. The descendants 
of the displaced ruler, Rajia Ram Chandra, and the other branches 
of the Orchha family formed an opposition group against Blr Singh 
and his successors, and whenever any opportunity presented itself 
they asserted their own independence and cut themselves off from 
the parent State. Thus, the independent principalities of Chanderi, 
Datia and others ceased to follow the lead of the rulers of Orchha, 
and when occasion demanded they did not even hesitate to assist 
the Mughul forces in invading Orchha State. 

3. Jujhar Singh 

On Blr Singh’s death in 1627, his eldest son, Jujhar Singh, 
succeeded him. He went down to Agra and paid homage to the 
new Emperor Shah Jahan. He was confirmed in his rank and jdgir 
but soon after he left the capital without permission and began to 
prepare for his own independence at Orchha. In 1629 more than 
one imperial force began to close down on Orchha from different 
sides. Irich was attacked and taken. Any further opposition 
seemed useless and Jujhar Singh was forced into submission. He 
agreed to pay a large tribute and to send down a contingent of his 
force on service with the imperial army in the Deccan. 

But Jujhar Singh could not long remain quiet. In 1634, he 
took the old Gond capital, Chauragarh, slew its Raja, Prem Nia- 
rayan, and seized his treasures. Shah Jahan sent three armies to 
invade Bundelkhand from three different sides, wth Prince Aurang¬ 
zib as their nominal supreme commander. Devi Singh Bundela, the 


377 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


great-grandson of Raja Ram Chandra, who was offered the throne 
of Orchha, most readily assisted the imperial armies in this inva¬ 
sion. Thereupon, Jujhar Singh lost heart and removed his family 
from Orchha, which was stormed and taken by the Mughul troops 
in October, 1635. Jujhar Singh fled to Dhamuni and thence across 
the Narmada to Chauragarh. Mughul forces pursued him even 
further through the Gond country of Deogarh and Chanda. Jujhar 
Singh and his son Bikramajit were finally surprised by the Gonds 
when asleep in the jungles and done to death in December, 1635. 

4. Champat Rai Bundeld 

Devi Singh was installed as the ruler of Orchha (October, 
1635), but the nobles of the Bundelas refused to bow to the traitor. 
They now rallied round Champat Rai Bundela of Mahoba, the great- 
grandson of Udayajit, the third son of Rudra Pratiap. Champat Rai 
had ail along been a close associate of Raja BIr Singh Dev and had 
earned the reputation of being a brave fighter and courageous leader 
of men. He had developed his small jtigir into a principality of his 
own and had extended the bounds of its territories into eastern 
Rundeikhand at the expense of the Rajias who were still ruling there. 
He delighted in opposing the Mughul forces and fought both times 
on the side of Jujhar Singh, but he did not follow him in his flight. 
He crowned Jujhar Singh’s infant son, Prithviraj, and raided the 
territories of Orchha. In the meanwhile, as Devi Singh had failed 
to restore peace and order in the Orchha State, it w r as taken out 
of his control and he reverted to his principality of Chanderi. Orchha 
continued to be without any ruler for the next six years. 

All efforts of the various successive Mughul officers to restore 
peace and order in Bundelkhand failed. The boy-ruler, Prithviraj, 
was captured (April, 1640) and lodged in State prison at Gwalior, but 
Champat Rai had escaped and was still at large. At last in May, 
1642, Raja Pahar Singh Bundela, the younger brother of Jujhar 
Singh, who had all along loyally served the Mughul empire, was 
appointed the ruler of Orchha. Within a month Champat Rai sub¬ 
mitted to him and entered into his service with the approval of the 
Emperor. Peace and order was thus restored in Bundelkhand. 

But the good relations thus established between Pahar Singh 
and Champat Rai did not last long. Champat Rai left Pahar Singh, 
took up service with Dara, and accompanied him to the third siege 
of Qandahar. Bitter animosity now prevailed between Pahar Singh 
and Champat Rai, and the former managed to bring Champat Rai 
into disfavour with Dara. Pahar Singh died soon after (1654), but 
Champat. Rai had his vengeance on Dara four years later when he 
showed to Aurangzlb an obscure and out-of-the way, but a safe 


378 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


ford of the Chambal for his forces to cross it (May, 1658). 

Champat Rai fought for Aurangzlb in the battle of Samogarh 
and continued to be on his side till the advance of Shuja 4 towards 
Khajuha, when he deserted from the army of Aurangzlb and returned 
home to take up his old game of robbery. He made extensive raids 
and rendered the Malwa roads extremely unsafe. He robbed the 
territories of other Bundela Chiefs also as freely as the Mughul 
dominions. But this could not continue long and in February, 1659, 
Aurangzlb sent a Mughul force under Subhakaran Bundela against 
him, which was further reinforced some time later by Raja Devi 
Singh Bundela and other troops from Malwa. Champat Rai now 
became anxious to make peace, but all his overtures were turned 
down. He moved from one place to another, seeking shelter, but 
was relentlessly pursued and even his one-time friends and re¬ 
latives declined to give him refuge. Most of the local Bundela 
Chieftains, too, joined in this hunt. Finally, about the middle of 
October, 1661, he ended his life by committing suicide. 

5. Chhatra Sal: his career up to 1707 A.D. 

Thus perished Champat Rai, but his fourth son, Chhatra Sal, 
who had accompanied his father in his last flight, escaped his father’s 
enemies. A few years later, at the request of Mirza Raja Jai Singh, 
he was enlisted in the Mughul army and accompanied him to the 
Deccan. lie fought well in the Purandhar campaign (1665) and 
the invasion of Deogarh (1667). But Chhatra Sal did not feel happy 
while serving the Mughuls. He longed for a life of adventure and 
independence like that of Shivaji; hence he visited Shivaji and 
sought to enter his service (1670). Shivaji, however, advised him to 
return to his own country and promote local risings against Aurangzlb 
so as to distract the Mughul forces. Chhatra Sal’s efforts to win over 
loyal but experienced Bundela leaders, like Subhakaran, to join him 
in his plan for a national rising against the Mughul Empire, failed. 
All the enthusiasm and efforts of Chhatra Sal would have ended in 
nothing, had Aurangzlb not unwittingly come to his help by launch¬ 
ing at this very moment upon the policy of temple-destruction which 
aroused universal indignation among the Hindus, and those of Bun- 
delkhand and Malwa prepared to defend the places of their religious 
worship. Hence, when Chhatra Sal appeared in their midst to op¬ 
pose the Mughul empire, he was hailed as the champion of Hindu 
faith and Bundela liberty. The rebels elected him as their king. 
Memories of Champat Rai were once again revived and the hopes of 
gains from plunder soon gathered round Chhatra Sal vast hordes 
of Bundelas and discontented Afghans who had settled down in 
these parts. 


379 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Chhatra Sal’s earlier raids were mostly directed against the 
Dhamuni district and the rich city of Sironj. The Mughul officers 
in charge of these places were unable to successfully resist Chhatra 
Sal. Many petty chiefs now joined Chhatra Sal and like the Mara- 
thas he levied chauth and spared the places that paid it to him. 
As Aurangzlb became more and more deeply entangled in the Dec- 
can, Chhatra Sal took fullest advantage of the opportunity. He 
captured Kalinjar and Dhamuni and even looted Bhilsa. The range 
of his raids now extended up to Malwa. In 1699, however, Chhatra 
Sal had to face a temporary reverse at the hands of Sher Afghan, 
the faujddr of Ranod, but a year later, in the return fight, Sher 

Afghan was killed and there was none left in these parts of the 

country who would dare oppose Chhatra Sal. Finally, in 1705, 
Firuz Jang induced Aurangzlb to make peace with this irrepressible 
Bundela. Chhatra Sal was granted 4 -hdzdrl Mansab and he visited 
the emperor in the Deccan. He stayed there in peace till the death 
of Aurangzlb, when he returned to Buldelkhand. 

6. Bundelkhand in A.D. 1707 

Since the time of Akbar, Bundelkhand had been included in 
the suba of Allahabad. The position had remained unchanged even 
in 1707. At this time, however, Bundelkhand itself was roughly 

divided into two main political units, eastern and western. In 

eastern Bundelkhand, Chhatra Sal had carved out a big kingdom 
for himself. The long period of his continued opposition to the 
Mughul rule ended in 1705, and now there followed a period of 
about fifteen years during which Chhatra Sal fully co-operated with 
the Mughul Empire. In western Bundelkhand there were two large 
Bundela States, Orchha and Datia, which had remained undisturbed 
for the last fifty years, save what depredations Chhatra Sal or his 
associates committed there during their innumerable raids. Raja 
Udaut Singh was then ruling over Orchha and he continued to guide 
its destinies for another thirty years. Datia State once formed part 
of the Orchha State, but it had lately emerged as a separate State, 
mainly due to the continued loyal brilliant services of its two suc¬ 
cessive rulers, Rao Subhakaran and his son Rao Dalpat. Dalpat, 
however, was killed in the battle of Jajau, and for once in 1707 
Datia was threatened with internal strife due to disputed succes¬ 
sion. Again, there was the petty State of Chanderi ruled over by 
the descendants of Raja Devi Singh, who was installed as the ruler of 
Orchha in 1735. There were also numerous other small jdgirs and 
zamindaris interspersed with the imperial lands, which only added 
to the difficulties and disorders of the province. 


380 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


APPENDIX 

AKBAR’S MEWAR POLICY 

If one may use a modern term, Akbar opened his “peace offen¬ 
sive” against the Rajasthan States in 1562, when he married the 
daughter of Raja Bharmal of Ambar. Abu-l-Fazl writes that Bhar- 
mal offered his daughter (AN, tr. II, 243), but it is more probable 
that he was induced to do so and, in any case, there must have been 
exchange of diplomatic agents and views before the Raja offered 
his daughter to Akbar. 

During the next five years Akbar was busy with subduing 
various rebellions, ,and consolidating his position; but during this 
period, too, he remitted the pilgrim tax in 1563 and the jizya in 
1564 (AN, II, 295, 317). There was, however, no response from the 
Rajasthan princes to these generous moves. Ultimately he must 
have been persuaded that force of arms was necessary to subdue 
Rajasthan, and that if Mewar were conquered other States would 
submit peacefully. This calculation was not wrong, for after the 
fall of Chitor several important Rajput States submitted voluntarily 
to Akbar (AN, II, 518, 522). Still Mewar was not conquered. 

For the next few years Akbar was busy elsewhere and could 
afford to ignore Uday Singh. However, Akbar re-opened his “peace 
offensive” against Rajasthan after crushing the Gujarat rebellion 
in 1573. Uday Singh had died the previous year, and Akbar pos¬ 
sibly expected his son to submit tamely. According to Abu-’l-Fazl, 
several officers including Man Singh, Jagannath and Gopal were 
ordered by Akbar to proceed from Gujarat to Dungarpur by way 
of Idar and from there to Agra. Abu-l-Fazl adds: “The Rana and 
other zamindars of the neighbourhood were to be treated with 
princely favours and to be brought to do homage, and the dis¬ 
obedient were to be punished.” (AN, tr. Ill, 48-9). Man Singh 
was opposed at Dungarpur, but he defeated the local army. He 
then went to Udaipur where he was by all accounts received cor¬ 
dially by Mahdrdnd Pratap. Abu-’l-Fazl states that the Mahdrdnd 
“put on the royal khilat”, but “owing to his evil nature he proceed¬ 
ed to make excuses (about not going to court) alleging that ‘his 
well-wishers would not suffer him to go.’ ” (AN, tr. Ill, 57). Raj¬ 
put chronicles are unanimous that Man Singh took umbrage at 
Pratap’s refusal to sit with him to dine. It is not difficult to re¬ 
concile the two versions, but the main point is that both the Mughul 
and Mewar versions agree that at first the Mahdrdnd received Mian 
Singh with at least outward show of cordiality, but refused to 
attend the Mughul court. 

However, the Mahdrdna’s behaviour must have been such as to 
make Akbar believe that he could still be persuaded to accept his 
terms. So a few months after Man Singh’s mission, his father Raja 
Bhagwan Das, after subduing idar, came to Gogunda, the temporary 
capital of the Mahdrdnd. Abu-’l-Fazl writes that the Mahdrdnd 
expressed his contrition, and sent with Bhagwan Das his son (AN, 
tr. Ill, 93). In the previous paragraph (ibid, 92) Abu-’l-Fazl has 


381 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


mentioned that Bhagwan Das presented to Akbar “Umra, the son 
and heir of the Rana.” But this Umra or Amar was most probably 
the son of the Raja of Mar, whom Bhagwan Das had just defeated. 
Before we discuss this point, we shall only note another mission sent 
by Akbar to the Maharand. 

Shortly after Bhagwan Das, Todar Mai also met the Maharand , 
but failed to accomplish anything. (AN, tr. Ill, 93). It is possible 
to conclude from Abu-’l-Fazl’s laconic reference to Todar Mai’s visit 
to the Maharand that the resources of diplomacy were exhausted and 
the issue could only be decided by war. 

The point, however, to be considered is how far the Maharand 
was ready to accommodate the Mughul demand. Did he really 
send his son, Amar Singh, or agree to do so? The probability is 
against such a conclusion for the reasons given below. 

In this connection Kaviraj Shyamaldas justly points out the 
following statement in Jahangir’s Memoirs : 

“The real point was that as Rana Amar Singh and his father, 
proud in the strength of their hilly country and their abodes, had 
never seen or obeyed any of the kings of Hindustan, this should 
be brought about in my reign.” ( Tuzuk , tr. I, 274). It is apparent, 
therefore, that Amar had never visited the Mughul court. Sir 
Thomas Roe, who was with Jahangir, when Kama, the son of 
Maharand Amar, came to the court also writes that this was the 
first time a descendant of Porus (i.e. Kama) visited the Mughul 
court. It is also to be noted that in 1614, peace was concluded 
by Prince Khurram with Maharand Amar Singh on practically 
identical terms, namely that he would send his son Kama to the 
Mughul court but would not attend himself, and Jahangir took it 
to be a great triumph, which indirectly shows that Maharand Pratiap 
never offered such terms. 

There is another factor which has not yet been noticed by any 
historian. Maharand Praiap had an unusually huge elephant call¬ 
ed Ramparsad, which was captured by the Mughul army during the 
battle of' Haldlghat, and brought to Akbar by the historian Badaunl. 
In this connection Badaunl writes: “....I came back to Fathpur 
with news of victory and brought with me the well-known elephant 
(the subject of dispute) from Rana Kika” (Badaunl, tr. II, 234-35). 
A little later, Badaunl again states: “Then the Amirs wished to 
send to the Emperor the elephant named Ram-parsad which had 
come into their hands with the spoil (and which His Imperial High¬ 
ness had several times demanded of the Rana and he, unfortunately 
for him, had declined to surrender it)....,” Badaunl tr. II, 241. 
It is evident from Badaunl that according to him the elephant was 
the cause of dispute. This may not be wholly true, but Abu-’l-Fazl 
corroborates Badaunl to some extent, for describing the battle of 
Haldlghat he states: “. .. .Ram Parshad. . . that noted elephant— 
which had often been a subject of conversation in the sacred assem¬ 
blies....” (AN, tr. Ill, 246) and among the booty brought by 
Badaunl, he specially mentions Ram Parshad (ibid, 247). By 
sacred assembly, Abu-’l-Fazl meant Akbar’s court. It is evident 


382 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


that the Mahdrdna had refused to surrender to Akbar an elephant, 
though Akbar’s weakness for elephants was quite well known. Is 
it likely that such an uncompromising man would agree to send 
his son to the Mughul court? We do not think so. Added to this 
is Abu-l-Fazl’s silence as to when Amar returned to his father. It 
seems to us, therefore, that Abu-’l-Fazl’s uncorroborated testimony 
that Pratap sent his eldest son to Akbar’s court is wrong. 

1. Memoirs of Babur , pp. 612-13. Babur refers to Karmavati as Padmavatl. 

2. Ibid., pp. 616-17. 

3. Bayley, Gujarat^ p. 350. T';A. Ill, pt.i, 350; pt.ii, 610-11. An inscription 

mentioned by Ojha ( History of Udaipur p. 291) records the repair of certain 
Jam temples at Satrunjaya by Ratna Singh’s minister Karma Singh with the 
help of a far mein of Bahadur. Ojha rightly points out that this far man must 
have been issued at the instance of Ratna Singh probably during these nego¬ 
tiations. 

4. According to the Virvinod (II, 5) a Rajput tradition persists that Surya Mai, 
afraid of the growing tension with Ratna Singh, induced his sister Karma¬ 
vati to send a rdkhi to Humayun. But apparently nothing came out of this. 

5. Bayley, Gujarat, 357. 

6. Ibid., 370. 

7. Ibid., Virvinod, II, 27. 

8. “Tatar Khan expected that, as the Rana had a large force at his disposal, 
he would offer battle and oppose his advance, but no opposition was made.” 
Bayley, op. cit. 370. 

9. Muhanote Nensi mentions ( Khyat, Hindi tr. I, 54) that Vikramaditya’s brother 
Uday Singh was given to Bahadur as hostage. But not only no other Rajput 
source, but not even any Persian source, mentions this event. Further, 
Nensi’s statement that Bahadur’s intention was to convert Uday Singh and 
adopt him as his (Bahadur’s) successor seems to be quite improbable. Nensi 
further adds that Uday Singh, on learning of Bahadur’s intention, fled from 
his camp, which led Bahadur to besiege Chitor for a second time. 

This may appear plausible, for Bahadur was offered practically the 
same terms which he ultimately obtained, before he opened the siege, and 
then suddenly returned, which apparently seems inexplicable. But Bahadur 
had good reasons to draw out of Chitor, as during his absence, Nizam Shah 
had invaded Gujarat. 

For a discussion of Nensi’s story, see Ojha, History of Udaipur, I, 396, 
f .n. 3. Ojha also rejects Nensi’s story partly on the grounds mentioned above. 
For Bahadur’s personal obligation to Karmavati, see Bayley, op. cit., pp. 305, 
372. 

10. Virvinod, II, 29. 

11. Bahadur committed the same mistake, when after the fall of Chitor, instead 
of attacking Humayun, he prepared a strong defensive position relying on 
his artillery to drive off Mughul attacks. As a result, soon he was reduced 
to such straits, that one night he had to flee from his camp, and his army, 
till then victorious, never recovered from this shock. 

12. Virvinod, II, 63-64. Muhanote Nensi, Khyat, Hindi, tr. I, 57. Ojha, History 
of Udaipur, I, 404. 

13. Abbas Sherwani, Tdrikh-i-Sher Shahi, HIED, IV, 406; Qanungo, Sher Shah, 
p. 332; Ojha op. cit., p. 406; G. N. Sharma, Mewar and the Mughul Emperors, 
p. 61. According to Sherwani, followed by Dr. Qanungo, Sher Shah left 
Mewar in charge of two Muslim officers. There is nothing how'ever to indi¬ 
cate that Uday Singh was driven out of Chitor. It is likely that these two 

officers were political agents. . 

Though no chronicles record it, it is quite probable that Uday Singh had 
come to an understanding with Sher Shah before he sent him the key. Sher 
Shah’s fight with Maldev had been a very close affair, and he must have 
thought it politic to be a friend of Maldev’s enemy. 

14. “In Rajputana Sher Shah made no attempt to uproot the local chiefs or to 
reduce them to thorough subjection as he had done in other parts of Hindusthan. 
He found the task dangerous as well as fruitless. He did not aim at the 
complete subversion of their independence”, K. R. Qanungo, Sher Shah, 333. 

15. AN, Tr. II, 443-44; Ojha, op. cit., 412; V. Smith, Akbar the Great Mogul; 82; 
Sharma, op. cit. iBadaunl, tr. II, 48. 


383 





THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


According to Abu-’l-Fazl, Akbar one day jestingly remarked to Sakta 
Singh, a son of Maharana Uday Singh, that though most of the chieftains of 
India had paid him respect, the Maharana had not done so, so he proposed to 
punish him. Thus alarmed, Sakta ran away without leave to warn his father. 
This enraged Akbar who determined to chastise the Maharana (AN, II, 442; 
462). What Abu-TFazl overlooks is that up to 1567, the only State in Rajas¬ 
than which had paid homage to Akbar was Ambar. 

Nizam-ud-din and BadaunI relate that Akbar was enraged at Uday Singh 
for his giving asylum to Baz Bahadur. This may have been a minor cause. 
What is surprising is first, that Akbar should have suddenly decided to attack 
Chitor, when from Uday Singh’s past records he could have expected a peace¬ 
ful surrender, and secondly that Uday Singh on his part should have contested 
the issue in 1567 instead of surrendering as he had done to Sher Shah in 1543. 
This indicates that surrendering to Siier Shah was a token surrender but 
Uday Singh realized that Akbar’s intentions were quite different. If we ignore 
Tod’s account of Uday Singh, which is usually accepted by modern historians, 
it would appear that instead of being a poltroon, Uday Singh was a cautious 
but determined man, without the dash and brilliant leadership of his illus¬ 
trious son, but not altogether an unworthy sire. What is overlooked in the 
general condemnation of Uday Singh for not sharing the fate of the besieged 
garrison at Chitor is that he never surrendered to the Mughuls as did most 
other chiefs of Rajasthan. It seems to us, that under the circumstances, his 
decision to quit Chitor was the correct one, and the fact that the fort heroically 
held out for some time shows that he had some power of organization. It 
may be recalled that Maharana Pratap left Kumbhalmer, almost under similar 
circumstances, but that does not reflect on his honour, and nobody would say 
of him as V. Smith, following Tod, says of Uday Singh that, “Udai Singh 
shamelessly abandoned the post of honour and hid himself in distant forests.” 
V. Smith, op. cit. 86. 

16. Virvinod, II, 75, 83. 

17. For reference, see Sharma, op. cit., p. 71. 

18. AN', tr. II, 466-67, Smith, op. cit., 88. Sharma, op. cit., 76. 

19. Virvinod, II, 80-81. Ojha (op. cit., 414-15) apparently follows Virvinod, 
though he does not refer to it. Sharma, however, contests Ojha’s view on 
the ground, that no other Rajput source mentions it, and that the Amara- 
kavya vamsavali states that he died on the spot. The verse quoted by Dr. 
Sharma, however, is corrupt, (p. 76, f.n. 61) and according to his correction 
(p. 252) should read as follows: 

Dillisa-samyukta-guti-prahasat Srx-Jaimalakhyo ravi-mandala mahat I 
Vibhidya paschat tridivam prayatah . .antahpure jvdlita eva tad bhataih II 
There is nothing in the verse to show that Jai Mai died on the spot; on 

the other hand paschat tridivam praydtah indicates that though he was hurt 

by Akbar’s shot he died later. 

Dr. Sharma’s other contention is that no other Rajput source corroborates 
MM. Ojha. Here he is wrong, for, as pointed out, MM. Ojha probably got 
his facts from the Virvinod. It should be noted that Kavlraj Shyamaldas 

knew the other version and in a footnote remarks that Abu-’l-Fazl being on 

the enemy side did not know the truth. 

20. Virvinod, II, 82. 

21. BadaunI, tr. II, 137, AN, II, 513-19; see also Ojha, History of Bikaner; I; 
155-56. 

22. BadaunI, tr. II, 239. 

23. The Amarakavya, quoted by Shyamaldas, gives certain information about 
Uday Singh which, if true, would show that he enjoyed considerable local 
power, Virvinod II, 87. Shyamaldas’s evaluation of Uday Singh ( Virvinod , 
II, 86) is far nearer the mark than Tod’s. 

24. The custom in the Mewar royal family is that the successor to the throne 
does not attend the cremation of the deceased king, Ojha, op. cit., 423, f.n. 3. 

25. Sharma (op. cit., 86, f.n., 14) points out that the State emblem “bears testi¬ 
mony to this day to the equal status given to the Bhils where both Pratap 
and a Bhil are standing on either side of Eklingji, the titular deity of Mewar.” 

26. “On seeing this circumstance the Rana could no longer hold his ground but 
left the ranks and fled, and confusion fell on the army of the Rana.” BadaunI 
tr. II, 238. 

27. Ojha, op. cit. 463-64; for a traditional account of Bhamashaha’s (Pratap’s 
Prime Minister) administration of the treasury, Virvinod, 251. 

384 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


28. See Appendix. 

29. AN, tr. HI, 236-37. Akbar gave Man Singh written instructions. For a des¬ 
cription of the battle of Haldighat, see AN, tr. Ill, 244-47; Badauni, tr. II, 
233-44. V. Smith’s description of the actual battle is scanty (Smith, Akbar, 
the Great Mogul, 148-53) and he relies to some extent on Tod ( Annals of 
Rajasthan, Routledge, 1914, I, 264-78) though he avoids Tod’s palpable mis¬ 
takes without pointing them out, as was done by Shyamaldas ( Virvinod, H, 
154-55). See also Ojha, op. cit., 429-43, for the traditional account of the 
battle and for a very interesting quotation (p. 441, f.n. 1) from the un¬ 
published Jagadis temple inscription; G. C. Sharma, op. cit., 91-106, gives 
the best account of the battle. He has consulted several unpublished Rajput 
chronicles and has discovered an interesting inscription, (p. 91, f.n., 18). 

30. Badauni, tr. II, 240. 

31. Badauni, tr. II, 241. 

32. Badauni, tr. H, 247. Abu-’l-Fazl states: “The officers (i.e. Man Singh and 
Asaf Khan) from prudential motives did not go in quest of him, and on 
account of the difficulty in transporting provisions they came out of that 
stony land and reared the standards of victory in the open plain.” (AN, tr. 
Ill, 259-60). This indicates that Man Singh was forced to evacuate Gogunda. 

33. AN, tr. Ill, 269. 

34. AN, tr. Ill, 267. 

35. AN, tr. Ill, 272. 

36. AN, tr. Ill, 274. 

37. AN, tr. Ill, 274-5. 

38. AN, tr. Ill, 277. 

39. Abu-’l-Fazl does not give the date of Shahbaz Khan’s appointment, AN, tr. Ill, 
339. But it is apparent from p. 337 (ibid) that it could not have been long 
after 11 March, 1578. Sharma (op. cit. Ill) gives the date of Shahbaz Khan’s 
expedition as 15 October, 1577, which is evidently wrong; Sharma does not 
give any reference for this date. 

40. Abu-’l-Fazl states that Bhagwan Das and Man Singh were sent back, “lest 

from their feelings as landholders there might be delay in inflicting retri¬ 
bution on that vain disturber (the Rana)”. AN, tr. Ill, 339. It appears that 

Man Singh was still under some suspicion. It is possible, as stated in the 
Tdrlkh-i-Nizami that he refused to devastate Mewar (Badauni, tr. II, 247, 
f.n. i). As we have seen, after the battle of Haldighat also Man Singh’s 
action or inaction gave rise to suspicion. AN, tr. Ill, 259-60. 

40a. AN, tr. Ill, 340. The Maharand seems to have left the fort after this accident. 

41. For an account of the besieged garrison, see, Virvinod II, 257; Ojha, op. cit., 
447. 

42. AN, tr. Ill, 355, 380. Shahbaz Khan, like other commanders before him, seems 
to have thought that with the capture of Kumbhalgarh, Udaipur, etc. his task 
was finished. 

43. Abu-’l-Fazl writes: “Owing to his (Shahbaz Khan’s) energy and good Ser¬ 

vices, Rana Pertab became a desert-vagabond, and fell upon evil days. He 
thought every morning would be his last day, and blistered his feet with 

running about in terror.” AN, tr. Ill, 459-60. 

44. AN, tr. Ill, 661. 

45. AN, tr. Ill, 705-06. 

46. Virvinod, II, 159. 

47. Ibid, II, 157. 

48. Amaresah Khdnkhana-daranam haranam vyadhat I 
Suvdsinibat santoshya preshaydmdsa tain puna'll II 
(Raj Prasasti, IV, v. 32. Virvinod, II, 588). 

Kumarastv-Amaresa nama Mlechchhd-bhimdna- 

kshayakdri-dhamd 
Jagrdha vai Serapuraj-javena sa 
Khdna-khanasya-kalatram apa 
(Amarakdvya Vamsdvali, f. 45 (b)« 

Quoted from Sharma, op. cit., 115, f.n. 119. Sharma quotes another 
Rajasthani verse to the same effect.) 

49. Ojha (op. cit. 467) accepts the same date as given in the Virvinod, (II, 164) 
but gives the Christian date as 19 January. The difference of ten days is 
probably due to Ojha’s converting it into N.S. The Maharand was born on 
Jyeshtha Sukla 13, 1493 V.S. 31 May, 1539). 

50. V. Smith, Akbar the Great Mogul, 151. 

51. For details, see, Sharma, op. cit., 123. Ojha, op. cit., 491, 506. 

385 


M.E.— 25 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


52. AN, tr. Ill, 1155. It is not possible to find out the date of this expedition 
but it was in the 45th regnal year which began on 11 March, 1600, ibid, 1233. 

53. AN, tr. Ill, 1233-34. 

54. For the reasons which led to Sagar’s joining the Mughuls, see, Virvinod, II, 
219-21. Sagar is not mentioned in the AN, and it is possible that he came 
to Akbar’s notice after the 46th year of Akbar’s reign (1601), that is, the end 
of Abu-’l-Fazl’s Akbar-namd. Sagar however is several times mentioned 
in the Tuzuk, where he is referred to as Shankar. 

55. Tuzuk, tr. by Rogers, I, 17. 

56. Ibid, 26. 

57. Ibid, 29. 

58. Ibid, 50. 

59. Ibid, 70, 73. 

60. Ibid, 74, 90. Shyamaldas gives a detailed account of Parvlz’s campaign which, 
as he correctly states, is not to be found in Persian chronicles ( Virvinod , 
II, 222-224). He states that Parvlz brought Bagha Singh to Jahangir (ibid, 
p. 223). Jahangir is silent about Bagha Singh’s subsequent fate. Ojha (op. cit. 
pp. 480-81) is somewhat wrong in stating that Bagha’s going to the Mughul 
court is not mentioned in any Mewar history, for the Virvinod, which Ojha 
has usually followed, definitely mentions him. Sharma (op. cit. 128) mentions 
that, Parviz, finding no hope of success, opened negotiations through Bagha 
Singh, but Sharma is silent about his coming to the Mughul court. Jahangir’s 
evidence on this point seems to be conclusive, but it also shows that Amar was 
not at this time prepared to accept Jahangir’s terms. 

61. Tuzuk, tr. I, 76. At this time we find Rai Singh and his son Dilip rebelling 
in Nagor, and Jagannath Kachwa, who was operating against the Mahdrana 
sent to suppress this rebellion (ibid, 76); but Jahangir later pardoned them 
(ibid, 148). 

62. Virvinod, II, 224 ff. 

63. Tuzuk , tr. I, 146. 

64. Ibid, 146-47. 

65. Ibid, 155. 

66. Virvinod, II, 225. It is stated that some Mewar soldiers entered the Mughul 
camp as fruit-sellers, really carrying rockets instead of fruits. At night, others, 
who were outside the camp, tied some lamp round the horns of buffalos and 
drove them towards the Mughul camp. This was the signal for firing the 
rockets near Mahabat’s tent. When he came out he saw the rockets and 
moving lights in the forest, and about 500 Mewar soldiers rushing in. He over¬ 
estimated their strength and ran away. 

67. Madsir-ul-Umara, quoted by Sharma, op. cit., 130, f.n. 40-41. Virvinod, II, 
225-7. 

68. Jahangir states that ‘Abdullah pursued the Rana into the hills and when night 
came he (the Rana) escaped with difficulty with his life, Tuzuk , tr I, 157. 

69. Later Jahangir sent to his aid Safdar Khan and Badi’uz-Zaman, T'uzuk tr. I. 
pp. 200-201, 204-05. Shyamaldas records that in 1884 a priest called Sukhananda 
came from Nurpur (Raja Basu’s capital) who had with him a copper-plate 
grant of land to one Vyasa, chief priest of Raja Basu, by Maharana Amar Singh. 
Shyamaldas has reproduced this grant ( Virvinod , II, 227-28). He also states 
that Amar gave an image of Krishna called Vrajaraj, which had been worshipped 
by MIrabai, to Raja Basu v/hich was still in the fort of Nurpur. If this grant 
is genuine, then it would appear that Amar had entered into some sort of 
arrangement with Raja Basu. 

70. For reasons which led Jahangir to go to Ajmer, see, Tuzuk, tr. I, 249, 255; 
for sending Khurram, and the conduct of Khan A‘zam, ibid 257-58. During 
his stay at Ajmer, Jahangir broke the image of Varahavatara set up by Sagar, 
(ibid, 254), or Shankar as he habitually refers to him. This shows the little 
esteem which Jahangir had for Sagar. Jahangir also refers to him now, as one 
of his ‘high nobles’. This indicates that Sagar had by 1613 given up all pre¬ 
tences to the Mewar throne, or Jahangir, in order to arrive at a peace, had with¬ 
drawn Sagar, so that Amar need have no reason to complain on that account. 

71. Tuzuk, tr. I, 259 260'. It should be noted that Jahangir not only recalled Khan 
A‘zam, but imprisoned him in Gwalior (ibid, 261). Later, one night he dreamt 
Akbar saying to him: “Baba, forgive for my sake the fault of ‘Aziz Khan, who 
is the Khan A‘zam.” (ibid, 269). Jahangir is unlikely to have taken the 
drastic step of imprisoning Akbar’s favourite foster-brother unless he was in¬ 
volved in something more serious than disagreement with Khurram. Khan 


386 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


A‘zam had been carrying on treasonable correspondence with the ruler of Khan- 
desh during Akbar’s reign and the letters were discovered by Jahangir (ibid, 
79-80), yet Jahangir took no step against him except exposing his perfidy. It 
is possible that goaded by the high-handedness of young Khurram, ‘Aziz Koka 
had started negotiations with the Maharand, and after his downfall when 
Khurram conducted the campaign vigorously it was decided to come to terms. 

72. Tuzuk, tr. I, 273. 

73. Shyamaldas began to write the Virvinod in 1879 ( Virvinod, I, 184), but his 
present account is corroborated by the Amarakavya vamsavali written just 
after V.S. 1732 (A.D. 1675) quoted by Sharma, op. cit, 135, f.n. 57. Possibly 
Shyamaldas, who consulted all available records had seen the Amarakavya 
vamsavali. For the account of the surrender to the Mughuls, see, Virvinod, 
II, 235-36. 

74. This farman was in Udaipur archives when Shyamaldas wrote his history. 

75. Virvinod, II, 237. 

76. Jahangir writes that the Maharand “fell at Khurram’s feet and asked forgive¬ 
ness for his faults.” (Tuzuk, tr. I, 276). But the author of the Iqbal-ndma 
(text III, 536) states: “I as a Bakshi was present on the occasion and, therefore, 

I could clearly see that the Rana was making low salutation.” quoted by 

Sharma, op. cit., 136. 

Jahangir most probably got the report of this interview from Khurram, 
who left for Ajmer (where Jahangir was staying) with Kama on the afternoon 
of the day the Maharand visited him. Khurram naturally was anxious to bring 
this affair to a speedy termination which his grandfather had tried in vain, and 
therefore is quite likely to have impressed Jahangir by exaggerated accounts of 
Rand's humility. 

77. Tuzuk, tr. I, 276. 

78. “As it was necessary to win the heart of Kama, who was of a wild nature and 

had never seen assemblies and had lived among the hills, I every day showed 
him some fresh favour.” Tuzuk, tr. I, 277. 

79. Ibid, 278. I think it is permissible to imagine that the Empress and the Mughul 
ladies were curious to see the scion of the house which had defied the Mughul 
arms for nearly half a century. 

Jahangir’s gifts to Kama are too numerous to be mentioned in detail. But 
the eagerness of the Emperor to please the Prince is matched by his poetic 
imagination. He writes: “On the 8th I gave Kama the mansab of 5,000 personal 
and horse, and gave him a small rosary of pearls and emeralds with a ruby in 
the centre which in the language of the Hindus is called Smaran (Sanskrit for 
‘remembrance’)”. Tuzuk, tr. I, 281. Jahangir had, a few days before, presented 
Kama with “a rosary of pearls of great value”, ibid, 278, 

80. Ibid, 289, 293. Jahangir also gave him some shawls etc. 

81. Ibid, 296. 

82. He died on Wednesday, Magh , Sukla 2, 1676. V.S. Shyamaldas gave the date 
in Christian era as October 30, 1620, Virvinod II, 266. Ojha however gives the 
date as 26 January, 1620. Ojha, op. cit., I, 507. 

83. B.P. Saxena, History of Shahfahdn of Delhi, 37. Saxena does not identify 
Bhlm with the Mewar Prince, but Shyamaldas states that he was the Son of 
Maharand Amar, Virvinod, 285. 

84. Saxena, op. cit. 50, 52. For a detailed account of Bhlm’s activities from the 
Rajasthani chronicles see, Virvinod, II, 285-88. 

85. Virvinod, II, 270-73, 589. Among other proofs Shyamaldas quotes a verse from 
the Rajasamudra Prasasti composed about 60 years after this incident which 
seems to be quite conclusive. 

Dillisvar a)-Jahangir a tasya Khurrama-namakam I 
Putram vimukhatdm prdptam sthapayitvd nija kshitau II 
Jahdnglre divamyate sange bhrataram-Arjunam I 
Datvd Dillisvaram chakre so’bhut Shdhijahdmbhidhah. II 

86. For details of Jagat Singh’s reign, see, Virvinod, II, 315-327 and Ojha, op. 
cit., II, 511-31 

87. B.P. Saxena: History of Shahjahan, 320. 

88. Ojha, op. cit., II, 533-34. Chandra Bhan’s four letters in original Persian are 
reproduced in the Virvinod, II, 403-412. 

89. Virvinod, II, 413-14. 

91 Five letters from Aurangzlb are printed in the Virvinod, II, 415-424. The letters 
are not dated, but the last letter carries the news of victory of the battle of 


387 




THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Dharmat (April 15, 1658). Aurangzlb evidently tried to enlist the help of 
the Mahdrdnd, but as the latter’s replies are not published, it is not possible 
to say what help Raj Singh rendered to Aurangzlb. It is evident from these 
letters that the Mewar contingent which was fighting in the Deccan (Sarkar, 
History of Aurangzlb, 1912 ed., I, p. 272) was with him during the war of 
succession. 

92. Shah Jahan had named this prince Saubhagya Singh, but the Mahdrdnd did 
not like the name and changed it to Sultan Singh. 

93. Virvinod, II, 425-431. Shyamaldas published these documents from the Udai¬ 
pur archives. Sir Jadunath Sarkar did not notice these in his History of 
Aurangzlb possibly because he had no access to the Virvinod , as, for unknown 
reasons, its circulation was prohibited till recently. 

94. Ibid, 432-433. 

95. Ibid, 437-443. Mahdrdnd’s appeal is also reproduced in which he admits 
having gone to Krishnagarh for marriage without permission but claims that 
a Rajput is free to marry any Rajput girl, though further details are not 
given. Ibid, 440. In the Raja-samudra-prasasti inscription, however, the 
allusion is quite clear. 

sate saptadase purne varsha saptadase tatah 
gatva Krishnagade divya mahatyd senaya yutah 
Dilllsdrtham rakshita yd Rdjasimha naresvarah 
Rdthoda Rupasimhasya putryah pdnigraham vyadhat 
(Rajasamudra-prasasti VIII, vv. 29-30. Virvinod , II, p. 596-97). The Raja- 
vilasa, a work composed during the life of Raj Singh gives the text of 
Charumati’s letter (quoted by Sharma, op. cit., 160, f.n. 30). It may be noted 
that Charumati’s sister was married to Mu’azzam. 

96. For details of Aurangzlb’s Marwar policy and subsequent war with Marwar 
and Mewar, see Sarkar, History of Aurangzlb, III (1921 ed.), 322-373; B. N. 
Reu, Marwar kd Itihas, Ojha and Sharma, op. cit., 

97. Sarkar, op. cit., 330. 

98. This account of escape is based on Sarkar. But Shyamaldas states that Durga 
Das fled away with the prince a day before the action took place ( Virvinod , 
II, 828-29). This, however, does not seem to be probable, as after Ajit had 
been carried away, there would hardly be any reason for the Rathors to fight 
the Mughuls in Delhi. Shyamaldas also states that the other son of Jasvant 
Singh, named Dalathambhan, was brought to Delhi, and suggests as one of 
the possibilities that this child might have been brought up by Aurangzlb 
(ibid, 830). The difference between the two versions is due to the fact that 
Sir Jadunath based his account on Isvardas and rejected the evidence of the 
Ma'asir-i-'Alamgiri, while Shyamaldas relied exclusively on the latter work. 
For another version based on Rajasthani chronicles, see Reu, op. cit., 254. 

99. This farman is given in the Virvinod, II, 885. 

100. Raj Singh is supposed to have written a letter to Aurangzlb protesting against 
the imposition of the j izya. Sir Jadunath Sarkar examined the letter 
thoroughly and came to the conclusion that it was written by Shivaji, ( Mo¬ 
dern Review, January, 1908, 21-23). Ojha, following Tod and Shyamaldas, 
was of the view that Raj Singh wrote the letter (Ojha, op. cit., 549-554). 
But Sharma (op. cit. 164) agrees with Sir Jadunath, and it also seems to us 
that the letter, which as usual was made current by Tod, could not have 
been written by Raj Singh. 

101. Sir Jadunath in the History of Aurangzib, III, 339, stated that Ajitffe mother 
was a Mewar princess, and in the CHI, IV, 248, that she was Raj Singh’s 
niece. I cannot find this corroborated by any Rajasthani chronicle and B. N. 
Reu doubts it (Reu, Marwar Ka Itihas, I, 257, f.n. 3), but Tod calls her a 
‘daughter of Mewar’, Annals, 1957 ed. I, 307. 

102. It is usually assumed that the Mahaiand took this defensive measure when 
the Mughul invasion seemed imminent. But the inscription on the portal at 
Deobarl is, according to Sharma, dated V.S. 1731=A.D. 1674, Sharma, op. 
cit., 165. f.n. 50. 

103. Quoted by Sir Jadunath Sarkar, op. cit., Ill, 336. 

104. Rajavilds, X, vv 1-22, f.n 137-40 quoted by Sharma, op. cit., 169, f.n. 66-7. 

105. Eka-maha-masidi-vikhandita laghu-masidi-trimsat I 
Devalaya-patana-rushah prakdsita Bhlmasimha-vlrena II 

Raja-samudra-prasasti XXII, v. 29. 

The Raja-samudra-prasasti mentions the sack of Idar, Vadnagar and Ahma- 
dabad. Sir Jadunath Sarkar, apparently on the basis of the Mirat-i-Ahmadl, 


388 


HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 


mentions the sack of “Vadnagar, Visalnagar and some other rich cities of 
Gujarat.and the recovery of Idar”. (Sarkar, op. cit. V, 1952 ed., p. 353). 

But the Raja-samudra-prasasti, XXII v. 28, definitely mentions the sack 
of Idar, Vadnagar and Ahmadabad. We shall see later Durga Das and Durjan 
Sal Hada carrying a more daring raid into the heart of the Mughul empire. 
Therefore a lightning raid on Ahmadabad does not appear to be improbable. 

Sir Jadunath Sarkar was of the opinion that prince Bhlm’s raids took place 
after Akbar had rebelled (Sarkar, op. cit., Ill, 366). But these raids, as 
mentioned in the Raja-samudra-prasasti, took place during the life of Raj 
Singh, therefore before Akbar’s rebellion. It may be noted that this prasasti 
is given in the Virvinod which was not available to Sir Jadunath. 

106. Raja-samudra-prasasti, XXII, v. 46. 

107. This is the date given by Sir Jadunath Sarkar (op. cit., Ill, 353) who has used 
O.S. throughout his work. Shyamaldas, probably using the N.S., gives the 
date as 3 November, 1680. The Indian date is Kdrtik, Sukla 19, 1737, V.S. 
(Virvinod, II, 473). 

108. Sir Jadunath Sarkar (op. cit., Ill, 367) states that Maharand Jai Singh “wel¬ 

comed him with present and invited him to stay. But Udaipur was no more 
invulnerable to Mughul invasion than Jodhpur. Then Durga Das most chival¬ 
rously undertook to conduct Akbar to the Maratha court-”. Sir Jadunath 

Sarkar does not give any reference for this statement but most probably he 
was following Tod. I am relying here on Shyamaldas (Virvinod, II, 653) who 
states that though Akbar had at this time some Mewar nobles to protect him, 
Jay Singh wrote to them not to bring Akbar to Mewar on any account, as 
peace talks were going on, but to escort him south to ShambhujTis court. This 
appears more probable, for it is difficult to believe that Mewar could not give 
protection to Akbar, when it could do so to Ajit. Also, the Mughul had 
never been able to reach the place where the Maharand lived. Ojha (op. 
cit., II, 587) has followed Shyamaldas. 

109. Virvinod, II, 650. 

110. Sir Jadunath calls him “Shyam Singh of Bikaner'’ (Sarkar, op. cit., Ill, 370) 
but the Raja-samudra-prasasti, XXIII, v. 32 which we have followed here 
definitely identifies him. 

Rdnd-sri'Karnasimhasya-dvitiyas-tanayahhali I 

Garibadasas-tat-putrah Sydmasimha iha-gatah II 

111. The farmdn is printed in the Virvinod, II, 651-52. 

112. For conditions of the treaty, see, Sarkar, op. cit., Ill, 370 and V, 216 and 
Virvinod II, 661-63. 

113. Sarkar, op. cit., Ill, 369-70. 

114. A'zam’s letter is published in the Virvinod, II, 665-66. A‘zam wrote a similar 
letter dated 24 Sha’ban (the year is not given), Virvinod, II, 662. It appears 
that he was extremely eager to come to terms with Jay Singh and gain his 
support. There is an initialled but unsigned treaty in the Udaipur archives, 
which Shyamaldas ascribes to A‘zam. This Seems to be the terms A‘zam 
would have offered to the Maharand if he became emperor. 

115. In 1683 Aurangzlb appointed Man Singh of Krishnagarh the faujdar of Pur, 
Mandal and Bednor, Virvinod II, 665. 

116. This farmdn, apparently issued in response to a petition by the Maharand, 
was signed by Aurangzlb on 6 July, 1690, Virvinod II, 669-72. 

117. Sarkar, op. cit., V, 221, 226 (1952 ed.). 

118. According to the Khyat, Ajit was induced by the Marwar nobles to come 
out of his hiding place in 1687 at the age of eight, and take part in the 
struggle, even before Durga Das’s return from the Deccan, B. N. Reu, Marwar 
Kd Itihds, I, 278. This is partly corroborated by Shyamaldas who states that 
Ajit joined the army in 1687 at the age of eight, Virvinod II, 832. This ap¬ 
pears to be incredible unless one assumes Ajit to have been more precocious 
than even Babur. It is also stated in the Rajasthani chronicles that more 
than once there were differences of opinion between the child Ajit and 
Durga Das, which probably means that some nobles wanted to remove 
Durga Das from his position of authority. But as the same sources state 
that all Such differences were ultimately made up, it indicates that Durga 
Das was vindicated. 

119. isvardas Nagar, Futuhdt-i-Alamglri, MsS, 167a-168b, tr. by Sir Jadunath 
Sarkar, op. cit., V. 231. For the account of Durga Das, Sir Jadunath relied 
exclusively on Isvardas, for he was a friend of Durga Das, had been a 
revenue collector at Jodhpur and had been entrusted by Shuja‘at Khan, the 
governor of Gujarat (under whom Isvardas Served) to act as the inter- 

389 



THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


mediary between the Mughuls and Durga Das. In fact/, the Rajasthani 
chronicles, namely the Ajitodaya and Ajitagrantha written at a later date, 
and on which B.N. Reu relies for his Marwdr ka Itihas, give much less im¬ 
portance to Durga Das than is due to him. 

120. Sarkar, op. cit., V, 236. 

121. J. N. Sarkar, History of Aurangzib, IV (1929), p. 27. 

122. Ibid., p. 275, 

123. Ibid., p. 276. 

124. See Chapter VIII. 

125. Sarkar, op. cit., pp. 287-8. 

126. Ibid., p. 288. 

127. Ibid., p. 290. 

128. Ibid., pp. 279-80. 

129. Ibid., p. 282. 

130. See Chapter VIII. 

131. Sarkar, op. cit., p. 330. 

132. Ibid., p. 334. 

133. Ibid., p. 355. 

134. For details, cf. ibid., p. 468. 

135. For details, cf. ibid., pp. 343 ff., 471 ff. 

136. ; Ibid., pp. 472-3. 

137. Ibid., pp. 474-5. 

138. According to J. N. Sarkar, Rajaram was crowned on 8 February (ibid., p. 
48i), but according to G. S. Sardesai he was proclaimed king on 9 February; 
New History of the Marathas, Vol. I, p. 319. 

139. Sardesai, op. cit., I, 320. 

140. Ibid. 

141. Ibid., p. 321. 

142. Ibid., p. 324. 

143. Ibid. 

144. Ibid., p. 328. 

145. Ibid., p. 329. 

146. Ibid. 

147. Ibid., pp. 338-9. 

148. For a detailed account, cf. ibid., pp. 337-9. 

149. Ibid., pp. 341-2. 

150. Ibid., pp. 342-3. 

151. Ibid, p. 348. 

152. Ibid. 

153. Risley, People of India, p. 8. 

154. K. R. Qanungo, History of the Jats, p. 1. 

155. Ibid, p. 2. 

156. Ibbetson, quoted in the Punjab Glossary, II. p. 366. 

157. Qanungo, op. cit., pp. 6-9, 325; Elliot, Memoirs of the Races of North-Western 
Provinces of India, I, 135-137; Risley, op. cit., p. 6. 

158. Growse, Mathura (1874), pp. 21-2. 

159. Tabaqat-i-Akbari (Bibliotheca Indica), pp. 16-7; Firishta, Translated by Briggs, 
Vol. I, pp. 81-2; CHI, III. p. 26. 

160. HIED, II. 218; CHI , III. 41; Qanungo, op. cit., p. 32. 

161. See p. 310. 

162. J. N. Sarkar, History of Aurangzib, HI. 331. 

163. Maasir-ul-umavd, III. 422; J. N. Sarkar, op. cit., pp. 331-32. 

164. J. N. Sarkar, op. cit., pp. 331-33. 

165. Ibid, pp. 333-36. 

166. Sinsanl and Sogor are situated, respectively, 16 and 4 miles from Bharatpur. 

167. J. N. Sarkar, op. cit., Vol. V, pp. 296-7. 

168. Isvardas, 164 b. 

169. Ibid, 132 b. Manucci says, “They began their pillage by breaking in the great 
gates of bronze which it had, robbing the valuable precious stones and plates 
of gold and silver and destroying what they were not able to carry away. 
Dragging out the bones of Akbar, they threw them angrily into the fire and 
burnt them.” Manucci, II. 320. 

170. Isvardas, 134 b; A.A., 311; J. N. Sarkar, op. cit., V. 299. 

171. Isvardas, 136b-137a; M.A. 334. 

172. Isvardas, 137 a and b; M.A. 340. 

173. Imad-us-Sadat, 55. 

174. Xavier Wendel, Fr. Ms. 41 as quoted in J. N. Sarkar, op. cit., V. 302. 

390 


CHAPTER XIII 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL 
IMPERIALISM (I) 

I. GUJARAT 

Sikandar and Mahmud II (1526) 

It has been noted in the previous volume that Sultan Muzaffar 
died on 5 April, 1526, and was succeeded by his eldest son, Sikandar. 
After a reign of six weeks, Sikandar was assassinated by one of his 
disgruntled nobles and an infant son of Muzaffar was raised to the 
throne under the name of Mahmud II (26 May, 1526). Taking ad¬ 
vantage of the situation Bahadur, the fugitive son of Muzaffar, re¬ 
turned to Gujarat. 

Bahadur ( 1526-1537 ) 

Bahadur had quarrelled with his father, Muzaffar, a few years 
before the latter’s death, and had first taken refuge at Chitor and 
then with Ibrahim Lodi. He was present at the battle of Panlpat 
but did not take part in fighting. After the battle, Bahadur is said 
to have been invited by some local nobles to fill the throne of Jaun- 
pur, and on his way thither news reached him of the happening in 
Gujarat. So Bahadur returned, and almost all the nobles except 
the murderers of Sikandar joined him. Their opposition was easily 
overcome and they were executed. After this, Bahadur turned 
against his brothers, and his closest rival Latif was severely wounded 
in an action, taken prisoner and died. The boy Mahmud II and 
three other princes were poisoned by Bahadur, whom the humane 
Babur rightly castigated as a “bloodthirsty and ungovernable young 
man”. Only his brother Chand Khan was left. This prince had 
taken refuge at the Malwa court, and Sultan Mahmud II of Malwa 
refused to surrender him, which caused a rupture of good relations 
between Gujarat and Mialwa and ultimately led Bahadur to conquer 
Malwa. 


War in the Deccan and Malwa ( 1528-1531) 

Khandesh, which had for a long time acknowledged the supre¬ 
macy of Gujarat, was during this period ruled by Muhammad I, the 
son of Bahadur’s sister. This prince and his ally, ‘Ala-ud-dln Tmad 
Shah of Berar, appealed to Bahadur after being severely defeated by 
Burhan Nizam Shah of Ahmadnagar and ‘Amir ‘All! Barld of Bldar. 


391 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


So in 1528, Bahadur and his allies advanced against the Nizam Shah 
and invested the fort of Daulatabad. But the NiZam Shah put up a 
stiff resistance and cut off the supplies of the invading army, forcing 
Bahadur to retire. But Bahadur reopened the campaign after the 
rainy season of 1529 and, overcoming a stiff opposition, again be¬ 
sieged Daulatabad. While the operations were progressing satis¬ 
factorily, Bahadur was betrayed by his ally, ‘Ala-ud-din ‘Imad Shah, 
who, suspecting that Bahadur had designs on the Deccan, retired to 
Bldar. Negotiations for peace then began and finally both Burhan 
Nizam Shah and ‘Alia-ud-din Shah were forced to sign humiliating 
treaties. 

Bahadur next turned his attention to Malwa. Mahmud II of 
Malwa, as has already been noted, had estranged Bahadur, by grant¬ 
ing asylum to Bahadur’s younger brother, Chand Khan, and refused 
to surrender him. Mahmud made his position worse by invading 
those portions of Malwa which Mahdrdnd Sanga had annexed to 
Mewar. He thus forced Mew^ar to join Bahadur, who regarded Mah¬ 
mud II as a vassal of Gujarat, since he was restored on the throne 
by Muzaffar II. Bahadur wanted Mahmud to come and meet him, 
but as the latter persistently failed to do so, invaded Malwa. Mah¬ 
mud literally made no resistance, and on 28 March, 1531, Mandu fell 
to the invaders. The khutba was read in Bahadur’s name and the 
portion of Malwa which still belonged to Mahmud was annexed to 
Gujarat. 1 


Bahadur and the Portuguese ( 1 ) 

In 1528, Nuno da Cunha was appointed the governor of Portu¬ 
guese India, with instructions to capture Diu. He arrived in India 
in October, 1529 and, while Bahadur was engaged in the siege of 
Mandu, a strong Portuguese fleet sailed from Bombay. It first cap¬ 
tured Daman and then proceeded towards its main objective, namely, 
Diu. On 7 February, 1531, the fleet appeared near Shial Bet island, 
eight leagues to the west of Diu, which they captured after over¬ 
coming a stiff resistance. The bombardment of Diu began on 16 
February, but no appreciable damage was done to the fortifications. 
So Nuno da Cunha, who was in charge of the expedition, left for 
Goa on 1 March, 1531, leaving a subordinate officer to cruise the 
gulf of Cambay. This officer systematically destroyed Mahuwa, 
Go go, Bulsar, Tarapur, Mahim, Kelva, Agashi and Surat. la 

Bahadur and Silahdi 

Now that the Portuguese menace was over, Bahadur turned to 
complete the conquest of Malwa, parts of which like Gagraun and 


392 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (I) 


Mandasor were occupied by the Mahdrdna of Chitor and other parts 
like Raisen and Bhilsa by a Hindu noble called Silahdi, both of 
whom had unwittingly helped Bahadur in conquering Malwa. In¬ 
deed, Bahadur had, after the fall of Mandu, granted Ujjain, Bhilsa 
and Ashta to Silahdi and graciously given him leave to depart after 
giving him three lacs of rupees and a large number of horses and ele¬ 
phants. But Bahadur now decided to crush Silahdi; the turn of 
Mewar would come later. 

Apparently Silahdi was too strong to be attacked, so Bahadur 
managed to allay his suspicion and bring him to his court where he 
was given the alternative of embracing Islam or death on the ground 
of his having a number of Muslim women in his seraglio. As Silahdi 
temporized, he was thrown into prison and Ujjain and Ashta were 
conquered from his son. Bahadur then conquered Bhilsa which 
having been under Silahdi for about two decades, had several tem¬ 
ples which were destroyed by Bahadur, who next besieged Raisen. 
Silahdi, alarmed at the turn of events, at last became a convert to 
Islam, but his brother Lakshman held out against the invading army 
and his son Bhupat went to bring help from Mewar. 

Unfortunately the help from Mewar was not effective, and in 
the skirmishes that took place the Hindus were worsted. Ultimately, 
on the pretext that the fort would be delivered if Silahdi came in 
and managed to persuade his queen, he was brought inside. Silahdi’s 
relatives then asked him “what the Sultan had given him in ex¬ 
change for his own honourable position,” and he told them “the 
sarkar of Barodah.” They said, “Silahdi, your life is drawing near 
its end, you have not long to live. Why should you wish to live, 
and through fear of death, cast your honour to the winds? Death 
is thousand times better than this. We have thus resolved. We 
men will perish by the sword, and our women by the jauliar, that 
is, in the flames. Do you also, if you have the spirit, join us in 
this resolution.” To this Silahdi yielded, and the women died in 
flames and the men sword in hand (10 May, 1532). 2 

First siege of Chitor , 1533 

After the defeat of Silahdi, Bahadur turned against Mewar and, 
as a preliminary, sent his officers to capture Gagraun and Mandasor, 
which had formed a part of Mewar since the time of Mahdrdna Sanga. 
They also conquered Islamabad, Hushangabad and other dependen¬ 
cies of Malwa, which had fallen in the hands of “zemindars ”, that is 
Hindu chieftains. 3 

His ostensible reason for attacking the country, which had shel¬ 
tered him during his exile, was to punish Mewar for having attempt- 


393 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


ed to help Silahdi. It should be recalled, however, that some time in 
1531 or 1532 Bahadur received an embassy from Sultan Nusrat Shah 
of Bengal, probably proposing some sort of alliance between Gujarat 
and Bengal against the Mughuls. Bahadur gave a warm reception to 
the Bengali envoys, but nothing came out of this as Nusrat Shah 
died soon after. 4 It is likely, however, that this possibility of an 
alliance with the Afghans against the Mughuls, encouraged Bahadur 
to envisage an extensive empire, the preliminary to the building of 
which should be the complete control over Rajasthan that controlled 
the routes from Delhi and Agra to Gujarat. As we shall see, this 
ambitious policy led to his doom. 

Bahadur’s Chitor campaigns have already been described in some 
detail. 5 As a result of his first invasion of Mewar, which came to 
an end on 24 March, 1533, he gained, besides the indemnities, those 
territories of Malwa which still appertained to Mewar. Besides this, 
Bahadur conquered Ranthambhor, Ajmer and Nagar. 

One of the reasons which probably prompted Bahadur to retire 
from Chitor was the activities of Burhan Nizam Shah and Amir 
‘All Barid of Bldar, who had advanced up to Bir 6 (22° N. 76° 5' E.). 
Bahadur sent an army under Muhammad Shah of Khandesh to co¬ 
operate with ‘Imad Shah of Berar, and joined him later. The Nizam 
Shah was defeated, but Bahadur, it seems, was content to drive him 
out on these terms. He then returned to Mandu, and as Sikandar 
says, “the ambition of conquering Chitor again took possession of 
him”. 


Bahadur and the Portuguese (II) 

But Bahadur’s ambition was thwarted by the Portuguese inva¬ 
sion of Gujarat coast. 

In 1534, heavy reinforcements arrived from Lisbon and the Por¬ 
tuguese again advanced towards Diu. They opened their attack by 
capturing Daman, upon which, Bahadur concluded peace with them 
on the most humiliating terms “to secure the friendship of the Por¬ 
tuguese against the Mughuls”. The conditions of the treaty, which 
was signed in December, 1534, were “that Bassein with all its depen¬ 
dencies by sea and land, should be made over to the King of Portugual 
for ever; that all ships bound for the Red Sea from the Kingdom 
of Cambay, should set out from Bassein, and return thither to pay 
duties; that no vessels should go to other ports without leave from 
the Portuguese; that no ships of war should be built in any ports 
belonging to the king of Cambay; and that he should no more give 
assistance to the Rumes.” 7 


394 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (I) 


Bahadur and Humayun 

The Mughul menace undoubtedly refers to Humayun, whom 
Bahadur had affronted in various ways. For several years Gujarat 
had become the asylum for the rebel Afghans whom Bahadur used 
to receive cordially. Thus, after the defeat of Silahdi, he conferred 
the fiefs of Bhilsa and Chanderi on ‘Ala-ud-din Alam Khan, Humayun’s 
rebel governor of Kalpi, and received very cordially ‘Ala-ud-dln Alam 
Khan Loch, a son of Buhlul, who had managed to escape from Bada- 
khshan where Babur had imprisoned him. Soon he, and particularly 
his ambitious son, Tatar Khan, rose high in Bahadur’s council and 
urged him to invade the Mughul dominions, to which, for the pre¬ 
sent, Bahadur prudently paid no attention. 8 

Bahadur’s relation with Humayun up to this period was quite 
cordial and he had sent an embassy to the Mughul court in 940 A.H. 
(1533-34), though he had also sent some money to Sher Shah, pre¬ 
sumably to aid him; but while the wily Afghan accepted the much- 
needed money, no help came from him when Bahadur was in dis¬ 
tress. 

Matters however reached a climax when Muhammad Zaman 
Mirza, who had twice rebelled against Humayun, escaped from pri¬ 
son and was granted asylum at Gujarat (1534). Bahadur was pro¬ 
bably at this time in Diu, where he might have gone to arrange a 
naval expedition against the Portuguese, when Humayun wrote to 
him either to hand over Muhammad Zaman Mirza to him or to expel 
the Mirza from Gujarat. Bahadur took this as a challenge to his 
sovereignty, and hastily concluded the treaty with the Portuguese 
mentioned above, in order to be free to meet the Mughuls. 

Humayun might or might not have known of Bahadur’s help to 
Sher Shah, but like all weak men who suddenly become resolute, 
was inexorable in his demand that Muhammad Zaman Mlirza be at 
least turned out of Gujarat. The correspondence began with a letter 
from Humayun in which he urged Bahadur to act in a friendly spirit, 
and was followed by another in which Humayun expressed surprise 
at Sultan Bahadur’s unfriendly conduct. 9 Apparently these mild re¬ 
monstrances failed to elicit a favourable reply, so Humayun sent 
another letter, more peremptory in tone, making it clear that failure 
to comply with his demand must lead to war. Bahadur in his reply 
refused to satisfy Humayun, and charged him with bad intentions 
for having marched to Gwalior while he (Bahadur) was busy with 
the Portuguese, which undoubtedly refers to the Portuguese inva¬ 
sion mentioned above. 


395 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


It seems that Bahadur had agreed to the humiliating peace terms 
of the Portuguese in order to be free to meet the Mughul menace. 
So he seized the opportunity afforded by Humayun’s temporary ab¬ 
sence from the capital to put down some disturbances in the eastern 
region, 10 , and sent Tatar Khan with a large army from Ranthambhor 
to harass the Agra region, and two smaller forces under ‘Ala-ud-dln 
and Burhan-ul-mulk to harass the Kalinjar and the Nagar regions. 
Bahadur then advanced to Chitor, determined to conquer it. With 
Ranthambhor and Chitor in his hands, it would be impossible for a 
Mughul army from Agra to invade Gujarat, while the Marwar route 
would also be safe so long as he had Nagar and Ajmer under him. 
He would also be in a position to help Tatar Khan when the conquest 
of Chitor was accomplished, and his instructions to Tatar was not 
to engage in a general action till he came with the main army. 

But Humayun took very quick and resolute action. He sent 
18,000 horse under ‘Askari, Hindal and several veteran generals 
against Tatar, who in disregard of Bahadur’s instructions engaged 
the Mughuls and died fighting; the other two raiding parties, under 
‘Ala-ud-dln and Burhan-ul-mulk, also seem to have been thoroughly 
defeated. Humayun now seized the opportunity which Bahadur pro¬ 
vided him. Bahadur’s subsidiary armies were gone, while his main 
army was immobilized around Chitor; so Humayun set out from 
Agra probably on 18 February, 1535 11 and, subduing Raisen quickly 
reached Sarangpur in Malwa. As soon as news of his advance reach¬ 
ed Bahadur, he decided to finish the siege of Chitor before fighting 
Humayun. 

In this connection, two interesting anecdotes are related, one by 
the Muslim and the other by the Rajasthan chroniclers. According 
to the first, Bahadur’s decision to continue the siege of Chitor instead 
of fighting Humayun was influenced by his conviction that Humayun 
would not attack him while he was fighting the Hindus, and this pro¬ 
gnostication came true. According to the Rajput chronicles, Rani 
Karmavatl, the mother of the reigning Mahclrdna, appealed to Huma¬ 
yun to come to her son’s aid and sent him a rdkhi (ritualistic wrist¬ 
band or thread which binds a man and a woman as brother and 
sister); but Humayun, though inclined to help her at first, ultimately 
did nothing. 

It is difficult to judge the historical value of these two interest¬ 
ing stories, but it is evident that Humayun did not afford any relief 
to the besieged garrison at Chitor, nor did he have any compunc¬ 
tion about invading Malwa while Bahadur was fighting the Hindus. 
Indeed, Humayun followed consistently the policy which was of the 


396 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGTIUL IMPERIALISM (I) 


greatest benefit to him, and seems to have been all along dictated by 
self-interest rather than calls of chivalry or religious brotherhood. 
Thus while Bahadur was tied up in Chitor, Humayun proceeded to 
Ujjain and easily captured this important city. However, Chitor fell 
on 8 March, 1535, and as Bahadur took the road to Malwa, Humayun 
also marched north, and the two armies met at Mandasor. 

Here Bahadur committed the fatal mistake of entrenching him¬ 
self behind a barricade on the advice of his Turkish gunner, Rumi 
Khan, who, unknown to him, had turned a traitor for not receiving 
Chitor as his fief as originally promised by Bahadur. The result of 
this defensive tactics was disastrous. Soon, food became so scarce 
that the Gujarat army practically ceased to be a fighting unit, and 
one night Bahadur secretly left it to its fate (25 April, 1535) 112 and 
fled to Mandu, pursued by Humayun, who was now joined by the 
traitor Rumi Khan. Rumi Khan seduced Silahdi’s son, Bhupat, who 
opened a gate to the Mughuls, and Mandu fell to Humayun. Baha¬ 
dur fled again, this time to Champaner, but having placed it under 
trusty generals he took refuge at Diu. 

End of Bahadur 

At Diu, Bahadur found himself completely destitute; so he had 
to turn to the Portuguese once more, and on 25 October, 1535, a 
treaty was concluded at Diu 13 , under which the Portuguese promised 
to help Bahadur by land and sea in exchange for permission to erect 
a fort at Diu, but the latter retained the right of collecting revenues 
of that port. The Portuguese help amounted to very little and the 
Portuguese utilized this opportunity to complete their fortification. 
It is possible that Bahadur granted this important concession to the 
Portuguese with the hope that he might escape with their help if 
Humayun followed him to Diu. 

This contingency, however, did not arise and taking advantage 
of popular support and collecting soldiers from Chitor, Ranthambhor 
and Ajmer 14 Bahadur managed to drive the Mughuls out of Gujarat 
by the beginning of 1536. Circumstances forced Humayun to leave 
Mandu for Agra in May, 1536, and though Bahadur was never des¬ 
tined to recover Malwa, the Mughul menace was gone. 

Bahadur immediately turned towards Diu, and began negotia¬ 
tions with Turkey for a naval expedition. The help came after his 
death. For the incidents that followed Bahadur’s visit to Diu the 
Muslim and the Portuguese chronicles give different versions. The 
fact, however, is that while negotiations were proceeding, Bahadur 
was induced to come and meet the Portuguese governor on board a 
Portuguese vessel. What happened thereafter is not very clear; ap- 


397 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


parently the Portuguese wanted to capture him, and as he tried to 
escape, his barge was attacked by the Portuguese and he jumped 
into the sea. As he called out for help and tried to swim, a Portu¬ 
guese sailor struck him with a halbert, as did others, till he was 
killed (February, 1537). 15 

Successors of Bahadur 

Bahadur left no son, hence there was some uncertainty regarding 
succession after his death, which was increased by the frivolous 
claim to the Gujarat throne made by Muhammad Zaman Mirza, the 
fugitive Mughul prince, on the ground that Bahadur’s mother had 
adopted him as her son. But the nobles wisely selected Miran 
Muhammad Shah of Khandesh, the nephew and constant ally of 
Bahadur, but that prince died on his way to Gujarat. Hence the 
nobles selected eleven-year-old Prince Mahmud Khan, son of Baha¬ 
dur’s brother Latif Khan, who had been brought up under surveil¬ 
lance. He was enthroned on 10 May, 1538, as Mahmud Shah III. 16 

Mahmud III (1538-1554) 

Mahmud, being a boy, the government was conducted by three 
nobles, namely, Imad-ul-mulk, Darya Khan and ‘Alam Khan Lodi. 
Soon after, Darya Khan managed to assume complete power and 
drove Imad-ul-mulk out of Gujarat (1538). 

Though the Muslim chroniclers describe these court intrigues in 
great detail they are completely silent about the most important 
event of the first year of Mahmud’s reign, namely, the Turko-Gujarat 
attempt to drive the Portuguese from Diu, which is described by 
Portuguese and Turkish historians. 17 It has been related above that 
before his death Sultan Bahadur had sent an appeal for help to 
Sulaiman, the Magnificent, of Turkey (1520-1568), in response to 
which a Turkish fleet, and considerable number of soldiers arrived 
at Diu some time after the death of Bahadur. Sulaiman Pasha’s in¬ 
struction was to destroy the Portuguese fleet but he engaged the 
Turkish troops in a siege of Diu. The siege continued for several 
months, and though the fort was severely damaged and its defenders 
practically exhausted, yet Sulaiman Pasha failed to capture the fort 
and sailed away. One of the reasons for failure was undoubtedly 
the gallant resistance of the Portuguese, but the main reason seems 
to be the character of Sulaiman Pasha, who even in that age was 
noted for his cruelty, and treated the Gujaratis like defeated ene¬ 
mies. As a result, the joint venture, which had great prospect of 
success, failed to accomplish any of its objects, namely, the destruc¬ 
tion of the Portuguese fleet and recovery of Diu. 


398 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (I) 

End of Darya Khan and 4 Alam Khan 

Darya Khan remained in power for about five years, at the end 
of which period the Sultan, unable to tolerate his overbearing man¬ 
ners, one night fled to Dhandhuka, where he was cordially received 
by its fief-holder, ‘Alam Khan. Darya Khan raised a boy of obscure 
origin to the throne, and advanced with a huge army to meet Mah¬ 
mud and ‘Alam Khan, and though he defeated them, his troops gra¬ 
dually deserted him and he was forced to flee to Burhanpur (1543). 

Soon, however, ‘Alam Khan became so powerful that Mahmud 
found that by driving away Darya Khan he had merely changed 
masters. ‘Alam Khan and other nobles also were disgusted by Mah¬ 
mud’s profligate habits and lowly friends, and having confined him to 
a citadel conspired to blind him and divide the kingdom among them¬ 
selves. But Mahmud forestalled their design by a daring coup and 
was at last able to have the reins of government in his own hand 
(1545). 


Epic of Diu 

In 1546 Mahmud again attempted to recover Diu, and this event 
has been characterized by the Portuguese historians as the “Epic 
of Diu” 18 on account of the severity of the contest. It seems, how¬ 
ever, that before the siege of Diu began, a strong fort was built at 
Surat to save it from Portuguese depredation, and it is from this 
time that the importance of Surat as a port begins. 

The siege of Diu began on 20 April, 1546, and continued till 11 
November, 1546, when the Gujarat army was decisively defeated by 
a comparatively small Portuguese force. The Portuguese governor 
then rebuilt the battered fort and left for Goa which he entered 
in a triumphal procession reminiscent of the Roman days, while the 
Portuguese navy cruising along the Gulf of Cambay set about des¬ 
troying the peaceful coastal towns including the ancient port of 
Broach. “This action”, says one Portuguese historian, “being so fa¬ 
mous amongst our soldiers as to give him who was called Menezes 
(the captain of the fleet) the surname of Baroche, as the ruins of 
Carthage gave Seipio the name of Africanus.” 19 ' The unfortunate 
soil of India has had to suffer many depredations by foreign invaders 
and by native rulers, but nothing comparable to the cruel barbarism 
of the Portuguese vandals possibly ever happened before or since. 

In 1548, Mahmud III again began to make preparations for in¬ 
vesting Diu, and the Portuguese made adequate arrangements for 
defence. But nothing came out of it. 


399 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Internal administration and death 

The administration had been decaying since the time of Bahadur 
and Mahmud did nothing to improve it. He was a profligate young 
man and, as if to atone for his vices, took stern measures against the 
Hindus. The Hindus had been enjoying inalienable right over a 
considerable part of Gujarat by virtue of a settlement made during 
the reign of Mahmud’s ancestor, Sultan Ahmad I (1411-1443), who 
found that this was the only way of maintaining peace with the war¬ 
like chieftains. Mahmud resumed these lands, 20 by what tyrannical 
methods we do not know. But immediately the frontier chiefs of 
idar, Sirohi, Dungarpur, Banswar'a, Lonawarah, Rajpipla and the 
chiefs on the banks of the Mahindri, Halod “and other strongholds 
on the frontier” broke into rebellion. The Muslim historians claim 
that these disturbances were put down and that “no Rajput or Koli 
was left who did not devote himself to agriculture. .. Every one of 
them was branded on the arm, and if any Rajput or Koli was found 
without the brand he was put to death.” 21 But this seems more like 
a pious wish than a statement of fact, for these States continued to 
flourish long after Mahmud’s dynasty had passed into oblivion. In¬ 
deed, this Hindu rebellion may have been one of the main causes 
for the rapid downfall of the Gujarat Sultanate. 

Resumption of the Wanta grant was not the only tyranny prac¬ 
tised against the Hindus. As Sikandar puts it: “In the reign of 
Mahmud, Muhammadan law and rule was so stringently enforced 
that no Hindu could ride on horseback in any city, nor dare enter a 
bazar without a patch of red on the back of a white garment, or a 
patch of white on red one, or to wear a dress all of one colour. In¬ 
fidel observances, such as the indecencies of the Holi, the orgies of 
the Diwali, and the practice of idol worship, and the ringing of bells 
were not allowed in public, and those who practised them in private 
did so with fear and trembling.” 22 

Sikandar was born (1553-54) during Mahmud’s reign and pre¬ 
sumably heard these stories from his father and brothers. The 
stories apparently are exaggerated, and there is no reason to assume 
that Mahmud had such an efficient administration that he could 
carry out these measures in a country which was predominantly 
Hindu. But the rules were issued and Hindus were subjected to 
petty tyranny wherever possible, so that Mahmud, who treated the 
Muslim divines with great respect and benevolence, could claim to 
be the champion of Islam, and thereby possibly induce foreign Mus¬ 
lims to join his service. The result was that his instruments of 
oppression, the Muslim nobles, concentrated power in their hands, 
while Mahmud gave himself up to voluptuous pleasure. He was 
poisoned by his cup-bearer in 1554. 


400 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (I) 


Mahmud had a horror of providing an heir who might contest 
the throne and therefore used to procure an abortion whenever a 
woman in his seraglio became pregnant. Hence a distant kinsman 
of Mahmud was raised to the throne as Ahmad III. 

Ahmad III ( 1554-1561) 

For seven years Ahmad III was the nominal ruler of Gujarat, 
while the nobles divided the kingdom among themselves into prac¬ 
tically independent principalities. The shifting combination of the 
greedy nobles started the country on the road to speedy disintegra¬ 
tion, and the confusion was increased by the influx of groups of 
Afghans. 

After about five years of tutelage under 1‘timad Khan, the noble 
who had raised him to the throne, Ahmad fled, but was captured by 
rtirnad who kept him under surveillance as before. Ahmad later 
foolishly attempted to hatch a plot against 1‘timad who had him 
assassinated in April, 1561. 

Muzaffar III ( 1561-1572 ) 

The death of Ahmad posed another problem of succession but 
I‘timad produced a child called Nathu and swore that he was a son 
of Mahmud III. Though this does not seem to be probable, Ttimad’s 
story was accepted by the nobles and the child ascended the throne 
under the title of Muzaffar III. The history of Muzaffar’s reign is 
a record of continuous strife among the nobles in the midst of which 
rtirnad managed to retain his regency until he was driven away by 
a Gujarat noble called Chingiz Khan and some Mirzas, that is, fugi¬ 
tive Mughul princes. 1‘timad Khan thereupon fled to Durgapur, and 
sent a message to Akbar, who was then besieging Chitor, to come 
and occupy Gujarat. Akbar, however, could not respond to this in¬ 
vitation immediately. 

Chingiz Khan’s power was short-lived and he was murdered by 
one of his Abyssinian officers. The result was Ttimad’s return to 
power, and the occupation by the Mirzas of Broach, Surat, Baroda 
and Champaner; Hindu feudatories began to assert their power and 
the Riao of Cutch and the Jam of Nawanagar began to issue coins. 23 
We need not trace the dreary history of Gujarat for the next few 
years till 1‘timad again invited Akbar to invade Gujarat. Akbar 
marched from Fathpur Sikri on 2 July, 1572, and when he approach¬ 
ed Ahmadabad unopposed in the following November, Muzaffar was 
found hiding in a corn field and brought in. He duly made his sub¬ 
mission (November, 1572) and was granted a small allowance. 24 

401 

M. E.—26 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


II. KASHMIR 25 
Muhammad 

We have noticed in the previous volume that Muhammad Shah 
ascended the throne for the fourth and last time in A.D. 1530. 25a 
Next year KajI Chak advanced with an army, while Kamran sent an¬ 
other under Mahram Beg to conquer Kashmir. In this predicament 
KajI Chak responded to the call of Abdal Makri, who was in virtual 
control of affairs, and their combined forces met the Mughuls. At 
first the Mughuls carried everything before them, and occupied the 
capital, but later the Kashmiri resistance was more successful; the 
Mughuls were forced to negotiate peace and after receiving a few 
presents were allowed to depart peacefully. 

Kashmir was then divided among the five great nobles, who 
suffered Muhammad to retain the crown lands, but soon after Mlrza 
Haidar invaded Kashmir. 

Mlrza Haidar, born in the Dughlat tribe, a branch of the Chagtiai 
Mughuls, was Babur’s cousin. Mlrza Haidar was at that time serv¬ 
ing under Sultan Sa‘Id Khan of Mughulistan and, along with Sa‘Id 
Khan’s son, Mlrza Sikandar, invaded Kashmir in 1532. Like Kam¬ 
ran, Mlrza Haidar at first was quite successful, but later dissension 
arose amongst his home-sick officers, and he had to retire from 
Kashmir by the middle of 1533, after concluding peace with Mlrza 
Muhammad who gave his daughter in marriage to Mlrza Sikandar. 

The only other notable incident in the reign of Muhammad was 
a severe famine graphically described by Prajyabhatta who adds 
that Abdal Makri and other nobles relieved the distress of the people 
by feeding them. 26 

Shams-ud-dln to Mlrza Haidar’s second invasion 

Muhammad died in the middle of 1537, and was succeeded by his 
son Shams-ud-dln. The hostility amongst the powerful nobles flared 
up and Kashmir again had to suffer prolonged civil war, as a result of 
which KajI Chak managed to secure control of the government. 

Shams-ud-dln died after a reign of about three years and was 
succeeded by Nazuk Shah. 27 

The year of Nazuk Shah’s accession (1540) saw Humayun’s de¬ 
feat at the battle of Kanauj. This was followed by a precipitate 
flight of the Mughuls as described above. 28 All the principal Mughul 
leaders assembled at Lahore, and there Mlrza Haidar suggested that 
Kashmir should be conquered. This plan had the merit of giving 


402 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (I) 

the Mughuls a base in India which could be easily defended against 
Sher Shah; also Mirza Haidar had been approached by Abdal Makri 
and Regi Chak to invade Kashmir. But, for various reasons Huma- 
yun did not accept the Mirza’s plan, though he allowed him to de¬ 
part for Kashmir and gave him four hundred soldiers. 

Kaji Chak on hearing of Mlrza Haidar’s invasion defended only 
one route, but Mirza avoided that route and entered Kashmir by 
the Punch pass on 2 December, 1540. Possibly the Mirza received 
adequate support within the country, for Kaji Chak, without any 
further attempt to oppose the Mughul invader, hastened to Sher 
Shah for help. Mirza Haidar thus conquered Kashmir without 
practically having to fight for it. 

Mirza Haidar allowed Nazuk Shah to continue as king with 
Abdal Makri as the wazir, and after the latter’s death, his son 
Hassan Makri was appointed as the wazir. Meanwhile Kaji Chak 
had been cordially received by Sher Shah, who gave him 5000 horse 
under the command of Afghan officers. With this force Kaji en¬ 
tered Kashmir in the spring of 1541. An indecisive battle was 
followed by a stalemate, but ultimately a decisive battle was fought 
in August 1541, in which the Mirza with inferior numbers defeated 
the Afghans, and forced them and their protege, Kaji Chak and 
Daulat Chak, to flee to India. The Chaks thereafter made a few 
more unsuccessful attempts to regain their power, but the death of 
Kaji Chak due to fever in 1544, and of Regi Chak in action two 
years later, relieved Mirza Haidar temporarily of any danger from 
that side. 

These victories made the Mirza master of Kashmir. Now he 
attempted to conquer the semi-independent provinces of the king¬ 
dom, such as Kishtwar as well as Baltistan and Ladakh. These 
adventures met with varying degrees of success, but resulted in the 
dispersal of his forces. The weakness of the Mirza’s position be¬ 
came apparent in 1549, when Haibat Khan Niyazi, Islam Shah’s 
rebel governor of Lahore, being defeated moved towards Kashmir. 
While on the way he met Daulat Chak and Ghazi Chak who pro¬ 
posed a joint invasion of Kashmir, but Haibat, instead of falling in 
with the proposal sent an envoy to Mirza Haidar who sent a large 
amount of money to induce Haibat to leave Kashmir. Thereupon 
the frustrated Chaks went to Islam Shah, and Mirza Haidar coun¬ 
tered their move by sending a present of saffron to Islam Shah. 
Islam later sent an envoy with rich presents to Kashmir, and Haidar 
gave him suitable presents. 

Mirza Haidar, like other Mughul princes, was a great patron of 
art and literature. His description of the Hindu temples is delight- 


403 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


ful reading, so that in contrast his religious orthodoxy comes as a 
surprise. He was a bigoted Sunni, and as soon as he felt secure, 
began to persecute the Nurbakshiya sect, who at that time had an 
influential following in Kashmir. Abu-1-Fazl also charges him with 
misgovernment. 29 Possibly the Mirza was a good soldier, lacking in 
administrative ability. To this was added his religious fanaticism 
and he further alienated the Kashmiris by transferring his allegi¬ 
ance to Humayun after the latter conquered Kabul and Qandahiar 
in 1545. 

Trouble broke out in 1551 and the Mirza sent a force towards 
Punch under his cousin Qara Bahadur but he was disastrously de¬ 
feated and imprisoned by the Kashmiris under Husain Makri and 
Idi Raina, who were soon after joined by Daulat Chak, and their 
combined force marched towards Srinagar. As Mirza Haidar pre¬ 
pared to proceed against them, serious rebellions broke out in Baltis- 
tan, Ladakh and other places and everywhere his small garrisons 
were overpowered and either driven off or destroyed. Still the 
Mirza set out to oppose the main Kashmiri army who had fortified 
themselves at Manar near Khianpur. As he had a small force, the 
Mirza decided to risk the hazard of a night attack, during which 
he died of a chance arrow (October, 1551). 30 

End of the Shah Mirl dynasty 

The history of the decade following the death of Mirza Haidar, 
ending in the assumption of sovereignty by the Chaks, is rather 
confusing. At first the nobles accepted Nazuk Shah as Sultan, a 
roi faineant , the real power being in the hands of Idi Raina, the 
prime minister, who had taken a prominent part in the actions 
against Mirza Haidar. Idi Raina, however, was able at the begin¬ 
ning to gain the support of the powerful houses of the Chaks and 
Makris by judicious distribution of favour. Thus when in 1552 
Haibat Khan Niyazi again invaded Kashmir, an army under Idi 
Raina, Daulat Chak and Husain Makri, successfully opposed him. 
In the action that followed, Haibat Khan and his wife Bibi Rabi‘a, 
who displayed great courage fighting by her husband’s side, lost 
their lives, and the Afghans were routed. 

Soon after the defeat of the Afghans, civil war broke out in 
Kashmir between Idi Raina, supported mainly by the Makris, and 
the Chaks led by Daulat Chak in which Idi Raina was defeated and, 
while flying, died accidentally. Daulat Chak thereupon assumed 
the office of the prime minister, deposed Nazuk Shiah, and set up 
Ibrahim, the son of Muhammad, on the throne (1552). 


404 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (I) 


From this time the ascendancy of the Chaks was complete 
though the Shah Mlrl kings were allowed to rule for another de¬ 
cade. Dissension, however, broke out among the Chaks a few years 
later when Daulat Chak married his aunt, the widowed mother of 
Ghazi Chak. Ghazi Chak managed to capture Daulat Chak, and 
after blinding him, became the prime minister. He immediately 
deposed Ibrahim and crowned his brother Ismail, and on his death 
in 1557, Ghazi set up on the throne his nephew and Isma‘lTs son, 
Habib. Four years later (1561) Ghazi set aside Habib on the ground 
of incompetence and ascended the throne himself. But, as has been 
noted above, Ghazi had been the virtual ruler of Kashmir from the 
time he became the prime minister. 

The period of Ghazl’s prime ministership was disturbed by local 
rebellions which he was able to crush. Some of the rebels, how¬ 
ever, sought the help of Abu-’1-Ma‘all, the disgraced noble of Akbar’s 
court, who collected some Mughul and Kashmiri soldiers and invad¬ 
ed Kashmir in 1558, but was disastrously defeated. The disgrunt¬ 
led nobles then sought the help of Qara Bahadur, one of Mlrza 
Haidar’s lieutenants, but his expedition, too, met the same fate, 
and he escaped to Akbar. There were other disturbances which 
Ghazi managed to quell, but the expedition which he sent to Ladakh 
was a failure. 

In his old age Ghazi was attacked with leprosy and entrusted 
his brother Husain Khan with the task of government. Soon cer¬ 
tain incidents antagonized the two brothers, and Husain usurped the 
throne in 1563 after deposing Ghazi and blinding his son Ahmad. 

Husain’s reign also witnessed the usual civil wars, but the most 
important incident of his reign was an apparently trivial affair which 
first interested Akbar in the fate of Kashmir. Two intemperate 
Mullas, one a Shiah and the other a Sunni, began by abusing each 
other and ended with the Shiah Yusuf wounding the Sunni Habib, 
and a special tribunal composed of Sunnis condemned Yusuf to 
death. It was at this time that Mlrza Muqim, Akbar’s envoy, came 
to Kashmir. Muqim was welcomed with great respect by Husain, 
who now referred the dispute to the Mughul plenipotentiary and a 
case was started against the Sunni divines for having executed 
Yusuf when he had merely wounded the Sunni qazl. As a result 
of this enquiry a few Sunnis were executed. Soon Muqim left 
Kashmir, laden with rich presents and Husain’s daughter to be 
married to Akbar. 31 But the disreputable conduct of Husain and 
his advisers so angered Akbar, that he declined to accept the pre¬ 
sents and Husain’s daughter had to return to Kashmir. Muqim was 


405 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


in his turn judged by ‘Abdun-Nabi and others and on their advice 
put to death by Akbar. On hearing this Husain fell seriously ill; 
his nobles deserted him and joined his brother, ‘All Khan, who soon 
forced Husain to abdicate in his favour (1569). 

‘Ali Shah’s reign was as disturbed by civil disturbances as that 
of his predecessors. In 1571, ‘All Khan Chak attempted to seize the 
throne but was ultimately defeated and captured. Next, ‘All Shah’s 
son and successor Yusuf, murdered Ghazi Shah’s surviving son, so 
that there might be no rival claimant to the throne. ‘Ali Shiah then 
sent a force against his son and it seemed that a war between father 
and son was inevitable, but the wazir intervened and effected a re¬ 
conciliation. A few years later two princes of the Shah Miri dynasty, 
who had taken refuge in Hindusthan, attempted to capture Kashmir, 
but were defeated. One of the princes died fighting while the other 
managed to escape. 

The most important event in ‘Ali Shah’s reign was his accept¬ 
ance of Mughul suzerainty. In the middle of 1578, Akbar sent two 
envoys, namely, Mulla ‘Ishqi’ and Qazi Sadr-ud-dm to Kashmir, as 
Abu-’l-Fazl says, “in order that they might guide that sitter in the 
hills (‘Ali Shah) to obedience.” 32 The result was that ‘All Shah 
had the khutba recited and coins issued in the name of Akbar. Why 
‘Ali Shah performed these acts is not known, but he undoubtedly 
provided Akbar the pretext for considering Kashmir as a vassal State. 

In 1579 ‘All Shah died of an accident while playing polo, and 
though most of the nobles were in favour of his son Yusuf, ‘All 
Shah’s brother, Abdal, decided to contest the throne. Abdal, how¬ 
ever, was defeated and killed in battle. Yusuf ascended the throne, 
but within two months the nobles drove him away and raised Sayyid 
Mubarak, the wazir , to the throne. Within a few months, however, 
the nobles imprisoned Mubarak and set up one Lohar Chak on the 
throne. 

In the meantime, Yusuf Shah, despairing of success, came to 
Lahore to seek Mughul help from Man Singh who brought him to 
the court at Agra where he was received by Atkbar in January, 1580. 33 
Akbar promised Yusuf the necessary help and deputed Man Singh 
and another officer for the purpose, with whom Yusuf left in August, 
1580. But by the time he arrived at Lahore some Kashmiri nobles, 
afraid of the Mughul troops, opened negotiations, and Yusuf managed, 
though it is not clear how, to detach himself from the Mughuls and 
raising a small force of Kashmiris entered his kingdom. This time 
fortune favoured Yusuf and he was able to defeat his enemies. 
Lohar Chak was captured and blinded. 


406 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (I) 

Resistance to Yusuf however continued though he managed to 
overcome all opposition. But in 1581 envoys came from Akbar and 
Yusuf hastened to welcome them at Baramula. He then sent his 
third son Haidar to the imperial court with rich presents. He was 
allowed to depart after a year, and this time Akbar demanded that 
Yusuf himself should come and wait on him. This Yusuf was not 
prepared to do and he sent his eldest son Ya'qub to the imperial 
court in 1585. Shortly afterwards, while Ya'qub was still there 
Akbar decided to invade Kashmir. 

Some modern historians have condemned Akbar for his un¬ 
provoked aggression. It is, therefore, necessary to remember that 
Akbar could justifiably have looked upon Kashmir as a feudatory 
State on the basis of 'All Shah’s reciting the khutba and striking 
coins in his name. This relation became even more pronounced 
when Yusuf came to him for support to win his throne; Yusuf then 
dispensed with Mughul support, but that would hardly change his 
status in Akbar’s view. Moreover, when Akbar demanded Yusuf’s 
presence at the imperial court, the latter, instead of an unequivocal 
refusal, prevaricated by sending his sons. Akbar alleged in one of 
his letters that Yusuf’s son Haidar was not fit for service, and 
Ya'qub was 'somewhat mad.’ 34 There can hardly be any doubt 
that diplomatically Akbar’s conduct was correct, and that Yusuf had 
put himself in an indefensible position by failing to assert his inde¬ 
pendence at the proper time. It is also extremely doubtful if Yusuf 
had ever sustained any idea of independence as we understand it 
today. When the Mughul army under Bhagwan Das began to en¬ 
ter Kashmir the nobles counselled resistance, but Yusuf decided 
otherwise and surrendered at the earliest possible opportunity 
(about 24 February, 1586). 35 

Yusufs surrender did not stop fighting. His son Ya'qub crown¬ 
ed himself and carried on the struggle against the Mughuls. At 
first the Kashmiri resistance halted the Mughul advance, but ulti¬ 
mately some landlords let the Mughuls pass through their villages, 
whereupon the Kashmiris came with proposals of peace. It was 
agreed that Akbar’s name should be mentioned in the khutba, coins 
struck in his name, and revenues from the mint, saffron, shawl, etc., 
should be collected by imperial superintendents and paid to the 
imperial treasury. 

It is difficult to determine, who entered into this treaty-relation 
with Akbar. Abu-’l-Fazl says: “As the army had been harassed, 
these proposals were accepted by the endeavours of Yusuf, the ruler 
of Kashmir.” 36 But Yusuf was at this time in the Mughul camp, so 
he seems to have acted as an intermediary between his son Ya'qub 


407 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


and the Mughuls. This conclusion is to some extent supported by 
Prajyabhatta who states that after Yusuf’s surrender Ya'qub be¬ 
came the king. 37 On 7 April, 1586, Yusuf was presented at the 
court. As mentioned above (p. 148) Yusuf was imprisoned. 

According to Abu-’l-Fazl, Akbar "had resolved upon restoring 
Kashmir to him (Yusuf) but the imperial servants represented that 
he ought to have some punishment for his backslidings, and that 
Kashmir should first be conquered and afterwards restored to him. 
H.M. accepted this view, and made him over to Raja Todar Mai.” 38 
A year later Yusuf was released and given a fief in Bihar. 39 

Akbar has been severely criticised by some modern historians 
for his treatment of Yusuf. It is no doubt impossible to justify 
Yusuf’s imprisonment, but the statement that it led Bhagwan Das 
to commit suicide seems to be absurd. 410 

The terms of the treaty, as might be foreseen, were not honour¬ 
ed by Ya'qub. Had he, however, administered the country well, 
he might have defied the mighty Mughul, secured as he was behind 
the formidable mountain passes. But Ya'qub, instead of rallying the 
country around his throne, divided his supporters by his anti-Sunni 
policy. He could not expect any support from the Hindus either, for 
the Chaks had alienated them by imposing the jizya 41 Rebellion 
broke out which he suppressed, but some disgruntled nobles approach¬ 
ed Akbar for help, and the emperor, who had been dissatisfied with 
the treaty negotiated by Bhagwan Das, seized this opportunity to 
send an army under Qasim Khan to conquer Kashmir (8 July, 
1586) 42 

The difficult terrain and inclement weather helped the Kash¬ 
miris, though Qasim Khan overawed a section of the Kashmiri army, 
and a large number of officers capitulated. 43 But the resistance led 
by Ya'qub persisted till Qasim Khan was replaced by Mirza Yusuf 
Khan. 44 Mirza Yusuf seems to have been able to cope with the 
situation successfully so that it was possible for Akbar to visit 
Kashmir. He left Lahore on the eve of 7 May, 1589, the day after 
the death of Miyan Tansen, and reached Srinagar on 15 June, 1589. 45 
On 21 July, 1589, Ya'qub opened negotiations for his surrender 
through his brother Abiya and on 7 August offered his formal sub¬ 
mission. 46 


1. For the annexation of Malwa, see above, Vol. VI, p. 186. 

la. Danvers, F.C.: The Portuguese in India (London, 1894), pp. 395-401. 

2. Mirat-i-Sikandari, tr. Bayley (MSB), p. 364; Nizam-ud-din gives a slightly 
different version of this speech, TA. tr. Ill, pt. i, 366. The date of the fall 
of Raisen is given in MSB, p. 365. 

3. MSB, pp. 367-68. Bahadur also invaded Gondwana and captured a fort 
called Kanur. 


408 





MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (I) 


4. History of Bengal, II, ed. by Sir Jadunath Sarkar, p. 157. 

5. Above, p. 329. 

6. MSB, p. 373. 

7. Danvers, op. cit., pp. 405-06; 416. 

8. Abu-’I-Fazl relates that Bahadur who was present in the first battle of 
Panlpat was extremely impressed by the fighting auality of the Mughuls, 
A.JV. tr. I 3 294. 

9. Dr< S. K. Bannerji has given translation of the earlier letters from the Arabic 
History of Gujarat, (S. K. Bannerji, Hvnnayun Badshah, pp. 99-111). Sikan- 
dar says that only Humayun’s third and last letter and Bahadur’s reply to 
the same have been preserved which he quotes, MSB, 375-380. Bahadur’s 
last reply to Humayun was quite frank and outspoken and, he accepted 
Humayun’s challenge. The story given by Sikandar and other historians is 
that Bahadur, who was illiterate, had this letter drafted by a man who had 
a grouse against Humayun, and gave orders for its despatch while under in¬ 
fluence of drink without consulting his ministers. Next morning when the 
Ministers learnt about it, Bahadur agreed to change it but the messenger had 
already departed and in spite of best efforts could not be recalled. This story 
appears to be apocryphal; Bahadur was justified in asserting his right to grant 
asylum to Muhammad Zaman Mirza. 

10. Dr. S. K. Bannerji, on the authority of the Ain (II, 184), states that Humayun 
had gone to Kanar in the Kalpi district (Bannerji, op. cit. 73). Dr. Iswari 
Prasad, who does not give any reference, states that Humayun had proceeded 
up to Kanauj on his way to Bengal. (Iswari Prasad, Life and Times of 
Humayun, p. 68). 

11. For Bahadur’s plan of campaign and Humayun’s activities See A.N. I, pp. 293 
ff. According to Abu-’l-Fazl, Humayun advanced from Agra on 9 November, 
1534. But this date seems to be too early. I have therefore followed the date 
given by Gulbadan Begam, Humayun-ndma, tr. pp. 131-32. 

12. A.N. tr. I, p. 303. Sikandar gives the date as 3rd Ramazan 941 A.H., 25 
March, 1535; MSB gives the date as 20th Ramazan 941 A.H. which Bailey 
converts into 25 March, 1535, which seems to be a mistake. 

13. Danvers, op. cit., 417. 

14. For the defeat of the Mughuls in Gujarat, see above pp. 47-50. Sikandar states 
that the troops which helped Bahadur to defeat Yadgar Nasir Mirza came from 
the garrison of Chitor, Ajmer and Ranthambor, MSB, 393. 

15. The Portuguese historians accuse Bahadur of having intended to capture the 
Portuguese Governor treacherously. Erskine went into the problem thoroughly 
and put the entire blame on the Portuguese (W. Erskine, History of India, 
Babur and Humayun, II, 95, f.n.). But Bahadur either intended to play some 
trick after allaying the suspicion of the Portuguese or was biding his time 
for the Turkish fleet’s arrival, MSB, pp. 395, 327; Danvers, op. cit., 425. 

16. MSB does not give the date but states that Mahmud ascended the throne in 
943 A.H. (A.D. 1536-1537). 

17. Both Sikandar and Haji-ud-dabir completely ignore this event, though the 
latter describes Gujarat’s attempt to recover Diu in 1546. For this encounter 
see M.L. Dames: “The Portuguese and Turks in the Indian Ocean in the 
sixteenth century,” JRAS, January, 1921, 15-20; E. Denison Ross, “The Portu¬ 
guese in India and Arabia”, JRAS, January 1922, 13 ff. R.S. Whiteway, The Rise 
of the Portuguese Poiver in India, 244-60, Danvers, op. cit., 425-39. 

18. For details see M.S. Commissariat: Studies in the History of Gujarat, pp. 7 ff. 
and History of Gujarat, pp. 436-57. 

19. Quoted by Commissariat, History of Gujarat, p. 451. 

20. “A fourth part of Gujarat, called Banth (Wanta), was in the hands of Rajputs 
and Grassiah” MSB 439. Wanta meant the enjoyment by the landlord of one 
fourth of a village. Forbes, Rds-mala, II, 270-71. 

21. MSB, 439. 

22. MSB, 439-40. 

23. A few copper coins bearing the name of Mahmud-bin-Latif in Persian and the 
name of the Rao of Cutch in Nagari have been found, from which Hodivala 

409 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


concluded that the Hindu princes were minting coins during the reign of 
Mahmud III. S. H. Hodivala: “The unpublished coins of Gujarat Sultanate” 
JBBRAS 1926, 32-33. But minting copper coins was of little importance. 

24. For details of Akbar’s Gujarat campaign, see above pp. 125, 133, 145. Though 
Muzaffar did not take any part in the Gujarat rebellion of 1573 he escaped from 
surveillance in 1578, and took refuge in Junagad, where he collected sufficient 
men to start a rebellion, and in 1583, captured Ahmadabad and declared him¬ 
self King. He defeated several imperial officers, but was severely defeated 
by ‘Abdur-Rahim, who got his title of Khan Khanan for his action against 
Muzaffar. Muzaffar then took refuge in Cutch, where the historian Nizam-ud- 
din pursued him. Muzaffar continued to give trouble till 1591-92 when he 
was captured and is reported to have committed suicide. 

25. The proper name is Kasmlra. But as it is also a modern name it is usually 
written without any diacritical mark or as Kashmir or Kashmir (as in this 
book). The form Kashmir used in CHI seems to be erroneous. (Ed.). 

25a. Vol. VI, 386. In an article published in 1956 I had shown that possibly 
Muhammad’s restoration in 1530 was the beginning of his fifth reign (A. K. 
Majumdar: ‘A note on the chronology of the Sultans of Kashmir in the 
Aln-i-AkbarV, JASBL, XXII, 92), but as all the authoritative texts assigned 
him only four reigns, I did the same. Dr. M. Husain in his Kashmir under 
the Sultans p. 296 (1959) has assigned five reigns to Muhammad; though he 
has noticed my article he has not taken into consideration the objections which 
prompted me to assign four reigns to Muhammad instead of five. I am there¬ 
fore following the chronology proposed in my article mentioned above. 

26. Rdjatarangini, (RT. Peterson’s ed.) pp. 351-52, vv. 347-361. 

27. For the relationship between Nazuk and Muhammad, see Vol. VI, 385. M. 
Husain states that Shams-ud-dln was succeeded by his brother Isma‘11. Fsom 
the RT, p. 355, v. 399 ff., however, it seems that Nazuk succeeded Shams-ud- 
din. Abu-’l-Fazl’s testimony is conflicting. In the Am (II, p. 375, 2nd ed.) 
Abu-’l-Fazl has given a list of kings from which it would appear that at the 
time of Mlrza Haidar’s invasion Isma‘Il was reigning, while in the Akbar-ndma, 
he States that “At that time (i.e. during Mlrza Haidar’s second invasion) a 
person called Nazuk Shah—having a name that was no name—was the reported 
sovereign”. AN, I, 402. Unfortunately M. Husain does not discuss this pro¬ 
blem at all and does not give any reference for his statement (p. 130) that 
Isma‘11 succeeded Shams-ud-dln, and that Mlrza Haidar set up Nazuk Shah on 
the throne (p. 133). We have therefore followed the statement of RT which 
is corroborated by the AN. 

28. See above pp. 55 ff. 

29. AN, I, 405. For Mirza Haidar’s appreciation of Hindu temples see Tdrikh-i- 
Rashidi tr. by Elias and Ross, p. 427. 

30. M. Husain, Kashmir under the Sultans, p. 140. 

31. M. Husain (op. cit., p. 156) writes that Husain’s daughter was intended to 
be married to prince Salim. But these incidents happened in A.H. 977 (A.D. 
1569-70), the year in which Jahangir was born; therefore the girl must have 
been intended for Akbar. 

32. A.N., III, 356. 

33. Ibid., 409; Yusuf’s surrender to Akbar is graphically described by Prajya- 
bhatta. 

Samasta-prithivi-pdla-Jaldladlna-bhupateh I 
Charano,m sarani-kartum yayau Yusuba-bhupatih II 
RT (Peterson’s ed.) p. 376, v. 637. 

Of Yusuf’s return it is stated:— 

Jaldladina-bhupdla-pdda-darsana-harshitah I 
Ayayau vatsare yate Srimdn-Yusuba-bhupatih II 
Ibid., p. 377, v.' 643. 

34. Haidar Malik: IOMS, p. 185< quoted by Beveridge, AN, III, 550, f.n. 

35. TA, II, 760-61, AN, III, 724; these incidents are quite graphically described in 
the RT. pp. 679-82, vv. 661-695. 

36. AN, III, 725. 


410 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (I) 


37. Pancha-varsha=sritdn=bhogdn-bhuktvd Yusuba-bhupatih I 
Jallaladina-bhupala-sevanartham atha—gamat II 

Gate tasmin mahlpdle Bhagavad=dasa-sainikam I 
Yakuba nama tat-putrah prdjyam rdjyam=athd-grahit II 
RT (Peterson’s ed.) p. 382, vv. 694-95. 

Prajyabhatta then relates in some detail Ya'qub’s attempt to defend Kashmir 
against the next Mughul invasion under Qasim Khan, but never mentions 
Yusuf. That is, so far as Kashmir was concerned Yusuf’s reign came to an 
end with his surrender. 

38. AN, III, 738-39. 

39. AN, III, 801. 

40. “.Akbar refused to ratify the treaty which Bhagwan Das had made, and 

broke faith with Yusuf by detaining him as a prisoner. The raja, sensitive 
on a point of honour, committed suicide”. (W. Haig, CHI, III, 293). Haig as 
usual does not give any reference but the only authority for this statement 
can be BadaunI, who states that Bhagwan Das had given safe conduct to 
Yusuf and when Akbar imprisoned him, the raja struck himself with a dagger, 
but recovered soon after (BadaunI, II, 364). But, as V. Smith pointed out, 
BadaunI was singularly misinformed about the fate of Yusuf, and his state¬ 
ment may therefore be rejected. V. Smith, Akbar the Great Moghul, 240. 
M. Husain (op. cit. 178) seems to reject Smith’s contention but does not give 
any reason for doing so. [It is noteworthy that even CHI, IV, p. 136 differs 
from what is Stated in CHI, III as quoted above, Editor!. 

41. Pura-chakka-kulo-tpannair-bhupair — jati-virodhatah I 
Brahmanebhyas—tada dahdo grihltah kila varshikah II 
RT, p. 400 v. 885. 

The persecution of the Brahmins seems to have been quite severe and there 
were some forced conversions too, for Prajyabhatta adds: 

Uttamo Bdhmano desam tatydja mlechhadushitam I 
T atyaja madhyamo lajjdm jdtim tatydja chd—dhamah II 
(ibid v. 888). 

Akbar remitted the j izya. 

Tadrsan Brahmandn jnatva J allaladlna-bhupatih / 

Chakka-vamsa-krama-ydtam vipra-dandam nyavarayat / 

The Chaks were religious fanatics and there can be no doubt that they were 
persecuting the Hindus. Akbar’s conquest must have come to them as a 
liberation and that is probably the reason why Prajyabhatta refers to him in 
very flattering terms. 

42. Mlrza Shah Rukh was Sent first, but was recalled as “his heart was not in 
the work.” AN, III, 747. It appears that the conquest of Kashmir was under¬ 
taken somewhat light-heartedly. Several officers gave their opinion as to 
the strategy which should be adopted in conquering that hilly country and 
Abu-’l-Fazl naively adds* “Though the writer of the noble volume fre¬ 
quently pointed out excellent methods for conquest, there was no good result,” 
that is, Akbar did not accept his historian’s plan for a difficult campaign. Pre¬ 
sumably he had become cautious after BIrbal’s death. However, Akbar called 
a meeting of astrologers, who predicted “that if some energy were exerted the 
conquest would be quickly made”. This excellent advice was accepted and 
Qasim Khan was selected for the command. AN, III, 752. 

43. AN, III, 787. 

44. Qasim Khan had probably become tired of the constant fight. From what 
Abu-’l-Fazl says (AN, III, 786) it may appear that Qasim Khan was recalled 
for his high-handedness but later (p. 798) Abu-’l-Fazl states that “Qasim Khan 
too got disgusted and petitioned for recall”. He reached the court in February, 
1588 (ibid, 805). 

45. AN, III, 817, 827. 

46. AN, III, 839, 846. 


411 



CHAPTER XIV 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL 
IMPERIALISM (II) 

THE FIVE SULTANATES OF THE DECCAN 

I. General Review 

It has already been shown in Volume VI, Chapter XI, how the 
forces of disintegration worked in the Bahmanl kingdom and ulti¬ 
mately brought about its dissolution. With the weakness and in¬ 
capacity of the central government, the provincial governors became 
all-powerful within their jurisdictions, and one by one, five auto¬ 
nomous States came into existence, viz., Ahmadnagar, Bijapur, Berar, 
Golconda and Bidar. The process of disintegration started with 
Malik Ahmad Nizam-ul-Mulk, the governor of Junnar, who refused 
to obey the behests of Qasim Band, the Prime Minister of the roi 
faineant, Sultan Mahmud Shah Bahmanl (1482-1518), and in A.D. 
1490 assumed independence in the city of Ahmadnagar founded by 
him. His example was followed by Yusuf ‘Adil Khan, the governor 
of Bijapur, and Fathullah ‘Imad-ul-Mulk, the governor of Berar, in 
the same year. These governors enjoyed full autonomy within 
their respective jurisdictions, 1 and owed only nominal allegiance to 
the Bahmanl Sultan at Bidar. Sultan Qutb-uLMulk, the governor 
of Telingana, also followed their footsteps in 1518 la after the death 
of Mahmud Shah. On the demise of Qasim Band in 1504 his son, 
Amir Band, controlled the administration of the decadent Bahmanl 
kingdom. But with the flight of Kalimullah, the last Bahmanl 
Sultan, from Bidar in A.D. 1528, Amir Barld was relieved of his 
phantom Sultan who, at first, went to Bijapur and thence to Ahmad¬ 
nagar, and breathed his last in 1538. Like the four autonomous 
States mentioned above, Amir Barld thus had one such unit, but 
he never formally assumed the title of “Shah”, and it was his son 
‘All Barld, who succeeded him in A.D. 1542 and assumed the title 
of “Shah”.£ 

In Berar, the khutbd was read in the name of ‘Imad-uLMulk 
for the first time in A.D. 1529. 3 So far as Bijapur was concerned, 
it was Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah I, the fourth ruler (1535-1557), who took 
the title of Shah 3a and in regard to Golconda, Ibrahim Qutb Shah, 
the third ruler (1550-1580), called himself Shah. But it is not of 


412 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 

much importance if any ruler out of sentiment did not assume the 
regal title; the fact remains that when there was no scion of the 
ruling dynasty on the BahmanI throne and the Sultan ceased to 
function, the provincial governments mentioned above who had so 
long acknowledged allegiance to the BahmanI emperor acquired the 
position of sovereign monarchs. 

Five independent Sultanates thus came into existence; namely, 
the ‘Adil Shah! of Bijapur, the Qutb Shahi of Golconda, the Nizam 
Shahi of Ahmadnagar, the Band Shahi of Bldar, and the ‘Imad 
Shahi of Berar. Of these, Berar and Bldar were ultimately absorbed 
by their respective powerful neighbours, Ahmadnagar and Bijapur. 
Berar was annexed in A.D. 1574 and Bldar in A.D. 1619. Some 
modern writers are of opinion that Bldar was annexed by Bijapur 
in A.D. 1609, but this view does not seem to be correct, for Bldar 
helped Malik ‘Ambar in his struggle with the Mughuls as late as 
1616. 4 According to the Basatln-us-Saldim it fell in 1619, 5 and this 
date is accepted by Sir Wolseley Haig. 6 Of the rest, viz., Golconda, 
Bijapur, and Ahmadnagar, the last two played very significant roles 
in the Deccan and shaped the history of south of the Narmada for 
a long time. “The heritage of the Bahmanis passed into the worthy 
hands of Nizam Shah and Adil Shah. Ahmadnagar and Bijapur 
now became centres which fully kept up the traditions of Islamic 
dominion and Islamic culture founded by the Sultans of Kulbarga.” 7 

The respective positions of the five Sultanates were as follows: 
Ahmadnagar was situated to the south of Khandesh and north 
of Bijapur. Berar was on the north-eastern side of Ahmadnagar, 
and when the former was annexed by the latter, the north-eastern 
boundary of Ahmadnagar also touched the south-eastern boundary 
of Khandesh. Bldar was situated on the eastern and south-eastern 
sides of Bijapur and Ahmadnagar respectively and “Golconda’s 
western boundary was mostly identical with the eastern frontier of 
Bldar.” So Bldar was surrounded by the three powerful kingdoms 
of Bijapur, Ahmadnagar and Golconda. 

The most important feature of the Deccan politics was the keen 
rivalry and frequent warfare among the three big States, viz., 
Ahmadnagar, Bijapur and Golconda for hegemony of the Deccan. 
As all these three had the same object in view, the repeated trials 
of strength arising out of their selfish greed not only disturbed 
peace and tranquillity in that region but often retarded the pro¬ 
gress of Islam there. The small States of Berar and Bldar were 
also not immune from rivalry and warfare, and they joined hands 
with one party or the other as suited their own purpose. But here 


413 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


one question naturally arises: how could Berar and Bldar survive 
such a long time in the teeth of opposition from their powerful 
neighbours? This was possible mainly because of the natural jea¬ 
lousies and animosities of the great powers who were interested 
more in annihilation of their rivals than crushing the small States. 
Moreover, the rival States were always alert in maintaining the 
balance of power in the Deccan and did not like to tolerate any ac¬ 
cession of strength of their adversary. This hindered the big powers 
from swallowing the weaker and smaller States and it also partly 
accounts for the prolonged life of the latter. 

Although efforts were made from time to time to make up the 
differences of the States by marriage and other friendly alliances, 
they could not pave the way for lasting peace. The bitterness with 
which their wars were sometimes carried on led one or other of 
them even to take the assistance of the Hindu kingdom of Vijaya- 
nagara to crush its adversary, and it was only on rare occasions that 
we find them acting together for a common cause. It was for the 
first time in 1564 that the four Sultans of Bijapur, Ahmadnagar, 
Golconda and Bldar agreed to unite and proceed against Vijaya- 
nagara and ultimately fought together in the battle, popularly known 
as the battle of Talikota, in 1565. Malik ‘Ambar’s adroitness again 
knit together Ahmadnagar, Bijapur and Golconda to stem the tide 
of Mughul aggression in the south. 

The period which witnessed such turmoil and frequent warfare 
in the Deccan also produced some of the best administrators and 
statesmen like Malik ‘Ambar and Ibtfahlm ‘Adil Shah II, of whom 
any country may be proud. “Malik Ambar,” says Sir J. N. Sarkar, 
“is one of the three true statesmen that Islam in southern India has 
produced, and in some respects he is the greatest of them. In con¬ 
structive genius and the combination of high military capacity with 
administrative skill, he towers above Khvaja Mahmud Gavan and 
Sir Salar Jang.” 8 

Fine specimens of architecture were produced both at Golconda 
and Bijapur. The architectural works at Bijapur are “marked by 
a grandeur of conception and boldness in construction unequalled by 
any edifice in India.” It was also during this period that under the 
patronage of some of the Sultans of the Deccan, historical literature 
in Persian flourished there. Among them special mention may be 
made of Tdrikh-i-Firishta of Muhammad Qasim Firishta, Tazkirat- 
ul-Mulk of Mir Rafl-ud-dln Shirazi, both written during the reign of 
Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah II, Futuhdt-i-Adil-Shahi of Fuzuni Astarabadi 
written during the reign of Muhammad ‘Adil Shah and TarVkh-i- 


414 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 


Muhammad Qutb Shah completed in the reign of Muhammad Qutb 
Shah. 


II. THE N IZAM.-S HAH I KINGDOM OF AHMADNAGAR 

In A.D. 1490, Malik Ahmad, the governor of Junnar, assumed 
independence within his jurisdiction and henceforth he had only 
slender tie of allegiance to the central government. 

Malik Ahmad “was the son of Nizam-ul-Mulk Bahrl, originally 
a Brahmin of Vijayanagara, whose real name was Timabhat, the son 
of Bahrlu. In his infancy, Nizam-ul-Mulk Bahrl was taken prisoner 
by the BahmanI Sultan Ahmad Shah, converted to Islam, and given 
the name of Malik Hasan. He was brought up and educated along 
with Prince Muhammad and from his father’s name he was called 
Bahrlu, but the prince being unable to pronounce the word Bahrlu 
called him Bahrl, whence he was known as Malik Hasan 
Bahrl. Subsequently he was put in charge of the royal hawks, and 
the word for hawk being Bahrl, it became a part of his title.” 9 He 
was a man of talents and, by degrees, rose to a very high position, 
wielding great authority in the State. He also obtained the grand 
appellation of Nizam-ul-Mulk. 10 

On the demise of his father, Malik Ahmad assumed the appel¬ 
lation of his father, and from this the dynasty is known as the 
Nizam Shah! dynasty. He had built a city on the bank of the river 
Sina, beautified it with fine buildings and gardens, named it after 
him Ahmadnagar, and made it the seat of his government. This city 
held a more convenient and strategically better position than Junnar. 

One of his great achievements was the conquest of the hill fort¬ 
ress of Daulatabad after prolonged efforts. The acquisition of such 
an important fortress greatly enhanced his power and prestige. Be¬ 
sides this, he took possession of the hill fort of Antur and several 
other places belonging to Khandesh and compelled the Rajia of Bag- 
lana to pay him tribute. In this manner he not only extended the 
territory of his State but also consolidated his power. He breathed 
his last in A.D. 1509. 

He never called himself ‘Shah’ and, as has been stated before, 
owed nominal allegiance to the BahmanI Sultan. Firishta praises 
him for continence and modesty, 11 and he was an efficient generlal, 
good administrator and fond of duelling; it was during his time that 
the system of duelling was introduced in Ahmadnagar and thence it 
spread to other places in the Deccan. 12 


415 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Burhan Nizam Shah I ( 1509-1553 ) 

On the demise of Ahmad, his son Burhan, a boy of seven, was 
installed in his place. Mukammal Khan, who held a high position 
in the State, was appointed minister and regent, and his son entitled 
‘AzIz-ul-Mulk was appointed commander of the household troops. 
The father and son exercised uncontrolled sway over all affairs of 
the State. But the pride and insolence of ‘AzIz-ul-Mulk became in¬ 
tolerable to some of the nobles and they conspired to remove both 
the father and son from their high position. They wanted to accom¬ 
plish this by removing Burhan and raising his younger brother 
RajajI in his place. But this plot was not successful and the plot¬ 
ters had to leave Ahmadnagar and take shelter in Berar where they 
excited ‘Ala-ud-din Tmad Shah to invade Ahmadnagar. ‘Ala-ud-dln 
proceeded against the Nizam-Shahl kingdom with a large army but 
sustained a severe defeat and was compelled to retreat to his capital 
Ellichpur, leaving everything including his horses and elephants in 
the hands of his enemies. 13 Being pursued he fled to Burhanpur, and, 
at last, a peace was concluded between the two States with the aid 
of the ruler of Khandesh, but quarrel over the possessions of Mahur 
and Pathri, the last of which was the ancestral home of the Nizam- 
Shahi rulers, brought them again into conflict. Burhan, however, 
conquered both these places and succeeded in retaining possession 
of them. 13a 

In 1524, IsmaTl, the ruler of Bijapur, met Burhan at Sholapur, 
and an alliance was formed between them. His (Ismahl’s) sister, 
BibI Mariyam, was married to Burhan. The underlying motive 
which prompted him to contract such an alliance was to strengthen 
his position for retrieving the losses he had suffered at the hands of 
Krishnadevaraya, the king of Vijayanagara, and punishing Amir 
Barid, the arch-enemy of Bijapur. 

But unfortunately the alliance could not create the desired feel¬ 
ing of cordiality. Asad Khan, the minister and envoy of IsmaTl, 
had promised in the name of his master to give the fort of Sholapur 
as marriage dowry to Burhan 14 but his master professed ignorance 
of such authorization and refused to part with it. Burhan was 
eager to occupy it, and made alliances with Amir Barid and Tmad 
Shah. 14 * In the following year, the confederate army marched 
against Sholapur, but they were defeated near the frontier of Bija¬ 
pur, and Burhan, “overcome with the extreme heat of the day,” was 
carried away from the battlefield in a dead faint. His losses were 
heavy. Thus Burhan was unable to occupy this border fortress 
which was always a bone of contention between Bijapur and Ahmad¬ 
nagar. 


416 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 

In 1527 Ahmadnagar again came to arms with Bijapur when the 
latter had taken up the cause of Berar for the recovery of Pathrl, 
but in the following year we come across a rare occasion when 
Bijapur joined hands with Ahmadnagar against the combined armies 
of Berar, Khandesh and Gujarat. Bahadur Shah of Gujarat made 
the position of Burhan precarious. Both the fortresses of Ahmad¬ 
nagar and Daulatabad were besieged and Burhan had to purchase 
peace on payment of an indemnity and causing the khutba to be read 
in the name of Bahadur. 14b 

In 1531 war commenced between Bldar and Bijapur for the pos¬ 
session of Kalyani and Qandahar. Amir Barid had promised to sur¬ 
render these places to Bijapur but did not act up to his promise and 
Isma‘11 marched to occupy them by force. As it was not possible to 
fight alone against Bijapur, Amir Barid sought the assistance of 
Burhan, who at first tried to desist Isma‘11 from attacking Bldar, but 
when he found that his endeavour did not produce the desired effect, 
he joined Amir Barid and moved against Bijapur with twenty-five 
thousand cavalry and sufficient artillery. But he sustained a severe 
defeat in the engagement that followed and fled post haste to Ahmad¬ 
nagar. 

In the following year there was an attempt to arrive at an under¬ 
standing between Burhan and Isma‘Il ‘Adil Shah by dividing the 
Deccan between the two. A meeting was arranged between them 
and both agreed in fixing their respective zones of aggrandizement. 
It was settled that Ahmadnagar might take up the conquest of Berar, 
and Bijapur that of Golconda. 

In accordance with these terms Isma‘11, who now joined hands 
with Amir Band, proceeded to Golconda and laid siege to the fortress 
of Kovelaconda, 15 but, all on a sudden, he fell seriously ill and ex¬ 
pired (1534). The whole plan was upset, partly due to his sudden 
death and partly on account of the disputes occurring between Bur¬ 
han and Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah I. 

In 1537, Burhan adopted the Shiah faith and although there was 
a Sunni rising against him, he quelled it within a short time. Ibrahim 
‘Adil Shah I, who was a Sunni, joined the Sunni kings of Gujarat 
and Khandesh and made a plan to parcel out Ahmadnagar among 
them, but Burhan frustrated their plan. 

1 here was no end of hostility between Bijapur and Ahmadnagar. 

As both these kingdoms desired supremacy in the Deccan, none could 
cease taking up arms against the other so long as the power of the 
adversary was not crushed or sufficiently reduced. Under such cir¬ 
cumstances excuses for attacks were never wanting. Encouraged by 

417 

M.E.—27 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


a dissension between Ibrahim and his Shiah minister, Asad Khan 
Lari, Burhan formed an alliance with Bidar and invaded Bijapur. 
Although crowned with temporary success he had to face reverses 
in the long run and to conclude a treaty with Ibrahim on condition of 
restoration of Sholapur which he had captured in the course of the 
war (1542). 

His defeat and consequent restoration of Sholapur to Ibrahim 
were too much for him to bear and he wanted to recover it as well as 
“the district of Panj Tappa or the five heights on the Bijapur 
border.” 16 It was with the purpose of enlisting the support of Jam- 
shld, the Qutb-Shahl ruler, that he fought on his side against his 
brother Ibrahim, who, with the assistance of ‘All Barld, had been 
trying to oust Jamshld. Before launching upon an offensive against 
Bijapur, Burhan succeeded in the formation of a quadruple alliance 
with Jamshld, Darya ‘Imad Shah and Ramaraja of Vijayanagara. It 
was arranged to invade the ‘Adil Shahl kingdom from different direc¬ 
tions (1543). The forces of Vijayanagara proceeded from the south 
and laid siege to Raichur; Burhan and Darya ‘Imad Shah besieged 
Sholapur, and Jamshld, taking advantage of the absence of ‘Adil 
Shahl forces on the Telingana border, seized Kaknl, constructed a 
strong fort there and occupied the whole territory up to the walls 
of Gulbarga. It was extremely difficult for Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah to 
repulse the attacks of his enemies, and with the object of creating 
a diversion he and his ally ‘All Barld marched to Parenda in the 
Ahmadnagar kingdom, and laid siege to it. This compelled Burhan 
and Darya to give up the siege of Sholapur and proceed to Parenda; 
Jamshld also moved there. The two hostile parties met at Khas- 
purl, about three miles from Parenda, and, in the engagement which 
followed there, Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah and ‘All Barld were defeated 
and fled to Bidar. Jamshld Qutb Shah chased them as far as the 
walls of Bidar and then returned to his country. Finding him de¬ 
tached from the confederacy, ‘All Barld took courage and invaded 
Golconda. The former received information of this when the enemy 
was only eight miles from the capital. Leaving a garrison for the 
defence of Golconda he created a diversion by an invasion of Bidar. 
As soon as ‘All Barld heard this he left Golconda and retreated to¬ 
wards his capital. He met Jamshld on the way where after an in¬ 
decisive battle, both of them agreed to retire to their respective 
dominions. 17 

After some time Jamshld Qutb Shah moved for an offensive 
against Bidar, and on hearing of it, ‘All Barld marched to oppose him. 
A battle was fought at Narayankhera without any decisive result, but 


418 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 

the campaign ultimately terminated in favour of Jamshid who occu¬ 
pied the districts of Kaulas and Narayankhera. 

Getting an assurance of aid from Burhan, Jamshid Qutb Shah 
again marched against Bidar. He occupied the hill fort of Medak, 
whereas Burhan and his ally Darya took possession of Ausa and 
Udgir. ‘All Band received assistance from Bijapur, but in spite of 
this reinforcement he was defeated by Jamshid Qutb Shah who, 
after the victory, retired to Golconda. On the advice of Asad Khan 
Lari, Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah decided to come to terms with Burhan 
and Ramaraja by offering some concessions to them. He ceded the 
district of Panj Tappla to Ahmadnagar and sent presents to Rama¬ 
raja. Thus Golconda was isolated. 

A secret understanding was also arrived at between Burhan 
and Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah allowing the former free hand in his policy 
of aggrandizement in Bidar, and the latter was allowed a similar 
advantage in Vijayanagara. 18 

After these, Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah sent Asad Khan against Jam¬ 
shid whom this general attacked with all his might. Jamshid was 
compelled to give up the siege of Yadglr in which he had been en¬ 
gaged and also leave the fort of Kaknl which was destroyed. He 
was closely pursued to the gates of Golconda where in the battle 
which ensued Jamshid was defeated. As Asad Khan found it be¬ 
yond his power to occupy this impregnable fort, he retreated and 
came back to Bijapur. 

Burhan attacked the fort of Qandahar belonging to Bidar, and 
captured it. ‘All Barld, who was unaware of the secret arrange¬ 
ment between Ahmadnagar and Bijapur, hastened to Ibrahim for 
assistance, but the latter, finding this a suitable opportunity for the 
annexation of Bidar, confined him in prison. 19 After this, he moved 
to the south and conquered several places of the Vijayanagara king¬ 
dom. But his enhancement of power and territory was viewed with 
alarm by Burhan who attacked Sholapur. Both these Sultans now 
requested Jamshid for assistance. The latter left Golconda, and 
without joining any party, took up his position between the two con¬ 
tending parties. He also received messages from ‘All Barld request¬ 
ing him for deliverance from his present miserable condition. The 
position of Jamshid was then really enviable; all the three Sultans 
were waiting in suspense for his favour and he exhibited his tact by 
sticking to his policy of neutrality to the last and, at the same time 
securing the release of ‘All Barld from Ibrahim and re-instating him 
on the throne of Bidar (A.D. 1548). 20 He thus kept Bidar as a 
buffer State between him and the powerful kingdoms on the west. 


419 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


The relation between Ahmadnagar and Bijapur remained as 
strained as before; Burhan resolved to invade Bijapur once more and 
with this end in view contracted an alliance with Vijayanagara. It 
was arranged to besiege Kalyani which belonged to ‘All Barld, now 
ally of Ibrahim. Burhan invested it and Ibrahim proceeded there 
to render assistance to his ally, but he was defeated with consider¬ 
able loss of men and money. At this, the garrison lost courage and 
surrendered. 

But Ibrahim was not dismayed by this discomfiture and he 
marched to Parenda which he occupied easily. Leaving this fort¬ 
ress in charge of an officer he laid waste the neighbouring districts 
and went back to Bijapur. Burhan recovered it without any diffi¬ 
culty, as the officer in charge of it, out of fear, had fled away even 
when he (Burhan) was many miles away from it. On his arrival at 
Bijapur the timid officer was put to death. 

On hearing of the preparations of Ibrahim for the recovery of 
KalyanI, Burhan again joined hands with Vijayanagara. It was 
agreed that the border fortresses, Mudgal and Raichur, situated be¬ 
tween the Krishna and the Tungabhadra, should be conquered by 
Vijayanagara and that Ramaraja should assist Burhan in recovering 
Sholapur. The allied army occupied Mudgal and Raichur and also 
captured Sholapur within three months. 

In 1553 Burhan and Ramaraja again invaded Bijapur and pro¬ 
ceeded as far as the fort of Bijapur which was invested, but the 
Nizam Shah fell seriously ill and he was compelled to return to 
Ahmadnagar where he expired. 

Husain Nizam Shah I ( 1553-1565 ) 

Burhan left six sons, of whom Husain succeeded to the throne 
of his father, and of his five brothers, ‘Abdul Qadir fled to Beriar, 
Khudabanda to Bengal and the three others, Haidar, ‘All and Mlran 
Muhammad Baqir to Bijapur. 

During this reign, the old quarrels between Ahmadnagar and 
Bijapur continued. Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah’s position was, for the time 
being, strengthened by the arrival of two influential Nizam Shahl 
nobles, Khvaja Jahan Deccani and Saif-‘Ain-ul-Mulk, in Bijapur. 
According to their advice Ibrahim took up the cause of ‘All and it 
was agreed that if the latter would succeed in winning the throne 
of Ahmadnagar, the forts of Sholapur and Kalyani would be given 
to Bijapur. ‘All, with a contingent of two thousand cavalry, march¬ 
ed towards Ahmadnagar with a view to enlisting the support of the 
Nizam Shahl nobles and then to attack Husain, but he met with 


420 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 


little success. Ibrahim had besieged the fort of Sholapur and 
Husain, making an alliance with Darya Tmad Shah, marched with 
him to raise the siege. Both the parties met in the vicinity of this 
fort and drew up their forces in battle array. A sanguinary battle 
was fought, but Ibrahim, suspecting the treachery of Saif-Ain-ul- 
Mulk, fled from the battlefield and retreated to Bijapur. Husain 
also then retired to his own dominion. Although ‘Ain-ul-Mulk 
tried to prove his guiltless conduct and sincere loyalty to Adil 
Shah, it was of no avail. Thus, goaded to desperation, he became 
a rebel (1555) and Ibrahim’s force had to sustain several defeats 
in his hands till at length he was driven out of Bijapur only with 
the assistance of Vijayanagara. He re-entered the kingdom of Ah- 
madnagar with permission of Husain but the latter treacherously 
put him to death. 21 

War however did not cease long in the Deccan and Husain made 
an alliance with Ibrahim Qutb Shah with the primary object of con¬ 
quering Gulbarga, situated in the territory of Bijapur. Both the 
Sultans then invested it (1557). Finding it impossible to resist 
their attacks, Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah I sought the assistance of Rama¬ 
raja who immediately marched with his army towards Gulbarga. 
At the request of Ramaraja, the Qutb Shah agreed to mediate for 
a settlement between Ahmadnagar and Bijapur. Moreover, with a 
view to arriving at a peaceful solution among the parties Ramaraja 
met the contending parties “at the junction of the Bhima and the 
Krishna” and “a peace was now effected to the mutual satisfaction 
of all parties.” 22 

Shortly after this conference, Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah died, and his 
son, ‘All Adil Shah I, ascended the throne of Bijapur (1557). He tried 
by all possible means to retain the alliance with Ramaraja and even 
went to Vijayanagara to offer his condolence on the death of a son 
of the latter 23 

Taking advantage of the accession of a new monarch on the 
throne of Bijapur, Husain Nizam Shah, in concert with Ibrahim Qutb 
Shah, invaded the Adil Shahl kingdom and All Adil Shah sought 
the assistance of Ramaraja who marched with an army towards Ah¬ 
madnagar. Both All and Ramaraja requested Ibrahim Qutb Shah 
to join them, as he was indeed obliged to do under the terms of the 
compact arrived at by the four parties, and Ibrahim joined them re¬ 
luctantly. On the approach of the enemies in his territory, Husain 
Nizam Shah retreated to his kingdom, and unable to resist them, 
retired to Paithan, on the Godavari, leaving a garrison in the fort¬ 
ress of Ahmadnagar for its defence. He solicited the aid of Berar, 


421 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Khandesh and Bldar but no relief came from these quarters. Khan 
Jahan, brother of ‘All Barld, who had gone over from Bldar to Berar, 
dissuaded Darya ‘Xmad Shah from rendering assistance to Ahmad- 
nagar and eventually joined ‘All ‘Adil Shah. 

The confederate army penetrated as far as the fortress of Ah- 
madnagar and after carrying on depredations in the places en route, 
laid siege to it. The garrison baffled all attempts of the besiegers to 
capture it and expected that the enemy would be compelled to raise 
the siege and retire with the advent of the monsoon. At the same 
time, Ibrahim Qutb Shah who had full sympathy for Husain, felt 
perturbed at the enhanced strength of Bijapur and maintained secret 
communications with Husain and the besieged, whom he assisted 
in all possible manner. When these things leaked out, ‘All and 
Ramaraja became highly incensed and demanded explanation from 
Ibrahim who decamped at night and proceeded towards Golconda 23a 

In the meantime, Darya ‘Imad Shah had sent a large army under 
Jahangir Khan for the assistance of Husain. He cut off the supplies 
of the besiegers and reduced them to a sad plight. All these com¬ 
pelled the besiegers to raise the siege of Ahmadnagar and move to 
Ashti whence one party was despatched against Parenda 24 and ano¬ 
ther to Ausa. 25 

The kingdom of Ahmadnagar had suffered a lot and there was 
still no end of suffering. In order to save his country from further 
devastation, Husain felt the imperative necessity of immediate peace 
with his enemies. He therefore sent envoys to Ramaraja for peace and 
at last it was concluded on three conditions laid down by Ramaraja. 
These were: (1) Husain should cede Kalyani to Bijapur, (2) he should 
put to death Jahangir Khan whose activities placed the besiegers 
in a miserable condition, and (3) he should also make personal sub¬ 
mission to Ramaraja. 26 All these conditions were ultimately fulfilled 
by Husain. 

Meanwhile Husain had troubles with the Portuguese also. They 
had sought his permission to construct a fort at Revdanda, near 
Chaul. But instead of giving them permission he constructed a fort¬ 
ress on the site selected by them, and had also detained their ambas¬ 
sador. At these, the Portuguese governor of Goa invested the fort 
and brought further reinforcement when Husain had to sue for peace. 
A treaty was concluded on condition that neither Husain nor the 
Portuguese should build any fort either at Revdanda or at Chaul. 

Although peace was concluded with Bijapur and Vijayanagara, 
Husain could not forget the losses he had sustained and the humilia- 


422 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 

lions he had undergone. Naturally he was on the look out for re¬ 
venge, and with this end in view, he met Ibrahim Qutb Shah in 
the vicinity of Kalyani. He gave his daughter Jamal Bibi in mar¬ 
riage to Qutb Shah and thus strengthened his position (1563). As 
soon as the ceremonies of the nuptials were over they besieged 
Kalyani. 

Under these circumstances Ramaraja again came to the assist¬ 
ance of ‘All ‘Adil Shah and the Sultans of Bldar and Berar, too, 
joined hands with them. Finding the Sultan of Golconda absent 
from his kingdom, Ramaraja despatched an army under Venkatadri 
to invade the southern districts of Golconda. On the approach of 
this confederate army Husain gave up the siege of Kalyani, and, 
sending his family to the fort of Ausa, he, along with Ibrahim, pro¬ 
ceeded against the enemies; but untimely rain and storm created 
great havoc in their camps. Their tents were blown down, and the 
guns, stuck in the quagmire, became mostly useless, as out of seven 
hundred only forty could be removed for use. On the following morn¬ 
ing the enemies attacked the camp of Ibrahim, who took to flight and 
reached Golconda with difficulty. Husain also was compelled to re¬ 
treat to Ahmadnagar but, considering it unwise to stay there, he 
left a garrison in it for its defence and retreated to the fort of Jun- 
nar. The enemies laid siege to the fortress of Ahmadnagar and 
carried on depredations in the neighbouring areas. On the advice 
of ‘All ‘Adil Shah, they raised the siege and proceeded towards Jun- 
nar in pursuit of Husain, who, on their approach retreated into the 
neighbouring hills, leaving instruction to his men to cut off the 
supplies of the enemies and to harass them in every possible man¬ 
ner. His troops did these so effectively that the movement of the 
confederate army was checked, and, on the approach of the mon¬ 
soon they gave up the pursuit in the inaccessible hills and again in¬ 
vested the fort of Ahmadnagar. The army of Vijayanagara had en¬ 
camped on the bank of the river Sina, but heavy rains causing sud¬ 
den spate in the river during the night carried away many men. 
In consequence of this disaster the siege was abandoned and the 
confederate army marched to Golconda. All attempts of Ibrahim 
to repel the attacks of Ramaraja proved abortive; many places were 
ravaged and one fort after another occupied. Thus fell Pangal, 
Kovelaconda, and Ganpura, etc., and the Qutb Shah, at last, had to 
purchase peace by the cession of Pangal and Ganpura. 27 

Ramaraja had fully realized the weakness of the Muslim States 
of the Deccan due to their mutual hatred, jealousy and disunion, 
and took advantage of it. The quarrels between Bijapur and Ahmad¬ 
nagar and his repeated armed assistance in deciding their struggles 


423 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


enhanced his power to a great extent which adversely affected the 
safety of these kingdoms. The position of Vijayanagara was now 
unique in the Deccan. It had humbled the powers of both Ahmad- 
nagar and Golconda, and the condition of Bijapur was also far from 
satisfactory, for ‘All ‘Adil Shah had also been compelled to cede 
some of his territories, viz., Yadgir and Bagalkot to Vijayanagara. 
The Muslim kings took alarm at the increase of power of the Hindu 
kingdom which had been invited more than once to intervene in 
the affairs of the Deccan. Moreover, the existence of such a 
wealthy and powerful neighbour was in itself a source of perennial 
danger to them. According to Firishta, the excesses committed by 
the army of Vijayanagara in the territory of Ahmadnagar were also 
responsible for a feeling of revenge against that kingdom. 28 

When the Muslim States of the Deccan became fully aware of 
the mischief which some of them had committed by inviting Rama- 
raja to intervene in their affairs, a serious attempt was made by 
them to unite against their common adversary and strike, if pos¬ 
sible, a serious blow at him. But how could it be done? Neither 
‘All ‘Adil Shah nor Husain Nizam Shah was willing to approach 
each other direct. Firishta says that ‘All took the initiative in 
forming an alliance of the Sultans of the Deccan and he sent an 
envoy to Ibrahim Qutb Shah with a view to bringing about an 
agreement between him and Husain. 29 It was Ibrahim who under¬ 
took to accomplish it and there is no denying the fact that he play¬ 
ed a very important role in the formation of an alliance between 
Bijapur and Ahmadnagar, the two arch-enemies. Husain Nizam 
Shah’s daughter, Chand Bibi, was married to ‘All ‘Adil Shah, and 
Sholapur, which had been one of the important causes of their quar¬ 
rel, was given as her marriage dowry; Murtaza, the heir of Husain, 
was married to Hadiya Sultana, the sister of ‘All. 

Bidar, too, joined this confederacy, but Berar stood aloof on 
account of the treacherous murder of Jahangir Khan by Husain. 

Before formal declaration of war, ‘All ‘Adil Shah demanded 
restitution of Yadgir, Bagalkot, Raichur and Mudgal from Vijaya¬ 
nagara, and when Ramaraja refused, the Deccani powers made it a 
plea for declaration of war. 30 The allied army marched towards the 
south and reached the small town of Talikota in Bijapur territory, 
about twenty-two miles to the north of the Krishna, on 26 December, 
1564. They assembled there and it is from the name of the place 
of assemblage that the battle is popularly known as the “battle of 
Talikota”, although the actual fighting took place about twelve 
miles south of the Krishna, and hence at a considerable distance 


424 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 


from this town. The battle is also known as that of Rakshasi- 
Tangadi, as these two villages of Rakshasi and Tangadi lie at a com¬ 
paratively less distance from the actual site of the battle, but they 
were also situated on the northern bank of the Krishna. The actual 
site of the battle was probably Bannihatti, on the confluence of the 
Maski river and its southern tributary. 31 

When Ramaraja received information of the movement of his 
enemies, he also made necessary arrangements to face them, and he 
had sufficient confidence in his strength. Though it is difficult from 
the figures furnished by different historians to form an accurate 
idea of the number of troops the contending parties had assembled, 
there is no doubt that they mustered an unusually large number, 
the like of which had never been assembled in any battle in the 
Deccan. The forces were arranged in the same time-honoured 
fashion of right, left, centre, vanguard and rear. The Deccani 
forces were commanded by ‘All ‘Adil Shah on the right, Husain 
Nizam Shah in the centre, and Ibrahim Qutb Shah and ‘All Band on 
the left. Husain’s powerful artillery under Chelepi Rurni Khan, 
an officer of great distinction, was placed in the centre. On the 
Vijayanagara side, the centre facing Husain Nizam Shah was in 
charge of Ramaraja himself; in spite of his old age he commanded 
his troops from a litter. The right wing was commanded by Rama- 
raja’s brother, Venkatadri, who was to oppose Ibrahim and ‘All 
Barld, and the left was entrusted to Tirumala, another brother of 
Ramaraja, to oppose ‘All. 

The battle took place on Tuesday, 23 January, 1565. The 
Vijayanagara army commenced attack in right earnest and the right 
and left wings of the confederate army were thrown into such dis¬ 
order that their commanders were almost prepared to retreat when 
the position was saved by Husain who opposed the enemy with great 
valour. The fighting was then continued and the loss of lives on 
both sides was heavy. But it did not last long and its fate was de¬ 
termined by the desertion of two Muhammadan commanders under 
Ramaraja. Caesar Frederick, who visited Vijayanagara in 1567, said 
that each of these commanders had under him seventy to eighty 
thousand men and the defeat of Vijayanagara was due to their de¬ 
sertion. 32 Ramaraja fell into enemy’s hands and was beheaded on 
the order of Husain. His army fled pell-mell in various directions 
and the victors pursued the defeated as far as Anagondi, in the 
vicinity of Vijayanagara, the capital city. The loss of the latter 
was appallingly heavy and it was estimated that about one hundred 
thousand men perished in battle and in pursuit. “The plunder was 
so great, that every private man in the allied army became rich in 


425 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


gold, jewels, tents, arms, horses and slaves, the kings permitting 
every person to retain what he acquired reserving the elephants 
only for their use.” 33 

Then followed the sack and destruction of the magnificent city 
of Vijayanagara. Before the arrival of the victorious army there, 
came the robbers and jungle folk of the neighbourhood who looted 
whatever they could get. “The third day saw the beginning of the 
end. .. .for a space of five months Vijayanagara knew no rest. The 
enemy (i.e. the victorious army) had come to destroy, and they 
carried out their object relentlessly. . . . Never perhaps in the 
history of the world has such havoc been wrought, and wrought so 
suddenly, on so splendid a city; teeming with a wealthy and indus¬ 
trious population in the full plenitude of prosperity one day, and 
on the next, seized, pillaged and reduced to ruins, amid scenes of 
savage massacre and horrors beggaring description.” 34 

The so-called battle of Talikota or Rakshasi-Tangadi is one of 
the most decisive battles recorded in the whole history of India. It 
shattered the military strength of Vijayanagara and inflicted on it 
such irreparable damage that it was no more possible for it to re¬ 
gain the glorious days of the past. 

The Muslims undoubtedly won a great victory over their rival 
and rejoiced at their grand success; Mudgal and Raichur were then 
easily recovered and added to Bijapur. The territories of Gol- 
conda which had been wrested by Ramaraja were also recovered. 

But the union of the Sultans for concerted action was tempo¬ 
rary, and as soon as the dread of the great Hindu kingdom was 
gone, they again commenced their dynastic quarrels, and their 
mutual hatred and jealousy hampered their onward march. 

Shortly after his return to Ahmadnagar, Husain died (1565), 
as a result of leading an intemperate life, and his minor son Mur¬ 
taza Nizam Shah I then ascended the throne. 

Murtaza Nizam Shah I ( 1565-1588) 

During the minority of Murtaza, his mother, Khanzada or 
Khunza Humayun Sultana, became regent and managed the affairs 
of the State for several years, at the end of which Murtaza took the 
reins of government in his own hands. 

During the king’s minority, ‘All ‘Adil Shah I had led a cam¬ 
paign against Vijayanagara which sought the aid of Ahmadnagar. 
In order to create a diversion with an intent to put a stop to ‘All’s 


426 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 

policy of aggrandizement in the south, the Queen-mother invaded 
Bijapur, upon which its Sultan was forced to recall his forces from 
Vijayanagara. But no great engagement took place between them 
and there were only several skirmishes, after which the Queen- 
mother retired to Ahmadnagar. 

‘All ‘Adil Shah could not forget this unprovoked attack by 
Ahmadnagar, and mismanagement in its administration by the 
Queen-mother afforded him an opportunity to invade it. His forces 
succeeded in wresting some territories from Ahmadnagar and his 
general Kishvar Khan constructed a fortress in the newly conquer¬ 
ed area and named it Dharur. It was at this stage when things 
were being mismanaged by the Queen-mother and her favourite 
brothers, ‘Ain-ul-Mulk and Taj Khan, that Murtaza seized the reins 
of government in his own hands. 

Next he proceeded towards Dharur with all haste and, on reach¬ 
ing the precincts of the fort, laid siege to it. A lucky incident 
hastened its fall. Kishvar Khan, who was in charge of its defence, 
was killed by an arrow while conducting the defence and this was 
followed by the flight of the garrison and evacuation of the fort. 
The lost grounds were thus recovered by Murtaza who then invad¬ 
ed the territory of Bijapur in conjunction with Ibrahim Qutb Shah, 
but this was ultimately foiled by intrigues which led to a breach 
between Murtaza and Ibrahim. 

In 1569-70 Murtaza in alliance with ‘All ‘Adil Shah and the 
Zamorin unsuccessfully invaded the Portuguese possession of 
Chaul. 34a 

The most important achievement of Murtaza was the annexa¬ 
tion of Berar in A.D. 1574. This considerably enhanced the terri¬ 
tory, power and prestige of the Nizam Shah! kingdom, and although 
a pretender with the aid of Miran Muhammad Shah, the ruler of 
Khandesh, tried to revive the kingdom, it proved abortive. Not 
only the pretender and the forces of Khandesh were driven back, 
but the kingdom of Khandesh, even to the very gates of Burhanpur, 
the capital city, was ravaged and Miran Muhammad had to take 
refuge in the fortress of Asirgarh and eventually purchase peace on 
payment of a large sum of money to the Nizam Shah. 

During this reign, Ahmadnagar reached its greatest territorial 
extent. On the west, it was bounded by the Arabian sea, from 
Bassein to Bankot, on the north it touched the southern frontier of 
Khandesh and “on the north-east it included Berar, which was 
bounded on the north by the river Tapti and the eastern and 


427 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


southern boundaries of which were enclosed by the Wain Ganga, 
Warda, and Pain Ganga rivers; the line, subsequently coming 
through the Godavari and the boundary of Bidar, moved first in 
the south-western direction, and passing Ausa and Sholapur, it took 
a north-western course, serving as the northern boundary of Bijapur 
till it reached Bankot.” 35 

On the death of ‘All in 1580, his nephew Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah II 
ascended the throne of Bijapur and taking advantage of the mino¬ 
rity of the Sultan, Murtaza invaded Bijapur but was defeated. 
Within a few years of the accession of Ibrahim the marriage of his 
sister Khadlja was celebrated with Murtaza s son, Miran Husain, 
but the marriage alliance failed to establish peace between Ahmad- 
nagar and Bijapur. 

Of all the actions of Murtaza his cruel and inhuman treatment 
of his faithful minister Chingiz Khan, whom he put to death by 
administering poison on the false accusation that he had been try¬ 
ing to make himself independent in Berar, deserves the strongest 
condemnation. The insinuation came from the king’s favourite, 
Sahib Khan, in order to feed fat his grudge on the minister, and it 
was too late when the Sultan discovered the truth. 36 This reminds 
one of the treacherous plot against Mahmud Gavan, the famous 
minister of the Bahmani kingdom. 

The last years of Murtaza’s life were embittered by his loss of 
mental equilibrium which specially manifested itself in the unjusti¬ 
fied suspicion of his son Miran Husain whom he suspected of de¬ 
throning him. To get rid of the Prince he set fire to his bed clothes, 
locking the door of the room from outside, while he (the Prince) 
was asleep. The latter was startled by the smoke in the room, and 
was rescued, and ultimately carried in secret to the fortress of 
Daulatabad with the help of his well-wishers. He soon took venge¬ 
ance on his father and caused his death by suffocating him in a 
close heated bath (1588). 37 

Firishta, the historian, had become a close confidant of Murtaza 
Nizam Shah during his last days, and escaped untimely death at the 
hands of Husain Nizam Shah, being the latter’s class mate. 


Husain Nizam Shah II ( 1588-1589) 

On the death of his father, Miran Husain ascended the throne 
with the title of Husain Nizam Shah II. He was a cruel and worth¬ 
less Sultan who wasted his time in wine and pleasures. His cruel¬ 
ties and excesses were so intolerable that he was dethroned, im- 


428 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 

prisoned, and, at last, put to death. His reign lasted a little more 
than ten months. 


lsmd 6 il Nizam Shah II ( 1589-1591) 

Isma‘11, a cousin of Husain II, who was now raised to the throne, 
was the younger son of Burhan-ud-dln, brother of Murtaza Nizam 
Shah I. During the reign of the latter, Burhan had made a fruit¬ 
less attempt to seize the throne, but having been defeated, took 
shelter in Bijapur. He made another effort but, this time, too, met 
with a similar fate, and he then went to the Mughul Emperor Akbar 
whose service he entered. But his two sons, Ibrahim and Isma‘Il, 
were left behind in the fortress of Lohargarh where he had once 
been confined. 

During the reign of Isma‘11 the real power was in the hands of 
Jamal Khan, the leader of the Deccani party. He belonged to the 
Mahdavi sect and persecuted all those who did not belong to it. 
During the tumult following the murder of Husain he had ruthlessly 
put to death many foreigners and now he seized the properties of 
those who had escaped massacre, compelling them (including the 
historian Firishta) to leave Ahmadnagar. But these persecutions 
had their natural reactions and dark clouds enveloped the political 
horizon of Ahmadnagar. The discontented nobles headed a revolt 
to drive away Jamal, and at the same time, Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah II, 
who bore hatred and anger against this leader for his religious per¬ 
secutions and who was anxious to bring back his widowed sister 
Khadlja to Bijapur, sent Dilavar Khan with a large force to invade 
Ahmadnagar. With great intrepidity Jamal met the two enemies 
successively. At first he defeated his internal enemies and forced 
them to fly to Burhanpur. Then he proceeded against Dilavar Khan 
and met him at Ashti. The two armies remained face to face for 
fifteen days without any action and, at length, on the request of 
Jamal Khan, peace was concluded between them on two conditions, 
viz. (1) Khadlja should be sent back to Bijapur, and (2) Ahmad¬ 
nagar should pay a war indemnity (1589). 37a 

Isma‘il’s father, Burhan, who had been eager to gain the throne 
occupied by his son, took permission of Akbar to proceed to the 
Deccan. The Mughul Emperor proposed to render military assist¬ 
ance to him, but Burhan politely and tactfully refused to accept it, 
as that would have made him an object of hatred in the eyes of his 
country-men and would have brought him under obligation to the 
Mughuls. He went to the Deccan, and with the assistance of some 
of the Nizam Shahl nobles, made an attack on Berar but was de- 


429 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


feated. He was forced to take shelter in Khandesh where he suc¬ 
ceeded in securing the aid of its ruler Raja All Khan. Ibrahim 
4 Adil Shah II also promised him assistance. Ahmadnagar was then 
invaded from two sides—on the north, by Burhan and Raja ‘All 
Khan, and on the south, by the army of Bijapur under Dilavar Khan. 
Jamal Khan first proceeded to the south against Dilavar Khan whom 
he defeated at Dharaseo. Next he proceeded tov/ards the north and 
met Raja ‘All Khan and Burhan at Rohankhed but he was slain in 
the battle. His death was followed by a flight of his army along 
with IsmaTl who was captured and then confined by his father 
(1591). 


Burhan Nizam Shah 11 ( 1591-1595 ) 

Burhan was an aged man when he ascended the throne. He 
annulled the orders of Jamal Khan regarding the Mahdavi sect and 
passed order for the death of its followers with the result that they 
left the kingdom. The Shiah religion was re-established and the 
foreigners, who had been expelled by Jamal Khan, were recalled. 38 

This reign witnessed the renewal of the old conflict between 
Ahmadnagar and Bijapur. The defeat of Dilavar Khan, the Bija¬ 
pur general, at Dharaseo, was a signal for his downfall. He had to 
leave Bijapur and go to Ahmadnagar where he was cordially re¬ 
ceived by Burhan and appointed in his service. Ibrahim requested 
Burhan to send Dilavar back to Bijapur along with the three hun¬ 
dred elephants which had fallen into the hands of Jamal Khan at 
the battle of Dharaseo. At the instigation of Dilavar, Burhan not 
only refused compliance but invaded Bijapur (1592). Finding no 
opposition he continued to advance in the territories of Bijapur and 
strengthened his position by repairing the fortress of Mangalvedha, 
on the bank of the Bhima. Instead of encountering the enemy in 
an open field, Ibrahim despatched a strong detachment of Maratha 
cavalry to cut off the supplies of the enemies and harass them in 
every possible manner. They made the position of Burhan so in¬ 
tolerable that he was obliged to march back to his own country to 
replenish his provisions. This being done, he proceeded towards 
Sholapur, but the forces of Bijapur inflicted a severe defeat on him. 
This so adversely affected his position that he was compelled to con¬ 
clude peace with Bijapur and demolish the fortress of Mangal¬ 
vedha, repaired by him. 

In the same year (1592) Burhan made an attack on the Portu¬ 
guese fortress of Chaul. Although he had some advantages at the 
initial stage, he suffered heavily when reinforcements arrived for 


430 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 

the assistance of the garrison. With the increased strength, the 
Portuguese not only defended Chaul but, taking the offensive, re¬ 
duced the fort which Burhan had constructed in the neighbourhood, 
killing more than twelve thousand Nizam Shahl soldiers. Farhad 
Khan, the commander of Ahmadnagar, was taken prisoner. 

After this discomfiture, Burhan made preparations to attack 
the Portuguese once more, but this did not ultimately materialize, 
as he marched to the aid of Isma‘Il who had rebelled against his 
brother Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah II. But on reaching Parenda, he learnt 
that Isma‘Il had already been captured and put to death by his 
brother, and retired to Ahmadnagar, where he fell seriously ill. 
Ibrahim II, who was highly annoyed with Burhan for supporting 
Isma‘11, despatched an army against him and defeated and killed his 
commander Bzbak Khan. This news gave Burhan a rude shock in 
his weak health which further deteriorated, confining him to bed. 

Burhan nominated his elder son Ibrahim as his successor, but 
Ikhlas Khan, ajn influential Nizam Shahl noble, taking up the cause 
of Ismahl, the younger son, proceeded against the Sultan who, in¬ 
spite of his illness, personally took the field and defeated the rebels. 
The prince then fled to Parenda. But the exertion of the campaign 
was too much for the Sultan who expired on the day following his 
return to the capital (1595). 39 

Ibrahim Nizam Shah (1595) 

Ibrahim then ascended the throne under the title of Ibrahim 
Nizam Shah, but his reign lasted a few months only. Miyian Manjhu 
became prime minister, and the Sultan as well as the minister granted 
pardon to Ikhlas Khan for his past conduct. But the latter, for¬ 
getting the gratitude he owed to the minister, arrayed a strong op¬ 
position against him, although he as well as Miyan Manjhu belong¬ 
ed to the same Deccani party. The motive behind such action of 
Ikhlas Khan was only self-aggrandizement at the expense of the 
prime minister. When the affairs in the realm were thus heading 
towards a crisis, the envoy of Bijapur was insulted, and Ikhlas 
Khan prevailed on the young Sultan, who was given to dissipation, 
to declare war against Bijapur. Miyan Manjhu’s efforts to avoid 
it was of no avail, and, to make matters worse, Ibrahim was slain 
in the sanguinary battle which ensued between these two kingdoms. 

Chaos and Confusion 

Ibrahim Nizam Shah’s death was followed by the flight of his 
army, and the victors returned to Bijapur laden with rich booty. 


431 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


This was a signal for serious confusion and disorder in the Ahrnad- 
nagar kingdom which continued unabated for most of the time till 
its annexation by the Mughuls. During this period, the leading 
nobles looked to their own interests alone instead of devising any 
common programme for the welfare of the realm. Parties of diffe¬ 
rent interests had existed even during its infancy, and their selfish 
greed sapped its vitality, but with the incapacity and weakness of 
the Sultans they became more powerful and brought about its final 
annihilation. Within a short time following the death of Ibrahim, 
four parties organized by different Nizam Shahi nobles arose to 
contest the throne. Chand Sultan, the aunt of the late Sultan and 
widow of ‘All ‘Adil Shah I, championed the cause of Ibrahim’s in¬ 
fant son, Bahadur, whom she proclaimed as the rightful Sultan; she 
became regent and appealed to the subjects for peace and amity, 
but in vain. The leader of the second party was Ikhlas Khan who 
declared a child called Moti, procured by him, as the legal sovereign. 
The third party was organized by Abhang Khan, 39a an Abyssinian 
noble, who was the supporter of Shah ‘AH, the son of Burhan Nizam 
Shah I; and the fourth party was led by Miyan Manjhu, who de¬ 
clared his nominee, Ahmad, as the real successor to the Nizam 
Shahi throne, and proclaiming him Sultan, captured and imprison¬ 
ed Bahadur. But it was soon found out that Ahmad was an im¬ 
postor, and due to keen opposition of Ikhlas Khan the position of 
Miyan Manjhu became extremely critical. The latter took shelter 
within the walls of Ahmadnagar and applied to Prince Murad, the 
son of Akbar, then governor of Gujarat, for assistance. Akbar had 
already decided to attack Ahmadnagar and given instruction to 
Murad to that effect. The invitation of Miyan Manjhu afforded a 
suitable opportunity to carry out his design and the Prince, accom¬ 
panied by Raja ‘All Khan, the ruler of Khandesh, and Khan Khanan 
Abdur Rahim moved towards Ahmadnagar (1595). 

In the meantime Miyan Manjhu had defeated his rival Ikhlas 
Khan and repented of having called in Mughul assistance. He 
joined Chand Sultan in her endeavour to save the kingdom from 
Mughul aggression and implored the assistance of Bijapur and Gol- 
conda. As regent, Chand Sultan undertook to manage all affairs 
of the kingdom and offered a stiff resistance to Murad who had be¬ 
sieged the fort of Ahmadnagar. At this juncture she appealed to 
Abhang, Khan, Muhammad Qull Qutb Shah aind Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah II 
for help. All of them responded to her request and ‘Adil Shah des¬ 
patched twenty-five thousand cavalry under the command of Suhail 
Khan, an eunuch, and the Qutb Shah five to six thousand cavalry. 40 


432 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 


Ikhlas Khan and Miyan Manjhu along with the army of Bijapur and 
Golconda advanced to the assistance of Chand Sultan. 

Prince Murad became anxious when he heard of these heavy re¬ 
inforcements coming to the relief of Ahmadnagar. The progress 
of the siege was undoubtedly slow owing to the jealousy and diffe¬ 
rences of opinion between him and the Khan Khanan, and without 
wasting any more time he laid mines. Although a breach was 
made in the wall of the fort, it was not possible for the besiegers 
to enter into it due to the gallant resistance of the besieged led 
by the valiant Chand Sultan. During the night the breach was re¬ 
paired under her superintendence, and thus the capture of the fort 
remained as difficult as before. Adding to their hardships, the 
Mughuls were experiencing shortage of provisions. On the other 
hand, Chand Sultan, too, was badly experiencing want of provisions 
and was in grave anxiety about the defence of the fort. Both sides 
were thus on the look out for an opportunity to terminate the war, 
and, at last, a treaty was concluded between them on conditions of 
recognition of the suzerainty of the Mughuls and cession of Berar 
by Ahmadnagar (March, 1596). 41 

On the return of the Mughuls, Bahadur was proclaimed Sultan 
and Muhammad Khan appointed prime minister. Miyan Manjhu 
expected that Ahmad would have preference to other rivals, but 
when this was not possible in a peaceful manner, he wanted to 
accomplish it by a trial of strength. Chand Sultan again appealed 
for aid to Ibrahim II who asked Miyan Manjhu to repair to Bijapur 
with Ahmad, and on their arrival there, both of them were taken 
into the service of Bijapur. 

The difficulties of Chand Sultan did not end with their exit 
from Ahmadnagar, and more troubles were in store for her. The 
high-handedness of Muhammad Khan was too much for her and 
the nobles to bear. Once more she appealed to Ibrahim II to help 
her to tide over the difficulties. The latter again despatched an 
army under Suhail Khan to Ahmadnagar with instruction to render 
all possible assistance to her. Muhammad Khan opposed Suhail Khan 
who besieged him in the fort of Ahmadnagar for four months. Thus 
placed in a critical position, Muhammad appealed for aid to the 
Mughuls, but the garrison, highly dissatisfied at this, seized him 
and made him over to Chand Sultan who appointed Abhang Khan 
in his place. Thus she got rid of her internal foe but there was re¬ 
crudescence of trouble with the Mughuls. 

Her relations with them were far from cordial. They had occu¬ 
pied some territories of Ahmadnagar including Pathrl not ceded to 

433 

M.E.—28 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


them by the last treaty, whereas Gawilgarh and Narnala, the two 
fortresses of Berar, were still in possession of the officers of Ahmad- 
nagar. Thus, when causes for renewal of a war already existed, the 
appeal of Muhammad Khan for aid to the Mughuls furnished the 
latter another important ground for an offensive. 

Realising the gravity of the situation, Chand Sultan appealed 
to Bijapur and Golconda for assistance, which both of them gave. 
A combined army of about sixty thousand cavalry marched towards 
Berar, and in the vicinity of Sonpet, on the Godavari, a severe battle 
took place between them and the Mughuls for two days in which 
the latter came out victorious (1597). 41a But, in spite of this, their 
progress was much hampered due to serious differences of opinion 
between Prince Murad and the Khan Khanan, and Akbar had to 
recall the latter, deputing Abu-1-Fazl instead. 

There was lack of unity in the Nizam Shahl camp, too, and 
quarrels had been going on between Chand Sultan and Abhang 
Khan. The latter besieged her in the fort of Ahmadnagar, and 
taking advantage of the absence of the Khan Khanan, attacked and 
besieged the Mughul officer in charge of the fortress of Bir. 

Abu-’l-Fazl could not improve the position of the Mughuls and 
on 12 May, 1599, Prince Murad died of intemperance. Under these 
circumstances Prince Daniyal, the youngest son of Akbar, and the 
Khan Khanan were sent to the Deccan, and with a view to conduct¬ 
ing the campaigns more vigorously the emperor himself proceeded 
to the south, making his headquarters at Burhanpur. An army was 
despatched to besiege Asir, and Prince Daniyal and the Khan 
Khanan were directed to proceed against Ahmadnagar. 

Abhang Khan raised the siege of Ahmadnagar and marched to 
oppose the Mughuls, but “finding himself out-manoeuvred and un¬ 
able to withstand the Mughul’s forces” he went back to Ahmad¬ 
nagar for amicable settlement of his differences with Chand Sultan; 
but when this was not possible, he retired to Junnar. The Mughuls 
reached Ahmadnagar without opposition and invested it. 

At this critical juncture, Chand Sultan, seeking the advice of 
Jita Khan, an eunuch and officer of rank, gave out that her past 
experience convinced her of the danger of placing reliance on the 
Nizam Shahl officers and, in her opinion, it would be proper to 
cede the fort to the Mughuls on condition of safe passage of the 
garrison and the young Sultan to Junnar. At this Jita Khan at 
once came out shouting that she was in league with the Mughuls 
for surrender of the fort. A mob headed by Jita Khan then rush- 


434 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 

ed into her apartment and piit her to death (July, 1600). Her 
murder sealed the fate of the kingdom, and in the following month, 
the Mughuls stormed and occupied the fort. 41b 

Thus, Ahmadnagar was annexed to the Mughul Empire and the 
young Sultan, Bahadur Nizam Shah, sent as a State prisoner to the 
fortress of Gwalior where he was confined for the rest of his life. 
Among the booty which the Mughuls received was a valuable 
library. 452 


Malik ‘Ambar 

But although the capital city and its adjoining places were 
occupied by the Mughuls and made a separate suba of the empire, 
an extensive part of the kingdom remained in possession of the in¬ 
fluential Nizam Shahl nobles like Malik ‘Ambar and Raju Deccani. 
They acted independently of each other and owed no allegiance to 
any king. It was to the credit of the former that he revived the 
fallen kingdom and imparted to it a fresh lease of life. 

Malik ‘Ambar was born in an obscure Abyssinian family in 
1549. He was originally a slave of Khvaja Baghdadi who had pur¬ 
chased him in Baghdad. He was then sold at Ahmadnagar to 
Chingiz Khan, the minister of Murtaza Nizam Shah I. Chingiz 
Khan had one thousand slaves and ‘Ambar was one of them. The 
sudden death of his master threw ‘Ambar in a helpless condition 
and for more than two decades he struggled hard, serving some¬ 
times as an ordinary soldier in Ahmadnagar and sometimes in Bija- 
pur. But these could not satisfy an ambitious man like him. When 
Abhang Khan was opposing Bahadur, he joined his service and was 
soon promoted to the rank of a commander of one hundred and 
fifty horsemen in reward for his good services. 

After some time he started his career as an independent chief¬ 
tain, and disorder and confusion then prevailing in the country 
afforded him a suitable opportunity for his adventurous activities. 
At the time when the Mughuls were busy in the siege of Ahmad¬ 
nagar, he, by his repeated sallies on the unruly men of the borders, 
made their lives so miserable that they were compelled to come 
under his leadership. These soon swelled the number of his fol¬ 
lowers to two thousand and five hundred, and encouraged by such 
successes, he continued from one daring act to another till he made 
a sudden sally on Bldar whose army he defeated. This victory en¬ 
hanced his resources in men and money. After this, he became 
bold enough to make surprise attacks on the Mughuls in Ahmad¬ 
nagar and plunder them. His followers continuously increased 


435 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


and many Nizam Shah! nobles joined him, adding to his strength 
and prestige. 43 Thus he became the most powerful factor in the 
Nizam Shahi politics and “brought under his possession the Nizam 
Shahi country from the Telingana borders as far north as within 
one kros of Bir and four of Ahmadnagar and from twenty kros west 
of Daulatabad to within the same distance of the port of Chaul.” 44 

Having thus made his position strong he took up the cause of 
the fallen Nizam Shahi dynasty which he wanted to reinstate at 
all costs. He was wise enough not to aspire after kingly position, 
and although there were obstacles in his way he surmounted them 
with his iron will. Bahadur and other members of the family were 
State prisoners at Gwalior and to bring them back was out of the 
question. He was, however, successful in finding out a scion of 
the Nizam Shahi family in ‘All, the son of Shah ‘All, then residing 
in Bijapur. It has already been stated how two fruitless attempts 
were made, one by Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah I and later on, by Abhang 
Khan, to place Shah ‘All on the throne of Ahmadnagar. He was 
now of advanced age and Malik ‘Ambar, inviting his son, placed him 
on the throne with the title of Murtaza Shah Nizam-ul-Mulk (1600). 

Murtaza Nizam Shah’s coronation took place at Parenda which 
was fixed “as the temporary capital of the kingdom, and Malik ‘Ambar 
became Prime Minister and Vakil-us-Sultunat (Regent of the King¬ 
dom) and gave his daughter in marriage to the king.” 45 

Murtaza II who ruled from A.D. 1600 to 1630 was Sultan only 
in name and the whole governmental machinery was run by Malik 
‘Ambar. The latter had to solve various problems of the revived 
kingdom including its protection from internal enemies and Mughul 
aggression. In place of chaos and confusion he soon established 
law and order and then diverted his attention to the self-seeking 
nobles, the most formidable of whom was Raju Deccani, who had 
brought under his possession a great part of the fallen Nizam Shahi 
kingdom and who, in order to fulfil his selfish design, was dragging 
the country to a crisis. Taking advantage of this rivalry the 
Mughul general, Khan Khanan, started an offensive campaign 
against ‘Ambar, and this was directed against his territory on the 
Telingana border. In one of the battles there, viz., at Nander, he 
was wounded (1602), and the war finally terminated in a treaty 
“marking out their respective boundaries.” 46 

After this, ‘Ambar compelled the conspirators like Farhad 
Khan and Manjhan Khan to leave the kingdom and take shelter in 
Bijapur. 


436 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 

In 1607, ‘Ambar transferred the capital to Junnar on account 
of its strategic importance and for efficient conduct of campaigns 
against Raju, as it was situated at a comparatively less distance 
from Daulatabad, the headquarters of the latter, than Parenda 47 
Circumstances now favoured the Abyssinian chief to subdue his 
rival. The oppression of Raju created a feeling of deep discontent 
among his subjects, including the soldiery, and the latter, deserting 
the cause of their master, joined ‘Ambar and complained to Murtaza 
Nizam Shah II about Raju’s oppression, requesting him to deliver 
them from their awful situation. Finding this a good opportunity, 
the Abyssinian chief marched against him with a large army. Al¬ 
though Raju tried hard, he could not defend for long due to lack 
of support from his followers, and the fort of Daulatabad was cap¬ 
tured by the Nizam Shah! army. He became a prisoner, and his 
territory was incorporated in the Ahmadnagar kingdom. 48 He 
remained in prison for three to four years, but when there was 
a conspiracy to create a rebellion in his favour ‘Ambar put him to 
death. 49 

Thus, it was due to the untiring zeal and efforts of the Prime 
Minister that the fallen kingdom was revived and its borders extend¬ 
ed. Party bickerings were removed and the structure of the govern¬ 
ment was built on a strong foundation. His occasional differences 
with the Sultan were also always made up. 

‘Ambar then turned his attention towards the Mughuls who, 
since the accession of Jahangir, were engrossed in their affairs in 
the north-west due to the revolt of Prince Khusrav and the siege of 
Qandahar by Shah ‘Abbas, the King of Persia. Commencing his 
offensive against them, ‘Ambar recovered many of the lost territories 
of Ahmadnagar. The Khan Khanan was thus placed in a miserable 
condition and recalled to Agra by the Emperor (1608) who, with a 
view to improving the situation, gave him a reinforcement of twelve 
thousand cavalry. 

‘Ambar’s anxieties increased when he heard of this reinforce¬ 
ment, and he took steps to form an alliance with Ibrahim ‘Adil 
Shah II. His requests to ‘Adil Shah “were three-fold; first, to render 
him military assistance against the Mughuls, so that he might fight 
them successfully.” He said, “It is my design to fight the Mughul 
troops so long as life remains in this body. It may be that through 
your Majesty’s daily increasing fortune I shall expel the Mughuls 
from the Deccan.” 50 The second request was “to hand over to him, 
for the safety of his family and the collection of rations, the fort 
of Qandahar which the ‘Adil Shah had wrested from the Nizam 


437 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Shahl kingdom some time back, and the third request was to bring 
the two states together into a close bond of union by matrimony.” 51 

Ibrahim Adil Shah II was also desirous of forming an alliance 
with Ahmadnagar in order to check Mughul aggression in the south 
and it had been one of the principal reasons for his assistance to 
‘Ambar in placing a scion of the old Nizam Shahl family on the 
throne. At the request of Ambar, ten thousand select cavalry were 
despatched to Ahmadnagar, the fort of Qandahar was returned, and 
a matrimonial alliance formed between the two kingdoms by the 
marriage of Ambar’s son Fath Khan with the daughter of Yaqut 
Khan, a nobleman of Bijapur, who was in high favour with the 
Sultan. Subsequently, another auxiliary force of three to four 
thousand cavalry was also despatched from Bijapur to Ahmad¬ 
nagar. 52 

Ambar had already besieged Antur and wrested it from the 
Mughuls. Even with his reinforcement the Khan Khlanan could 
not improve the situation due to discord and disunion in his camp. 
So, in 1609, Jahangir sent Prince Parvlz to the Deccan as Governor 
of Berar and Khandesh, and with supreme command to lead the 
campaigns, and another general named Khian Jahan Lodi was also 
ordered to proceed there. But in spite of these, the Mughul posi¬ 
tion, instead of improving, deteriorated further. The Khan Kha- 
nan’s plan of surprise attack on Ambar ended in disaster. He was 
continuously harassed by the light Maratha cavalry of Ahmadnagar, 
well-trained in guerilla tactics, and his condition became so precari¬ 
ous that he had no other alternative but to patch up a disgraceful 
treaty with Ambar and retire to Burhanpur (1610). 53 

After conquering the surrounding places the Nizam Shahl army 
had besieged the fort of Ahmadnagar which, too, fell. These exploits 
enhanced the power, prestige and extent of the Ahmadnagar king¬ 
dom. Its capital was then transferred from Junnar to Daulatabad, 
a place of greater strategic importance. 

The heavy losses which the Mughuls had suffered were too much 
for them to bear and the Khan Khanan was recalled and Khan Jahan 
was promoted to take up the command in his place, but as petty 
wranglings among the officers continued unabated in the Mughul 
camp, nothing could be done to improve matters. 

At last, a better plan was devised to invade Ahmadnagar from 
two sides—one by Abdullah Khan, who was appointed Governor of 
Gujarat with instruction to lead the expedition by way of Nasik and 
Trimbak, and the other under the joint command of Raja Man Singh 

438 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 


and Khan Jahan Lodi to proceed by way of Berar. Eager to gain 
the full credit of the victory, ‘Abdullah Khan moved on without 
keeping in touch with the other party and entered the kingdom of 
Ahmadnagar. Fully alive to the situation, ‘Ambar followed his gue¬ 
rilla tactics as before and his Maratha bands harassed ‘Abdullah 
Khan’s army in all possible ways. Although ‘Abdullah penetrated 
almost as far as Daulatabad, he found his position so precarious that 
he was compelled to retire, pursued and continually harassed by the 
Nizam Shahl forces up to the border of Baglan. With heavy losses he 
returned to Gujarat, and when Rajia Man Singh and Khan Jahan 
heard of his retreat, they, too, retired (1612). 54 

After this victory, the capital of the Nizam Shahl kingdom was 
transferred to Khirki, about ten miles off from Daulatabad. Situat¬ 
ed in a hilly region, it had natural barriers for protection against 
invasions from outside. It had originally been a small village but 
‘Ambar peopled and beautified it with fine buildings. “The grand¬ 
eur and beauty of this new capital found encomium even in the 
pages of Mughal history; the Maasir-i-Rahimi says that it was not 
only the best city in the Deccan but the like of it was not to be found 
even in Hindusthan.” 55 

‘Abdullah Khan was severely reprimanded by the Emperor for 
his indiscreet actions and the Khan Khanan was again directed to 
proceed to the Deccan with his sons including Shah Navaz Khan. 

Taking advantage of desertions of some of the Nizam Shahl 
nobles, Shah Navaz Khan moved direct towards Khirki. In the 
meantime, Malik ‘Ambar had made alliances with Bijapur, Golconda, 
and Bldar, all of whom responded to his call and despatched neces¬ 
sary quotas of troops to his aid. ‘Ambar remained at Khirki with 
forty thousand cavalry and another force was sent to harass the 
Mughuls and check their advance. But the Nizam Shahls proved 
powerless against the superior strength of Shah Navaz Khan who 
defeated them and marched towards Khirki. ‘Ambar came out and 
met the Mughuls at Rosalgarh, near Khirki. Here, in the sanguinary 
battle which ensued, he was defeated, sustaining heavy losses in men 
and materials (1616). 

The Mughuls then entered the Nizam Shahl capital and carried 
on destruction in it, but they did not pursue the defeated. 56 The 
effect of the victory was only temporary and could not much alter 
the situation. Despite the presence of Prince Parviz in the Deccan 
for seven years, there was no tangible progress in the Mughul cam¬ 
paigns and he was therefore transferred to Allahabad while Prince 
Khurram was ordered to proceed to the Deccan. Before his depar- 

439 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


ture he was conferred with the lofty title of “Shah” (1616) 56a and 
the emperor himself proceeded to Mandu for better guidance of the 
campaigns. 

The Prince, at first, opened diplomatic negotiations with Bija- 
pur, Golconda and Ahmadnagar and offered them proposals of peace 
on two conditions, viz., restitution of the conquered territories and 
payment of tribute. Weary of the struggle and afraid of the exten¬ 
sive preparation of the Mughuls, both Bijapur and Golconda accept¬ 
ed these terms and ‘Ambar, fearing the enmity of these combined 
powers, found no alternative but to come to terms by the surrender 
of Ahmadnagar with its contiguous places and the Pargands of Bala- 
ghat previously wrested from the Mughuls. 57 

The Abyssinian hero took this step only to ward off a crisis and 
wait for an opportunity to regain the lost territories. 

An undue parade of the Prince’s success was made when he met 
his father at Mandu and among the marks of distinction, he received 
the lofty title of “Shah Jahan” and the special privilege of a seat 
near his father in darbar (October, 1617). 

‘Ambar’s opportunities came after two years when Jahangir was 
in Kashmir, Shah Jahan busy in the siege of Kangra and the Mughul 
officers in the Deccan engaged in petty bickerings and rivalries. He 
made alliances with Bijapur and Golconda, and with about sixty 
thousand cavalry marched towards Ahmadnagar, recovering the lost 
places, and besieging it. An army was left to carry on the siege, 
while he marched triumphantly towards Berar. He besieged Bur- 
hanpur, crossed the Narmada and plundered the environs of Mlandu. 

Shah Jahan was once more directed to proceed to the Deccan. 
‘Ambar, who did not like to take the risk of an open engagement 
with Shah Jahan, gave up the siege and retreated. But the Prince 
gave the Deccanis a hot chase and pursued them to the very gates 
of Khirki, and occupied the city after ‘Ambar had removed Murtaza II 
with his family to Daulatabad. The Mughuls destroyed the fine 
structure of Khirki and ‘Ambar, realizing the insecurity of his posi¬ 
tion, opened negotiations for peace. Shah Jahan had also to contend 
with many difficulties. So, he decided to accept the offer of peace. 
Besides promising to restore the territories occupied from the 
Mughuls in the course of the last two years, ‘Ambar agreed to sur¬ 
render “fourteen Kros of the adjoining country” to them, and more¬ 
over, the three kingdoms of Ahmadnagar, Bijapur and Golconda con* 
sen ted to pay fifty lakhs of rupees as tribute. 58 


440 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 

But who could foretell then that Prince Shah Jahan would step 
into the Deccan as a fugitive and suppliant for aid to the Abyssinian 
antagonist about two years later to save himself from the wrath of 
his father? Malik ‘Ambar who was then not on good terms with 
Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah II and who was anxious to gain Mughul assistance 
in order to defeat his enemy, gave an evasive reply to the Prince. 

But what are the factors which contributed in creating a rift 
between Ahmadnagar and Bijapur? First, the fort of Sholapur was 
a frequent bone of contention between them. Secondly, taking ad¬ 
vantage of disorder and confusion in the kingdom of Ahmadnagar in 
1600, Ibrahim II had annexed a portion of it; and not to speak of 
giving it back, he cherished further designs of aggrandizement. The 
Bijapur Sultan came to realize that the revived kingdom of Ahmad¬ 
nagar under the leadership of an able general and statesman like 
‘Ambar was really a menace to the safety of Bijapur. The Bijapur 
nobles also viewed with extreme jealousy the ascendancy of an Abys¬ 
sinian slave to such a height of power and strength in the neighbour¬ 
ing kingdom and eagerly looked forward to bring about his down¬ 
fall. Moreover, the Nizam-Shahi deserters like Farhad Khan and 
others who were in Bijapur service, widened the gulf between these 
two kingdoms. Fuzuni, the author of Futuhat-i-‘Adil-Shahl, wrote 
as a Bijapuri partisan, and it is difficult to believe him when he 
ascribed the cause of rupture of ‘Adil Shah with the Abyssinian 
leader to “bad behaviour and inordinate pride and insolence” 59 of 
the latter. But it may be mentioned here that ‘Ambar was eager 
to regain the territories which had been forcibly occupied by 
Ibrahim II. 

When feelings in Ahmadnagar and Bijapur were thus strained, 
both tried hard to join Mughul alliance with a view to inflicting a 
stunning blow to the other. But the Mughuls decided in favour of 
Bijapur, and ‘Ambar was left alone against a formidable confederacy. 
He realized the gravity of the situation and removed Murtaza II to 
the fortress of Daulatabad for safety. He then went towards GoF 
conda and realized from the latter the fixed subsidy ( zar-i-mukar - 
rari) which had been in arrears for two years and formed an offensive 
and defensive alliance with it. 60 

Thus strengthening his position, he marched against Bidar which 
had been under the domination of Bijapur since 1619. By a surprise 
attack he defeated the Bijapur army and pillaged the city. His next 
move was against Bijapur itself and Ibrahim II> unable to oppose 
him in an open fight, withdrew into the walled city which was 
besieged by the Nizam Shah! army. Driven to such an extremity 


441 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


‘Adil Shah recalled his contingents under Mulla Muhammad Lari 
from Burhanpur where they had been sent to join the Mughul ser¬ 
vice in fulfilment of the terms of his alliance with them. As a re¬ 
sult of his appeal for Mughul assistance, the Mughul governors of 
Ahmadnagar and Bir, with many other officers of distinction, march¬ 
ed in conjunction with Mulla Muhammad Lari for the relief of Ibra¬ 
him II. Alarmed at this heavy reinforcement, ‘Ambar repeatedly 
appealed to the Mughul officers not to support Bijapur, and to allow 
Ahmadnagar and Bijapur to settle their own differences, but in vain. 
They forced him to raise the siege of Bijapur and retreat to his own 
country, but closely pursued by them. Thus, goaded to the last 
extremity, he fell back “on Bhatvadi, about ten miles south-east by 
east of the fort of Ahmadnagar, and on the western bank of the Keli 
Nadi, a feeder of the Sina. ,,60a Here he exhibited uncommon bra- 
very and resourcefulness in dealing with this desperate situation. 
By cutting the embankment of the Bhatvadi lake he filled the adjoin¬ 
ing areas with mud and water and rendered it impossible for his 
enemies to approach the place. A heavy rain worsened the situa¬ 
tion. To make their position still more miserable, ‘Ambar carried 
on surprise night attacks, plundering the enemy-camps and making 
it impossible for them to receive any supply of provisions. Scarcity 
of food made the sufferings of the army so distressing that many 
deserted their camp. The rival parties had encamped at a distance 
of two or three kros only, and, at length, both of them arranged their 
forces for an open engagement. ‘Ambar’s talents as a general never 
shone forth more brilliantly than in this battle. The Mughuls and 
their Bijapur allies sustained a severe defeat and their losses, too, 
were heavy (1624). 61 Many Mughul and Bijapur commanders fell 
into the hands of their enemies and Mulla Muhammad Lari was 
slain. 

The battle of Bhatvadi was indeed one of the most decisive 
battles in the history of the Deccan. The victory saved Ahmadnagar 
from annihilation and engendered great confidence in the minds of 
the victors about the superiority of their military tactics and strength. 
It was a wonderful feat on the part of ‘Ambar and humbled the 
pride of his adversaries. 

After sending the prisoners to Daulatabad, ‘Ambar hurried to¬ 
wards the fort of Ahmadnagar which was besieged. Leaving a de¬ 
tachment to continue its siege he marched against Bijapur, which, 
too, was invested as Ibrahim II had taken refuge within this walled 
city. He also attacked and occupied the territories of the ‘Adil Shah! 
kingdom upto the Mughul frontier in Balaghat. Sholapur was also 
invested and occupied within a short time (1625). 62 


442 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 

In the meantime, another force had been despatched against 
Burhanpur, the Mughul commander of which, unable to resist, re¬ 
tired into the fort which was besieged. 

When ‘Ambar was thus in a favourable position, Shah Jahan, 
driven from the north, again came to the Deccan and an alliance 
was formed between them. According to the arrangement, the 
Prince co-operated with the Nizam Shahl force in pressing the siege 
of Burhanpur. Despite three successive efforts the fort could not 
be taken, and with the approach of Prince Parviz and Mahabat Khan, 
who had been chasing the rebel prince, the siege was abandoned. 
Later on, the rebellion of Mahabat Khan and the close attention of 
the Mughuls to subdue him, afforded a suitable opportunity to ‘Ambar 
to drive away the Mughuls from the Deccan, but his death in May, 
1626, put an end to this checkered career. Before his death he had the 
satisfaction of seeing that he left intact the independence of the 
Ahmadnagar kingdom. 

Malik ‘Ambar was one of the greatest personalities that Islam 
produced in the Deccan and his wonderful abilities drew admiration 
even from his enemies, the Mughuls. From obscurity he rose to a 
position of the highest distinction, re-established and rejuvenated 
a fallen kingdom in the teeth of opposition of the Mughuls at the 
height of their power, gave it a well-organized government and con¬ 
solidated it as far as practicable. He was a man of undaunted hero¬ 
ism, indefatigable energy and uncommon perseverance. He was a 
general of rare genius who remodelled the militia on a sound basis, 
best suited to the hilly regions of his adopted country. The guerilla 
tactics, so well organized by him with the Maratha bands, highly 
strengthened his position, and at times, the Mughuls showed their 
bankruptcy in dealing with him. 

Great as he was as a general, he was no less famous as; a politi¬ 
cian. His actions were always characterized by due caution and 
foresight. He showed his skill not only in the revival of the fallen 
kingdom but also in the formation of a powerful anti-Mughul coali¬ 
tion with the neighbouring States of Bijapur and Golconda and it 
was only at the fag end of his career that a rift occurred with Ibra¬ 
him II “which threw the latter into their common enemy’s arms.” 

He was also undoubtedly one of the greatest statesmen in the 
Deccan. By removing lawlessness and other disintegrating forces 
he established a strong but benign government, based on sympathy 
and goodwill of the people, both Hindus and Muslims. He was tole¬ 
rant to the Hindus, and no historian has stigmatized him for the 
demolition of any temple or other place of worship. The Hindus 

443 


I 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


and the Muslims were equally eligible for government service and 
many Marathas like Shahji, the father of Shivaji, Sharifjl and Vithal- 
raj occupied high rank in the Nizam Shahi government. 

His wise revenue system is another instance of his farsighted¬ 
ness and constructive genius. Although new in the Deccan, it was 
based primarily on what Raja Todarmal had introduced in northern 
India and some parts of Gujarat and Khandesh. ‘Ambar’s objects 
“were threefold: first, the good of the peasantry, secondly, encourage¬ 
ment and promotion of agriculture, and thirdly, enhancement of the 
Government revenue.” 63 

Lands were classified as good or bad according to their fertility 
and he took great pains and a number of years to ascertain the 
average yield of lands. He abolished revenue farming and relieved 
the peasantry from oppression of the land farmers. At first, reve¬ 
nue was fixed as two-fifths of the actual produce in kind, but later 
on, the cultivators were allowed to pay in cash “representing about 
one-third of the yield.” Although an average rent was fixed for 
each plot of land, actual collections depended on the condition of 
crops, and they varied from year to year. 64 Such kind and sympa¬ 
thetic consideration on the part of the government gave satisfaction 
to the peasants, and encouraged cultivation of waste land. 65 This 
not only enhanced production but also augmented government re¬ 
venue. 

Malik ‘Ambar was the last prop of the Ahmadnagar kingdom 
and his death was the beginning of its end. His eldest son, Fath 
Khan, was unscrupulous and incapable of holding the position of 
his father. Dissatisfied with his king, Murtaza II, he opened nego¬ 
tiations with the Mughuls, and at their suggestion, put him to death, 
and raised his son, Husain, a boy of ten, to the throne, with the title 
of Husain Nizam Shah III. 

Husain Nizam Shah III (1630-1633) 

Fath Khian was not sincere to the Mughuls and did not act up to 
his promise. So, Shah Jahan, who was then the Mughul Emperor, 
took steps to punish him, and along with the boy king, he had to 
take shelter in the fortress of Daulatabad. Unable to resist for long, 
he was compelled to submit before the superior arms of the Mughuls 
(1631). But he again broke his pledge to them and they then pro¬ 
ceeded against him and besieged Daulatabad. After a blockade of 
about four months they succeeded in capturing it (1633). The 
young king Husain was sent as a State prisoner to the fort of Gwa- 


444 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 

lior for the rest of his life and Fath Khan taken into the Mughul 
service. 653 

Thus came to an end the kingdom of Ahmadnagar, and although 
an attempt was afterwards made by ShahjI with the assistance of 
Bijapur to revive it by setting up a scion of the Nizam Shah! dynasty, 
it proved abortive (1636). 

III. THE ‘ADIL-SHAH1 DYNASTY OF BIJAPUR 
Yiisuf ‘Adil Khan ( 1490-1510 ) 

The founder of this dynasty was Yusuf ‘Adil Khan, the Bah- 
manl governor of Bijapur, who assumed independence in 1490. In 
his early life he was a Georgian slave and sold to Mahmud Gavan at 
Bidar, but according to Firishta, he originally belonged to a royal 
family, being the son of Sultan Murad II of Turkey, who died in 
1451 and was succeeded by his eldest son Muhammad. On his ac¬ 
cession, the latter gave orders for the execution of his brothers, in¬ 
cluding Yusuf, who was saved by the extraordinary skill of his 
mother. She managed to substitute a slave boy for execution and 
sent her own son to Persia with the help of a Persian merchant. 
He was secretly brought up in Persia, and when he was seventeen 
years of age, he came to India and was sold as a Georgian slave to 
the BahmanI minister Mahmud Gavan. From Firishta’s writings 
it appears that he was satisfied as to the truth of the story. 66 

By dint of his abilities as well as patronage of his new master, 
Yusuf rose from one position to another till he became a person of 
prominence in the BahmanI kingdom. Finally, he occupied the high 
position of the provincial governor of Bijapur, and taking advantage 
of the weakness of the BahmanI Sultan, he assumed a position of 
independence, in reality, though not in name. 

The city of Bijapur was made the seat of his government. He 
had a formidable enemy in Qasim Barld, the powerful minister and 
de facto ruler of the BahmanI kingdom, who was extremely jealous 
of his growing power. Qasim Barld formed an alliance with Na- 
rasa Nay aka, the Regent of Vijayanagara, and Bahadur GllanI, the 
ruler of Konkan, and they invaded Bijapur. Narasa Nay aka at¬ 
tacked the Krishna-Tungabhadra doab and captured both the fort¬ 
resses of Raichur and Mudgal. Unable to repel all the attacks of his 
enemies at a time, Yusuf made peace with Vijayanagara by the ces¬ 
sion of the above two forts and then drove away Bahadur GllanI. 
Next, he marched against Qasim Barld who, in the meantime, had 
joined with Malik Ahmad Nizam-ul-Mulk and Khvaja Jahan of 
Parenda. He met them in the vicinity of Naldurg where Qasim 


445 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Barid was defeated, and after this, a treaty was made between 
Yusuf and Malik Ahmad. 

As soon as he got rid of his enemies, Yusuf directed his atten¬ 
tion to recover Raichur and Mudgal, and Narasa Nay aka marched 
to oppose him. In the battle which ensued, ‘Adil Khan was severe¬ 
ly defeated and, driven to a precarious condition, he took recourse 
to a stratagem, inviting Narasa Nlayaka and his young king Saluva 
Timma, with the nobles and officers for a peace conference and kil¬ 
ling most of them by a treacherous attack; the king and the regent 
anyhow escaped death. After this, Yusuf recovered both Raichur 
and Mudgal. 663 

In response to a request for assistance by Mahmud Shah, the 
Bahmanl Sultan, in his campaign against Bahadur GllanI, ‘Adil 
Khan despatched a contingent of five thousand cavalry to him. This 
helped his own cause as well, as it was with the assistance of the 
Bahmanl Sultan and his minister Qasim Band that he got back the 
fortress of Jamkhandi which Bahadur had occupied. 

In 1504, ‘Adil Khan succeeded in gaining possession of the pro¬ 
vince of Gulbarga, then held by Dastur Dinar, an Abyssinian, who 
was defeated and killed. This acquisition enlarged his territory on 
the east. 

Due to his long stay in Persia in his early life, Yusuf was 
deeply attached to the Shiah faith and cherished the idea of esta¬ 
blishing it in his dominion, but so long he could not put his ideas 
into action, as he was preoccupied with manifold difficulties. Now 
that he felt secure and strong enough to carry out his contemplated 
project, he made this creed the State religion, but perfect tolera¬ 
tion was allowed to his Sunni subjects. This innovation created 
enmity not only at home but also abroad, and a formidable con¬ 
federacy was formed against him by some of his Muslim neighbours, 
viz., Malik Ahmad, the ruler of Ahmadnagar, and Mahmud Shah, 
the nominal Bahmanl Sultan, under instruction of his minister Amir 
Barid; and, on their request, Sultan Qull Qutb-ul-Mulk, the gover¬ 
nor of Telingana, too, joined them. Unable to cope with them 
Yusuf fled to Berar, and, on the advice of Ala-ud-dln ‘Imad-ul-Mulk, 
gave orders for the restoration of the Sunni faith and withdrew to 
Burhanpur. ‘Imad-ul-Mulk pointed out to Malik Ahmad and Qull 
Qutb-ul-Mulk that Amir Barid had been on the look out for the 
annihilation of ‘Adil Khan for his own selfish motive and not for 
religion, and as ‘Adil Khan had already restored the Sunni creed, 
there was no valid ground for continuing the war against him. Con¬ 
vinced of these arguments they left the confederacy, and ‘Adil Khan 


446 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 

with the assistance of ‘Imad-ul-Mulk, defeated Mahmud Shah and 
Amir Barld who fled to Bidar. Thereupon Yusuf returned in triumph 
to Bijapur, and “being no longer apprehensive of his enemies, he re¬ 
newed the public exercise of the Shiah religion/’ 67 

Goa, which was within the territory of Bijapur, was a very im¬ 
portant port on the Malabar coast. It “was more favourably situated 
than Calicut or Cochin as far as the trade of the Red Sea and the 
Persian Gulf was concerned, and it was for this reason that Albu¬ 
querque, the governor of the Portuguese possessions in the East, 
desired to possess it.” 68 He made a surprise attack on it and occu¬ 
pied it without any difficulty (1510), but it did not remain long 
in his possession, as it was shortly recovered by ‘Adil Khan. 69 

‘Adil Khan died in October, 1510, and was buried at Gogi, to 
the east of Bijapur city. Firishta praised him highly for his good 
qualities. He was handsome, brave, a skilled musician, “eminent 
for his learning, his liberality”, and “intimately acquainted with 
human nature.” 

“Although he mingled pleasure with business, yet he never 
allowed the former to interfere with the latter. He always warned 
his ministers to act with justice and integrity, and in his own per¬ 
son showed them an example of attention to these virtues. He in¬ 
vited to his court many learned men and valiant officers from Persia, 
Turkistan, and Room, also several eminent artists, who lived happily 
under the shadow of bounty/" 70 

Isma‘il Adil Khan ( 1510-1534 ) 

During the minority of Isma‘Il, Kamal Khan, an experienced 
officer whom Yusuf had appointed regent before his death, carried 
on the affairs of the government. He established the Sunni faith as 
the State religion. 

Albuquerque was on the look out for an opportunity to recover 
Goa, and in November, 1510, when most of its army was away in 
Bijapur to attend a State ceremony, he made a surprise attack on it 
and re-occupied it. Goa was thus lost for ever to Bijapur. 

Concentration of too much power in the hands of Kamal Khan 
made him highly ambitious. He entered into a conspiracy with Amir 
Band and made an attempt to oust Isma‘Il and seize the reins of 
government in his own hands. But it proved futile and he was 
assassinated. 

Amir Band was bent on curbing the power of Bijapur. Jahan¬ 
gir Khan, the adopted son of Dastur Dinar, was given all possible 


447 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


assistance to recover Gulbarga which his father had once held and 
which Kamal Khan had also secretly promised to cede to Amir 
Band. It was recovered and Jahangir was placed in charge of it 
as a provincial governor. But Bijapur retook it, whereupon, Amir 
Barld, in the name of the BahmanI Sultan, Mahmud Shah, appealed 
for aid to Ahmadnagar, Golconda and Berar, all of whom responded 
to the call. Accompanied by their forces, Barld, along with the 
Sultan marched against Bijapur. But Ismail inflicted a severe de¬ 
feat on them, and Mahmud and his son Ahmad fell into the hands 
of the Bijapur forces. ‘Adil Khan showed proper respect to the 
Sultan and at the request of the latter, Bibi Musity, the sister of 
Ismail, who had been affianced to Ahmad, was married to the latter 
at Gulbarga. After the ceremony, five thousand Bijapur cavalry 
were sent to escort Mahmud Shah to Bldar. On the approach of 
this army, Amir Barld fled away but as soon as they left Bldar, he 
came back, and resumed control of all affairs of the BahmanI King¬ 
dom as before. 71 

Ismail had also the privilege of receiving high honour from 
Shah Isma‘11 Safavl, the Sultan of Persia, in return for his assist¬ 
ance in relieving a Persian ambassador from unnecessary detention 
at Bidar by the Sunni bigot, Amir Barid. Highly satisfied, the 
Persian king sent him rich presents and addressed him as an inde¬ 
pendent ruler. 72 

The minority of the Sultan and Kamal Khan’s hostile activities 
against him had afforded an opportunity to Krishnadevaraya, the 
king of Vijayanagara, to invade the Bijapur kingdom. He attack¬ 
ed and occupied Raichur (1512). Getting rid of his internal trou¬ 
bles and in an opportune moment when Krishnadevaraya was busy 
in his war against Orissa, Ismail marched towards Raichur and 
captured it. Highly incensed at this, Krishnadevaraya again pro¬ 
ceeded there with a large army and invested this fort (1520). 
Ismail also moved against him, and in the battle which ensued, he 
sustained a severe defeat with heavy losses. He had no alternative 
but to take to his heels, and while retreating, many of his troops 
were swept away by the strong current of the Krishna. But the 
Bijapur army in the fort did not yield and fought valiantly, till 
their commander’s death paralysed the defence, and made them 
surrender. 

Hostilities continued between Ismail and Krishnadevaraya in 
which the former suffered several reverses, and even the city of 
Bijapur was once occupied by the enemy. But after the death of 
Krishnadevaraya, ‘Adil Khan again invaded the Raichur doab 


448 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 

(1530) and succeeded in gaining possession of both Raichur and 
Mudgal. 723 

His relations with the neighbouring Muslim States have most¬ 
ly been described in connection with the history of Ahmadnagar 
and Bldar. While he was conducting the siege of Kovelakonda, a 
fortress on the border of Golconda, he was attacked with a high 
fever which proved fatal (1534). He was interred at Gogi, close 
to the tomb of his father. 

He was just, kind, magnanimous, averse to harsh language, and 
fond of wit and humour. He was also a poet and patron of the 
learned, a skilled musician, and an expert painter. 

Mallu ‘Adil Khan ( 1534-1535) 

According to the will of I small, his son Mallu Khan was ele¬ 
vated in his place with the assistance of Asad Khan, the most in¬ 
fluential Bijapur noble, who became protector of the State. The 
latter had been entrusted by Isma‘fl to prosecute the siege of Kovela¬ 
konda, but it was abandoned, and the Bijapur forces retreated to 
Gulbarga. 

Mallu was unfit to reign. He neglected his duties and indulged 
in low vices, the result of which was discontent and confusion in 
the kingdom. Finding this a suitable opportunity to recover the 
Raichur doab y Achyutadevaraya, the king of Vijayanagara, invaded 
and succeeded in wresting it from Bijapur, compelling Mallu to 
accept his terms. 73 

The excesses of the latter became so intolerable that even his 
grandmother went against him and had him removed and blinded, 
raising his younger brother Ibrahim in his place. 

Ibrdhim ‘Adil Shah I ( 1535-1557 ) 

The first act of Ibrahim was to establish the Sunni faith, to 
which he belonged, as the State religion, and to discontinue the use 
of the head-dress of the Shiahs in his army. He then dismissed a 
large number of foreigners and appointed Deccanis and Abyssinians 
in their places. Another innovation which also went against the 
foreigners was the introduction of the Deccani languages like 
Marathi and Kannada, instead of Persian, for maintenance of Govern¬ 
ment accounts which were then kept by the Brahmins in exclusion 
of the foreigners. The Brahmins thus got a good opportunity of 
acquiring considerable influence in the government. 

449 

M.E.—29 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Ibrahim I took advantage of the internecine quarrels in Vijaya- 
nagara during the reign of Achyutadevaraya and invaded that king¬ 
dom. Nagalapur, a town near Vijayanagara, was “razed to the 
ground” and both Achyutadevaraya and Ramaraj&, who were at 
enmity with each other, were afraid lest he should join hands with 
the other side. ‘Adil Shah besieged the city of Vijayanagara, and, 
by negotiations with the contending parties, settled their differences 
after which he returned to his kingdom on receipt of a large sum 
of money, twelve fine elephants, and some horses as a reward for 
his services. 74 

Later on, his attempt to take possession of the fortress of Adoni 
from Vijayanagara appeared to have ended in fiasco. His relations 
with Ahmadnagar and other States of the Deccan have already been 
discussed in the section on Ahmadnagar and need not be repeated 
here. 

Suspecting treachery on the part of some of his officers he put 
to death seventy Muslims and forty Hindus of high rank in course 
of two months. Such cruel action did not go without serious re¬ 
action, and a conspiracy was formed to depose him and place his 
brother ‘Abdullah on the throne (1545). But the matter leaked out 
and most of the conspirators were put to death. It was with great 
difficulty that ‘Abdullah managed to escape to the Portuguese at Goa. 

Although the relation between Bijapur and the Portuguese was 
friendly for a considerable time, it was disturbed by the presence 
of Prince ‘Abdullah at Goa, as Ibrahim I was anxious to gain pos¬ 
session of his rebel brother. He proposed to cede Salsette and 
Bardez to the Portuguese on condition of the surrender of his 
brother. But without complying with it, they proposed to send him 
to Malacca. They did not act up to this proposal even, but occu¬ 
pied Salsette and Bardez, and this finally brought Bijapur and Goa 
into conflict. Ibrahim I was ultimately forced to give up his claim 
on these places and conclude peace with the Portuguese in August, 
1548, mainly for two reasons: he had become anxious when he heard 
of the separate treaties of Vijayanagara and Ahmadnagar with the 
Portuguese, and moreover, he was aware that enmity with Goa 
would mean loss of maritime commerce, as it was the Portuguese 
navy which then controlled the trade of the Arabian Sea. 75 

‘Abdullah’s case never prospered, and, in 1555, when his cause 
was championed by Saif ‘Ain-ul-Mulk, then a hostile Bijapur noble, 
he was captured and imprisoned. 76 

At the fag end of his career, Ibrahim I led a dissipated life 
which hastened his death. He fell ill and died in 1557. 


450 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 

It has already been stated that he was the first ruler of this 
dynasty to assume the title of “Shah”. 

‘All ‘Adil Shah I ( 1557-1580 ) 

Ibrahim I had a mind to nominate his younger son Tahmasp 
as his successor in preference to his eldest son ‘All who was a Shiah, 
but when it came to his knowledge that Tahmasp was a more zea¬ 
lous Shiah than ‘All, he became highly incensed and left the matter 
of succession without any decision. On his decease, ‘All ascended the 
throne with the aid of the influential ‘Adil Shahl nobles. 

‘All ‘Adil Shah’s first act was the re-establishment of the Shiah 
faith as the State religion and encouragement to the foreigners to 
enter his service. 

It has been stated in the history of Husain Nizam Shah (1553- 
1565) that ‘AH I formed an alliance with Vijayanagara against Husain 
(1558) and humbled him. The confederate army, particularly the 
Vijayanagara army, carried on depredations on an extensive scale in 
the territories of Ahmadnagar and these were highly resented by the 
neighbouring Muslim kingdoms. These, along with other reasons, 
which brought about a coalition of the four Deccani Muslim States 
including Bijapur against Vijayanagara and the parts played in the 
formation of this alliance as well as in the battle of Talikota by ‘All I, 
have also been discussed above. 763 

In 1569, ‘All formed alliances with Murtaza Nizam Shah I and 
the Zamorin of Calicut against the Portuguese with a view to re¬ 
covering Goa. The plan was quite sound, as it was decided to attack 
both Chaul and Goa simultaneously, thus dividing Portuguese 
military strength in two places at the same time. The military 
operations began in January, 1570. Chaul, which was a Portuguese 
outpost in the Ahmadnagar kingdom, was besieged by Murtaza I 
and Goa by ‘All I. But none of the operations succeeded, as the 
Portuguese repulsed all their attacks. The siege of Chaul was 
abandoned after seven months and ‘All also ultimately gave up the 
siege of Goa and retreated. 

After this, ‘All decided to extend his kingdom in the south and 
moved against Adoni, the hill fortress of Vijayanagara, and suc¬ 
ceeded in capturing it after prolonged siege. His enhancement of 
power in this region was looked upon with disfavour by Murtaza 
Nizam Shah I, but instead of coming to arms both of them decided 
amicably to allow each other to extend their respective frontiers 
in the areas which each coveted. A treaty was concluded permit- 


451 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


ting Murtaza I to annex Berar and Bidar, and ‘All I to conquer an 
equivalent territory in the Western Carnatic. 77 

In accordance with the above arrangement, ‘All I marched with 
his minister Mustafa Khan to the Western Carnatic and conquered 
many places one after another, some of which were kept under 
his direct administration and others allowed to remain under their 
respective local chiefs who paid him tribute. Mustafa Khan was 
appointed Governor of the conquered territories with his head¬ 
quarters at Chandraguni and ‘All returned to Bijapur (1575) after 
an absence of more than three years. 

Next year, he marched to Adoni and thence to Penukoiida, the 
capital of Srlrahga I of Vijayanagara. On his approach, the latter 
retired with his treasures into the fort of Chandragiri, leaving the 
defence of the capital to his general Chennappa. ‘All laid siege to 
it but the garrison held out for three months, and when they were 
almost ready to surrender, &rlranga bought over a Marat ha com¬ 
mander of ‘All. This desertion helped the cause of Vijayanagara 
which received help from Golconda also, and Chennappa N'ayaka 
succeeded in defeating ‘Adil Shah who was compelled to raise the 
siege (1576) and retire to Bijapur. 773 

Having no issue, ‘All nominated his nephew Ibrahim, the son of 
Tahmasp, as his successor. Within a few months, ‘All was assassinat¬ 
ed by one of the two eunuchs whom he had brought from Bidar 
(1580) as a price for his help to ‘All Band against an Ahmadnagar 
invasion. 

It was during the reign of ‘All ‘Adil Shah that the wall of 
Bijapur city was constructed, and arrangements were made for ample 
supply of water in the walled city by cutting an aqueduct and con¬ 
structing a large reservoir. He showed his fine taste for architec¬ 
ture, specially by the construction of buildings like Jami Masjid, 
Mecca Masjid, and Gagan Mahal or Hall of Audience. Although not 
fully completed, Jami ‘Masjid “is the best proportioned building in 
the city” of Bijapur and “for simplicity of design, impressive gran¬ 
deur and the-solemn hush of its corridors” it “stands unrivalled.” 78 

Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah II (1580-1627) 

Ibrahim ascended the throne at the age of nine. Kamil Khan 
Deccani was appointed regent and Chand Sultan, the widow of ‘All I 
and daughter of Husain Nizam Shah I, was entrusted with the edu¬ 
cation of the minor Sultan. But the regent having shown disrespect 
to Chand Sultan, she and Haji Kishvar Khan, another Deccani of 


452 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 


high rank, planned to remove him, and one evening, while Kamil 
Khan was engaged in an official work in the palace, Kishvar Khan 
attempted to seize him whereupon he took to flight but was seized 
and beheaded. 79 

Kishvar Khan was then appointed regent, and, following in the 
footsteps of Kamil Khan, he also exercised uncontrolled sway in the 
kingdom. Taking advantage of these internal troubles in Bijapur, 
Ahmadnagar invaded it, but Bihzad-ul-Mulk, the commander of the 
Nizam Shah! army, sustained a heavy defeat at Dharaseo and all his 
artillery and elephants fell into the hands of his enemies. The 
victory was again followed by an internecine quarrel in consequence 
of an order issued by the Regent to the military officers to give up 
the elephants, captured in the last campaign, to the Sultan. This 
gave offence to the nobles concerned who not only refused compliance 
but determined to oust him from the regency and instal Mustafa 
Khan, another nobleman, in his place. Informed of these designs, 
Kishvar Khan made a conspiracy against Mustafa and had him assas¬ 
sinated. 80 

Highly enraged at this cold-blooded murder, Chand Sultan up¬ 
braided Kishvar Khan who, in retaliation, had her confined in the 
fortress of Satara. This and some other high-handed acts made him 
extremely unpopular and a strong party was formed against him. 
Feeling his position insecure and resistance impossible, he fled to 
Ahmadnagar, but being unable to find a shelter there he went to 
Golconda where he was assassinated by a relative of Mustafa. Al¬ 
though Chand Sultan was released from Satara, the situation in Bija¬ 
pur did not improve; party strife continued, and encouraged by such 
internal dissensions, Ahmadnagar, in conjunction with Golconda, in¬ 
vaded Bijapur and laid siege to the fortress of Naldurg. The garrison 
defended it with all their might and its commandant resisted every 
effort of the enemy to reduce it. Finding difficulty in capturing 
it and expecting that dissensions prevailing at the capital would help 
its fall and hasten the conquest of other places of the ‘Adil Shah! 
State, the confederate army raised the siege of Naldurg and proceed¬ 
ed towards the capital. There were then only two to three thou¬ 
sand troops to defend the city, and although reinforcements arrived 
within a few days, there was lack of concerted action and desertions 
followed from their camp. On the other hand, the Ahmadnagar 
camps, too, were suffering from discords and dissensions which de¬ 
layed their assault on the walled city. 

Chand Sultan entrusted the work of defence to an able officer 
named Abu-’l-Hasan who saved the situation by summoning the 

453 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Maratha forces from the Carnatic and employing them in harassing 
enemies by cutting off their supplies and in all other possible man¬ 
ner. Both the forces of Ahmadnagar and Golconda began to feel 
badly the pinch of starvation and they were compelled to retreat. 
The Nizam Shahl army retired to Ahmadnagar after plundering some 
places of Bijapur on the way, while the forces of Golconda were 
defeated and driven out of Bijapur, even to the gates of Golconda. 

When Bijapur was free from foreign aggression, internal dis¬ 
orders again vitiated its atmosphere. It was Dilavar Khan who had 
driven back the Qutb Shahl forces; and, on return from this success¬ 
ful campaign, he coveted the high position of minister by ousting 
Ikhlas Khan who was captured, blinded, and kept in confinement, 
and Dilavar Khan became all powerful in the kingdom. Abu-’l- 
Hasan was also blinded and put to death. Chand Sultan’s power 
was curtailed and the Sunni faith established as the State religion. 
Dilavar remained the dominant force in Bijapur for eight years from 
1582 to 1590 and, during this period, matrimonial alliances were 
formed with Golconda and Ahmadnagar. Ibrahim II married a 
sister of Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah, and his sister Khadija was 
married to Miran Husain, the son of Murtaza Nizjam Shah I. But 
within a few years, war again commenced between Ahmadnagar and 
Bijapur and Dilavar Khan was defeated at Dharaseo (1591). This 
led to his fall and he was forced to leave Bijapur and take shelter 
in Ahmadnagar where he entered the service of Burhan Nizam 
Shah II. The latter refused to send him back to Bijapur and his 
instigation led to a renewal of war between these two kingdoms, but 
Burhan sustained a serious defeat. These have already been stated 
in the history of Ahmadnagar. 

By a stratagem, Ibrahim II inflicted a befitting punishment on 
the traitor, Dilavar Khan, when he came back to Bijapur on assu¬ 
rances of safety as well as of reinstatement to his former position. 
He was blinded and confined in the fortress of Satara, till his death. 81 

Relieved of the control of Dilavar, Ibrahim II assumed charge 
of the government, but even then, he was not free from domestic 
troubles. In 1594 his brother, Isma‘il, rebelled against him, and al¬ 
though the situation became very serious owing to the defection of 
‘Ain-ul-Mulk, the Amir-ul-Umara, and the advance of Burhan II to 
aid the rebels, Ibrahim succeeded in quelling the rebellion before 
the Nizam Shahl army could actually come to the assistance of 
his enemies. Both Isma‘il and ‘Ain-ul-mulk were captured and put 
to death. 


454 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 


Subsequent relations of Ibrahim II with Burhan II and his son 
Ibrahim Nizam Shah have already been described in the history 
of the Nizam Shahl kingdom. 813 When, on the death of the last- 
named Ahmadnagar Sultan, that kingdom was convulsed by party 
strife as well as Mughul invasion, Ibrahim II, at the request of 
Chand Sultan, rendered necessary assistance to it to tide over the 
difficulties. Although the kingdom could not be saved, the fact 
remains that ‘Adil Shah was not slow in lending aid to his neigh¬ 
bouring State in its hour of peril in spite of long-standing enmity 
existing between them. Subsequently, when Malik ‘Ambar appear¬ 
ed as a saviour on the political arena of Ahmadnagar and sought 
his assistance, he helped him in his efforts to revive the fallen 
fortunes of the State, and like that astute politician, he, too, rea¬ 
lized the necessity of mutual aid and co-operation with a view to 
protecting their kingdoms against Mughul aggression. At the re¬ 
quest of ‘Ambar he allowed ‘All, a scion of the Nizam Shah! 
dynasty, then at Bijapur, to proceed to Parenda and ascend the 
throne of the newly revived Ahmadnagar kingdom with the title of 
Murtaza Shah Nizam-ul-Mulk. 

Ibrahim II also joined hands with ‘Ambar in his conflicts with 
the Mughuls on many occasions, and it was unfortunate that a rift 
occurred between them at the fag end of their career, but it must 
be said to their credit that they foiled the Mughul efforts to annex 
the south for a considerable time. 81b 

It was during the reign of this monarch that Bldar was annexed 
to the ‘Adil Shahl kingdom (1619). 

In spite of his preoccupations in war, Ibrahim II devoted his time 
to the civil administration of his country. In this connection Mea¬ 
dows Taylor says: “He applied himself to the civil affairs with 
much care, and the land settlements of the provinces of his kingdom, 
many of which are still extant among district records, show an 
admirable and efficient system of registration of property and its 
valuation. In this respect, the system of Todar Mai introduced by 
the Emperor Akbar seems to have been followed with the necessary 
local modifications.” 82 

About his tolerance and broadness of mind the same writer 
says: “Although he changed the profession of the State religion 
immediately upon assuming the direction of State affairs from 
Shiah to Sunni, Ibrahim was yet extremely tolerant of all creeds 
and faiths. Hindus not only suffered no persecution at his hands, 
but many of his chief civil and military officers were Brahmins and 
Marathas.” 83 His liberal views were testified to by Firishta as 


455 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


well, 84 and he was known as the “Jagadguru”, or “spiritual guide 
of the world.” 

He was a man of culture, patron of the learned and fond of 
music and poetry. It was during his reign that Muhammad Qasim 
Firishta wrote the famous Tdr^ikh, better known as the Tdrlkh-i- 
Firishta. He was also a great builder and several ornate buildings 
erected by him show his fine taste. Of these, the Ananda Mahal 
or palace of delight, built in 1589, is a very conspicuous palace in 
the Bijapur fort; the Mihtar Mahal, Malika Jahan Masjid and the 
mausoleum of his queen Taj Sultan also deserve special mention. 

He died in September, 1627, and was buried at a short distance 
from the walled city of Bijapur. His own mausoleum in the group 
of buildings known as the Ibrahim Rauza is a richly decorated 
structure. It was not quite finished during his life-time and was 
completed during the reign of his son Muhammad ‘Adil Shah. 

Muhammad i Adil Shah (1627-1656) 

Although Darvesh was the eldest son of the late Sultan, his 
claim was set aside by the joint intrigues of the minister Mustafa 
Khan and another influential Bijapur noble named Daulat Khan. 
Darvesh was blinded, and his younger brother Muhammad, a boy 
of fifteen, was raised to the throne, under the title of Muhammad 
‘Adil Shah. 

Early in his reign, the Nizam Shah! army under Hamid Khan 
invaded Bijapur, but they were defeated and compelled to retreat 
to their territory. 

On his accession to the throne, Shah Jahan started a vigorous 
policy against the Deccan States. 84a In 1631, Bijapur was invaded, 
and although the Mughul army scored some successes at the early 
stages of the campaign and laid siege to the fort of Bijapur, they 
were ultimately compelled to withdraw, due to acute shortage of 
supplies. 

Shah Jahan, who was bent upon annexing the Deccan States, 
was highly dissatisfied at this discomfiture. The conduct of Muham¬ 
mad ‘Adil Shah and ‘Abdullah Qutb Shah, who tried to seize some 
of the territories of the fallen Nizam Shah! kingdom and offered 
secret aid to Shahji in his effort to revive that kingdom, further 
annoyed him. Besides, the emperor, who was a staunch Sunni, bore 
hatred against these States, many of whose princes, nobles and peo¬ 
ple professed the Shiah faith. Both Bijapur and Golconda were 


456 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 

asked to accept Mughul suzerainty and some other terms. Shah 
Jahan personally went to the Deccan for better conduct of affairs 
(1636), and three armies of 50,000 men in all were kept ready for 
action against them. 

Golconda submitted in terror, but ‘Adil Shah decided to resist 
Mughul aggression. Bijiapur was invaded from three sides and the 
Mughul armies carried on extensive devastations in the towns and 
villages, mercilessly massacring the inhabitants. Although the Sul¬ 
tan fought with great valour and defended his capital by cutting the 
dam of the Shahpur lake and flooding the surrounding country-side, 
he was eventually compelled to sue for peace, and a treaty was 
concluded between them in May, 1636. The Sultan of Bijapur ac¬ 
knowledged the “overlordship” of the Mughul emperor, promised 
not to cause any annoyance to the Sultan of Golconda, now his (em¬ 
peror’s) vassal, and agreed to pay a sum of twenty lakhs of rupees 
as an annual tribute. In return, Shah Jahan assigned to Bijapur a 
part of the recently conquered Ahmadnagar territory consisting of 
fifty pargands which included Sholapur and vangi mahals, the par- 
gands of Bhalki and Chidgupa, north Konkan, and the Poona dis¬ 
trict, yielding an annual revenue of eighty lakhs of rupees, while 
the Mughuls annexed the rest of Ahmadnagar. The Sultan was 
ordered to abstain from aiding ShahjI in any hostile activity. 8413 

After this, friendly relations prevailed between Muhammad 
‘Adil Shah and the Mughul emperor, and there were exchanges of 
presents between the two. Thus feeling secure on the north, ‘Adil 
Shah diverted his attention towards the extension of his frontiers 
on the other three sides, viz., the east, south and west. 

“The principality of Ikkeri had been raided in 1635 at the invita¬ 
tion of a local faction, and a heavy fine of 30 lakhs of hurts imposed 
on its Raja Virabhadra Nayak.” 85 In 1637 the invasion was renewed 
at the invitation of Kenge Hanuma, chief of Basavapattanam and 
Tarikere, a recalcitrant feudatory of Ikkeri. 85a Randaulah Khan, 
with a huge force consisting of 40,000 cavalry, besides infantry and 
elephant corps, invaded Ikkeri. He proceeded as far as Ikkeri, the 
capital city, and, unable to resist long, Virabhadra retreated to the 
fortress of Bhuvanagiri. After occupying the capital city, the Bija¬ 
pur army laid siege to Bhuvanagiri, whereupon he was compelled 
to sue for peace, and, according to the terms of the treaty, he had 
to surrender the forts already occupied by the Bijapur army and 
acknowledge the overlordship of the Sultan of Bijapur. Shortly 
after this, Ikkeri helped Bijapur to crush Tarikere and Basavapatta¬ 
nam. 86 


457 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


In 1647, Mustafa Khan, the Bijapur general, marched against 
Srlranga III of Vijayanagara, and took several places including Kri- 
shnagiri and Deva Durga. In the same year he arrived at Vellore 
where he met Mir Jumla, the Golconda general, and it was arranged 
that they would wrest the territories of £>riranga and divide them 
between Bijapur and Golconda. Vellore was besieged and occupied 
by Mustafa Khan whose victorious army took possession of many 
other places including Kaveripattanam, Hasan, Kanakagiri, Ratna- 
giri and Arjunakote, all belonging to Vijayanagara. 87 

On Mustafa Khan’s death in November, 1648, the command of 
the Bijapur expeditionary forces devolved on Khan Muhammad (Khan 
Khanan) who succeeded in capturing the fortress of Gingee in 
December, 1649. The victors received a rich booty consisting of 
gold, silver and precious stones worth several crores of rupees. The 
Nayakas of Madura and Tanjore then offered their submission, 88 and 
towards the west, the ‘Adil Shahi army obtained some successes 
against the Portuguese of Goa also. The territories of Bijapur now 
extended “from the Arabian Sea to the Bay of Bengal, across the 
Indian Peninsula.” 89 

It was during this reign that Shivaji started his activities against 
Bijapur and the serious illness of Muhammad ‘Adil Shah in 1646 
afforded him a grand opportunity for the same. He occupied many 
forts, one after another, like Torna, Kondhana (Simhagarh), Chakan 
and Purandar; but, for these acts of disloyalty, his father Shahj® was 
arrested and Shivaji secured his release with great difficulty. 

Muhammad ‘Adil Shah breathed his last in November, 1656. It 
was during his reign that the ‘Adil Shahi kingdom attained its 
greatest extent and power. At the time of his death it “had an 
annual revenue of seven krores and eighty-four lakhs of rupees, be¬ 
sides five krores twenty-five lakhs of tribute due from vassal rajahs 
and zamindars. The strength of the army establishment was 80,000 
cavalry and 2,50,000 infantry, besides 530 war elephants. The exact 
extent of the kingdom can be judged from the fringe of dependent 
and tributary states around it, covering the Kanara and Dharwar 
districts of Bombay, the Bellary and Karnool districts of Madras, 
and much of the kingdom of Mysore.” 90 

Muhammad ‘Adil Shah was well known for piety, justice and 
love for his subjects, and was a patron of arts, literature and science. 
He also earned great reputation as a builder; the most conspicuous 
building erected by him in Bijapur was his own mausoleum, the great 
Gol Gumbaz, which contains one of the greatest domes in the world. 


458 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 

He also erected the Asar Mahal within which was enshrined two 
hairs of the Prophet’s beard. 

‘All ‘Adil Shah II (1656-1672) 

‘All Adil Shah II, the only son of the late Sultan, was then placed 
on the throne with the help of Queen Bari Sahiba and prime minister 
Khan Muhammad. He was only eighteen years of age and incapable 
of controlling different factions within the kingdom. Disorders fol¬ 
lowed in some of the newly conquered territories and consequent loss 
of them, and the nobles began to quarrel among themselves for 
power. Aurangzlb, who was then Mughul viceroy of the Deccan, 
considered it a convenient time for the invasion of Bijapur, and with 
the sanction of the emperor, on the plea that ‘All was not really a 
son of the late king, he opened his campaign against ‘Adil Shah and 
laid siege to the fort of Bidar. In the meantime, he had been able to 
seduce some of the ‘Adil Shah! nobles; Mir Jumla, who had deserted 
his master, the Sultan of Golconda, and joined the Mughuls, render¬ 
ed immense help to him. 

But this declaration of war against Bijapur on an issue which 
was purely its own concern, was wholly unjustified. Bidar fell after 
a gallant resistance of twenty-seven days (1657). Bijapur could not 
check the advance of the Mughuls who ravaged an extensive area 
of the kingdom and laid siege to Kalyani, forty miles west of Bidar, 
and once the capital of the Chalukya kings, which also fell (1657). 
‘All ‘Adil Shah II was compelled to sue for peace, and on the inter¬ 
cession of Daria, Shah Jahan agreed to conclude a treaty with Bija¬ 
pur. ‘Adil Shah consented to surrender Bidar, Kalyani and Parenda, 
and pay an indemnity of one crore of rupees to the Mughuls. 

After these, the news of serious illness of Shah Jahan and 
Aurangzlb’s march towards the north to contest the throne, and quar¬ 
rels among the Bijapur nobles, culminating in the murder of Khan 
Muhammad, gave ShivajI an opportunity for his ambitious projects. 
He hurried to Konkan and occupied Kalyan, Bhivandi and the fort 
of Mahuli. 

In 1659 the Bijapur government sent Afzal Khan, a noble of 
high rank, with 10,000 cavalry against ShivajI with instruction to 
capture him dead or alive. It has been already narrated how Afzal 
Khan opened negotiations with the Maratha chief, met him in a con¬ 
ference, and was killed by ShivajI (pp. 258-9). 

The leaderless Bijapur army became panic-stricken and had no 
courage to oppose the enemy. Many of them were killed and others 


459 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


surrendered. Their losses were heavy and all their artillery, am¬ 
munition, and camp equipage fell into the hands of the Marathas 
(1659). 

After this triumph, Shivaji captured the fort of Panhala and 
obtained more successes against Bijapur. To avenge these losses 
and drive away the rebel, ‘All II sent Fazl Khan and SidI Jauhar, 
now entitled Salabat Khan, and Shivaji was defeated and forced to 
take shelter in the fort of Panhala which was also besieged. It was 
with difficulty that the latter managed to escape. 

Taking advantage of ill-feeling between the Nayakas of Madura 
and Tanjore, ‘All II despatched a large army against them. A sur¬ 
prise attack was made on Tanjore upon which its Nayaka, Vijaya> 
raghava, fled to Vallam and the Bijapur force occupied Tanjore with¬ 
out much difficulty (1659). The fort of Vallam also fell without any 
resistance, as the Nayaka had fled to the forests of Talavarayan and 
the garrison did not defend it. The victors then proceeded to the 
fort of Trichinopoly and laid siege to it, but due to famine and 
troubles created by the Kallars (robber chiefs), they had to retire 
on receipt of a sum of money only from the Nayaka of Madura. 
Soon after, Vijayaraghava reoccupied Tanjore. In 1663, another 
expedition was sent to Trichinopoly which was besieged, and the 
surrounding regions were plundered. But in spite of repeated at¬ 
tacks, the fort could not be occupied and the Bijapur army had to 
retire on receipt of a large sum of money from the ruler of Madura. 91 

The Nayaka of Ikkeri had recovered several forts like Ikkeri, 
Soraba, Udugani, Mahadevpura and Ambaligolla from Bijapur, and 
‘Ali II led a campaign against him, defeated him near Ambaligolla, 
and occupied Bednor, the then capital of Ikkeri. The fort of Bhuva- 
nagiri was then invested, but Bhadrappa Nayaka, the Nayaka of 
Ikkeri ( 1662 - 64 ), adopted guerilla tactics and cut off all communi¬ 
cations of the Bijapur forces who were obliged to make peace with 
him and retire. ‘All II sent another expedition against Ikkeri and 
occupied three of its forts (about 1668). 92 

In the meantime, Bijapur had to face another Mughul invasion, 
and this was led by Jay Singh (1665-66). Although the Mughul ad¬ 
vance was rapid for some time, it soon received a serious set-back 
through the exertions of ‘All II, and Jay Singh was compelled to 
retire without achieving anything. “Not an inch of territory, not 
a stone of a fortress, not a pice of indemnity was gained.” 93 

After this, ‘Ali II did not at all attend to his duties but spent his 
time in idle pleasures. Fortunately for him, he had an able prime 


460 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 

minister in ‘Abdul Muhammad who conducted the administration 
with efficiency. 

The Sultan died of paralysis in 1672 and was succeeded by his 
son Sikandar, a boy of four only. ‘All was a patron of Urdu litera¬ 
ture. Among the court-poets who flourished during his reign and 
wrote in Deccani Urdu were Mian Nusrali, Mian Hansi and Mirjan 
Marsiya. “Besides the two memorable works Gulshan-i-Ishq and 
All Noma, Nusrali composed numerous Qasidahs and Diivan-i-Gha- 
zals full of beauty and virility. Mian Hansi’s solid contributions to 
literature are his story of Yusuf and Zulaikha, Gkazals and other 
poems. Mirjan Marsiya, the third notable poet and writer, wrote 
verses in praise of the Prophet, Hasan and Husain, and the Imams.” 94 

Sikandar ‘Adii Shah (1672-1686) 

Sikandar was the last of the ‘Adil Shahi Sultans, and as he was a 
minor, the administration of the kingdom was run by its wazirs or 
prime ministers who also acted as regents. “The history of Bijapur 
from 1672 to 1686 is really the history of its v^azirs. It was a period 
marked by chronic civil war among the factious nobles, indepen¬ 
dence of the provincial governors, paralysis of the central adminis¬ 
tration in the capital itself, occasional but indecisive Mughul inva¬ 
sions, and a secret alliance but pretended hostility with the Mara- 
thas.” 95 

Immediately after the death of ‘All II, Khavass Khan, the Abys¬ 
sinian leader of the Deccani party, seized the real powers of the 
State and became prime minister and regent. But due to his in¬ 
capacity and indolence there were disturbances in the kingdom, and 
taking advantage of this situation, ShivajI conquered some of its 
territories and the Mughuls began to seduce its nobles. Khavass 
Khan was in power for three years, and when he had quarrels and 
bitter animosity with ‘Abdul Karim Buhlul Khan, the commander- 
in-chief and leader of the Afghan party, the latter invited him to a 
dinner and imprisoned him in a drunken state (1675). Buhlul then 
stepped into his position but his regime of two years was worse. 
He raised his own men to high posts and expelled those of the Dec¬ 
cani party. Disorders followed in the kingdom and his chief ad¬ 
viser, Khizr Khan, was murdered; in revenge, Buhlul murdered 
Khavass Khan. The Mughuls took up the cause of the Deccani party 
who had sought their assistance and occupied Naldurg and Gulbarga 
(1677). 

Under the Afghan regime the sufferings of the people knew no 
bounds, and, at last, on the death of Buhlul (1678), Sddi Mas‘ud, 


461 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


another Bijapur! noble, with the assistance of the Mughuls, became 
prime minister and regent. He made peace with the Mughuls, one 
of the conditions of which was that Shahr Banu Begam, Sikandar’s 
sister, was to be married to a son of Aurangzlb, and, according to 
this, she left the city of Bijapur in 1679 and was married to Prince 
A‘zam in July, 1681. 95a 

The condition of Bijapur went from bad to worse. The govern¬ 
ment was bankrupt, and disorder and anarchy prevailed in the State 
due to quarrels between Mas‘ud and Sharza Khan, an influential 
noble. The Regent could not, in the least, improve the dilapidated 
condition of the kingdom and its future seemed to be doomed. 

After a bitter experience of five years as wazir and regent, 
Mas‘ud resigned his office early in 1684. Aqa Khusrav, who then 
occupied his place in March, 1684, died in October of the same year. 
The time was extremely ominous and dark clouds were hanging on 
the political horizon of Bijapur. The most intrepid general, Sayyid 
Makhdum surnamed Sharza Khan, was entrusted with the defence 
of the kingdom. 

In the meantime, the Mughuls had been appropriating Bijapur 
territories and establishing their outposts in them. Mangalvide and 
Sangola were conquered in May, 1684. Aurangzlb, who was deter¬ 
mined to annex this kingdom both on political and religious grounds, 
took vigorous steps to prosecute his plans. Acrimonious letters 
passed between him and Sikandar, and a serious rupture seemed 
imminent, although some months passed before the formal out¬ 
break of war. In such a critical time, the Sultan of Golconda pro¬ 
mised aid to Bijapur and a Maratha contingent also arrived there 
from ShambhujI. 

In April, 1685, the Mughuls laid siege to the fort of Bijapur, 
and Prince A‘zam reached there in June to take charge of the ope¬ 
rations. The Bijiapuris fought valiantly for the defence of their 
capital and within a month three severe battles were fought. They 
cut off the supplies of the Mughuls who suffered terribly for want of 
provisions, but the prince was resolute and conducted the siege in¬ 
spite of his father’s order to return. Aurangzlb then sent sufficient 
provisions, money and reinforcements which saved the besieging 
army, but even after a siege of fifteen months, there was no real 
progress owing to discord and jealousy among the officers. So, the 
Emperor himself went to Rasulpur, a suburb west of the fort, 
(1686), 95b and pressed the siege in right earnest. His personal pre¬ 
sence and firm determination to capture the fort cowed down the 
courage of the Bijapurls. They lost heart, as they saw no hope of 


462 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 

saving their capital city. The garrison had shrunk to two thousand 
men only and there was no possibility of assistance from outside. 
The scarcity of provisions due to famine made their position still 
more intolerable and it was not possible to resist any longer. 

In September, 1686, Sikandar surrendered to the Mughul Em¬ 
peror. 950 Thus, the ‘Adil Shahi kingdom lost its independent existence 
and was annexed to the Mughul Empire. Sikandar was enrolled as a 
Mughul peer, with an annual pension of one lakh of rupees, but he had 
to suffer life-long imprisonment and died in April, 1700, when he was 
less than thirty-two. 

With the loss of independence, Bijapur, which was once “the 
queen of southern India”, wore the look of a desolate city. 

IV. THE TMAD-SHAHI DYNASTY OF BERAR 

The founder of this dynasty, Fath-ullah Tmad-ul-Mulk, was ori¬ 
ginally a Hindu from Karnatak. In his boyhood, he was taken 
prisoner by the BahmanI army, converted to Islam and appointed one 
of the body-guards of Khan Jahan, the governor of Berar. By dint 
of his abilities he rose to positions of distinction and received the 
lofty title of Tmad-ul-Mulk. He also became the governor of Berar, 
the most northern province of the BahmanI kingdom, and the weak¬ 
ness of the central government encouraged him to assume indepen¬ 
dence in 1490. 96 

He exerted his utmost to improve and strengthen the newly 
founded autonomous State, and after his death in 1504, his eldest 
son, ‘Ala-ud-dln Tmad Shah, succeeded him as the ruler of Berar. 

i Ald-ud-dln Tmad Shah ( 1504-30 ) 

During ‘Ala-ud-dln’s time started the long-drawn struggle with 
Ahmadnagar, culminating in the annexation of Berar by the former. 
Various factors were responsible for this conflict. First, the rela¬ 
tion between these two kingdoms was strained due to an invasion 
of Ahmadnagar by Berar with a view to rendering assistance to some 
disaffected Nizam Shahi nobles who had taken shelter in it. Al¬ 
though the invasion was repulsed by the Nizam Shahls (1510) and 
a peace concluded between these kingdoms, it did not last long, and 
they again came to arms for another and more important cause. 
Burhan Nizam Shah I coveted Pathrl, his ancestral home, situated 
in the kingdom of Berar, but bordering on Ahmadnagar and, in lieu 
of it, he offered another place to Tmad Shah “yielding even a greater 
revenue,” 963 but the latter rejected the proposal and fortified it, 
whereupon the former made a sudden attack and took it (1518). 97 


463 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Ala-ud-dm contracted a matrimonial alliance with Isma‘11 k Adil 
Khan by marrying his sister Khadija and also concluded a friendly 
alliance with Golconda. With a combined army of these States, he 
recovered Fathrl, but within a short time, Burhan again took it 
(1527). 

The third cause of conflict between Berar and Ahmadnagar was 
over the possession of Mahur. Burhian strengthened his position by an 
alliance with Bidar and invaded Berar. He took possession of Mahur, 
and then proceeded as far as Ellichpur, its capital. At this critical 
juncture, Ala-ud-dm sought the aid of Muhammad I, the ruler of 
Khandesh, but this also did not improve his position, as both of them 
sustained a serious defeat, with the loss of all their camp equipage 
and three hundred elephants. Many places of Berar were occupied 
by the allied armies of Ahmadnagar and Bidar. The two vanquished 
Sultans then sought the assistance of Bahadur Shah of Gujarat, who, 
finding it a suitable opportunity for extending his power in the south, 
responded to their appeal, and proceeded to the Deccan (1528). 
Alarmed at this Burhan requested Bijapur, Golconda and Bidar for 
help, and both Bijapur and Bidar responded to his appeal and sent 
him necessary assistance. Bahadur, who moved against Ahmad¬ 
nagar, was defeated twice, but the allied army could not cope with 
him when further reinforcements joined the Gujarat army. Both 
Burhan and Amir Barid were compelled to fall back on Parenda 
and thence to Junnar, and began to harass the enemy by night attacks 
and cutting off their supplies. Bahadur occupied the city of Ahmad¬ 
nagar and, entrusting the siege of the fort to Ala-ud-din, moved to 
Daulatabad. Burhan’s position became critical and he had no alter¬ 
native but to sue for peace. On the other hand, Bahadur's policy of 
aggrandizement in the Deccan had caused grave concern to his allies 
who no longer wanted to act in concert with him. On his side, the 
latter, too, was anxious for his own safety lest he should be cut off 
from his country in the ensuing monsoon. Cessation of war thus be¬ 
came the prime consideration of both the parties and a peace was 
therefore effected. Burhan caused the khutba to be read in the name 
of Bahadur and returned the elephants seized from Muhammad I 
during the war but did not fulfil his promise in respect of restora¬ 
tion of Mahur and Pathri to Berar. 98 

Ala-ud-dm died in 1530 and was succeeded by his eldest son 
Darya ‘Imad Shah. 


Darya T mad Shah ( 1530-62 ) 

During the reign of Darya ‘Imad Shah the kingdom enjoyed 
peace and tranquillity. In the wars between Bijapur and Ahmad- 


464 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 


nagar, he sided once with Bijapur but helped Ahmadnagar on three 
occasions, once in 1543 and twice during the reign of Husain Nizam 
Shah I. 

After his death in 1562 his infant son Burhan succeeded him to 
the throne. 


Burhan ‘Imad Shah and Tufal Khan 

Burhan ‘Imad Shah’s minister, Tufal Khan, a man of high ambi¬ 
tion and of extraordinary courage, became regent. He confined the 
king in the fort of Narnala and seized the reins of government in his 
own hands. 

% 

As he had reasonable cause of resentment against Husain Nizam 
Shah I for the cruel murder of Jahangir Khan, he not only held aloof 
from the confederacy formed by the four Deccani Muslim powers 
against Vijayanagara, but also carried on depredations in the Nizam 
Shahl kingdom. ‘Adil Shah and Nizam Shah were highly incensed 
at these and they invaded Berar. It was impossible for Tuflal to 
fight against such heavy odds and he managed to purchase peace from 
‘Adil Shah in secret on payment of a heavy sum of money and fifty 
elephants (1566). Finding himself deserted by ‘Adil Shah, Nizam 
Shah also retired. 

Although Tufal saved himself from this crisis, other serious dan¬ 
gers awaited him. A treaty was concluded between Murtaza I and 
‘All Adil Shah I, defining their sphere of aggrandizement. The 
former was allowed to annex Berar and Bldar, and the latter to “con¬ 
quer as much of the Carnatic as would produce a revenue equal to 
Berar and Bldar.” 98a Then followed their activities. As a pretext 
for invasion of Berar, Tufal was asked to re-instate his sovereign in 
his position, but when this was not complied with, Murtaza I in¬ 
vaded Berar. Unable to check his advance, Tufal allowed Ellichpur 
to be occupied by his enemies and fled from place to place. Leaving 
Berar, he tried in vain to take shelter in Khandesh and ultimately 
took refuge with Burhan ‘Imad Shah in the hill-fort of Narnala, while 
his son went to Gawilgarh. 

Due to its natural position, the fort of Narnala was favourable 
for defence, and here Tufal repulsed the attacks of his enemies with 
great valour, but was troubled by paucity of provisions. On the 
other hand, Murtaza, too, got tired of the protracted siege, and un¬ 
able to occupy the fort by arms, he took the golden means of seduc¬ 
ing the garrison. This produced its desired effect. Finding it im¬ 
possible to defend any longer, Tufal fled into the neighbouring hills 
but was soon captured. Thus fell Narnala (April, 1574), and shortly 

465 

M.E_80 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


after this, Tufal’s son surrendered Gawilgarh. Burhan ‘Imad Shah 
along with the usurper Tufal Khan and his son Shamshir-ul-Mulk 
were taken to Ahmadnagar and confined in a fortress where all of 
them subsequently died. It is said that their death was caused either 
by the Sultan’s order or cruel treatment in the prison. 

Thus disappeared Berar as an independent State from the map 
of the Deccan. 

V. THE BARID-SHAHI DYNASTY OF BIDAR 

Mahmud Shah Bahmani, who reigned from 1842 to 1518, was un¬ 
fit to hold the sceptre during that troublesome period. He could not 
cope with the situation, and disorder and confusion increased on all 
sides. The real power passed into the hands of Qasim Band, his 
prime minister, who had risen to that high position by dint of his 
extraordinary abilities. Originally, he was a Turk, domiciled in 
Georgia. He came to the Bahmani kingdom in his early boyhood 
and then entered the service of Muhammad Shah III. By and by, 
he rose to positions of distinction till he became prime minister, ex¬ 
ercising regal power, in fact, though not in name. 

Qasim Barid died in 1504, and was succeeded as prime minister 
by his son Amir Barid, who, too, like his father, wielded uncontrolled 
sway in the kingdom. Mahmud Shah died in 1518, and was succeeded 
by four sultans, one after another, but all of them were mere tools 
in the hands of Amir Barid. Kalimullah, the last of them, tried in 
vain to regain his power with the help of Babur. At last, he fled 
to Bijapur and thence to Ahmadnagar; he breathed his last in 1538, 
but with his flight from Bidar in 1528 Amir Barid became practically 
independent, although he never formally asserted his independence 
nor assumed the title of “Shah”. 

Amir Barid was very cunning, and hence he was known as 
Robah-i-Deccan or the Fox of the Deccan." He knew well how to 
play one party against the other, but such cunning brought him dis¬ 
grace also and he had to suffer humiliation at the hands of Isma‘il 
‘Adil Khan against whom he had plotted. Apart from political diffe¬ 
rences, the two had religious differences as well; Isma‘Il ‘Adil Khan 
was a Shiah, whereas Amir Barid was a bigoted Sunni. The former 
was highly incensed when, in 1529, it was reported to him that Amir 
Barid had attempted to incite a part of his soldiery against him, and 
observed, “it was contrary to wisdom to treat the wolf with gentle¬ 
ness, or the snake with kindness.” 100 At his request, when Burhan 
Nizam Shah promised to remain neutral, Isma‘fl ‘Adil Khan started 
against Amir Barid. The fort of Bidar was besieged, and Amir 


466 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 


Band, who was then old, withdrew to the fortress of Udgir, leaving 
the defence of Bidar to his eldest son ‘All Band. However, Amir 
Band’s position became very perilous, and, in spite of the assistance 
of Golconda and intercession of Ala-ud-dln ‘Imad Shah, he was un¬ 
able to save his own position. Isma‘11 was not willing to accept any 
terms short of complete surrender of Bidar. On hearing of it, Amir 
Barld came out of Udgir to entreat ‘Imad Shah once more to effect 
a peace, but when this was not possible, he went back to his camp 
close to that of the former and “to drown his cares he gave himself 
up to pleasures.” 100 * 1 Asad Khan, the general of Isma‘11, took him by 
surprise while he was in a drunken and senseless condition and 
carried him away to his master who gave order for his execution. 
On the earnest entreaty of Amir Barld, ‘Adil Khan agreed to spare 
his life on condition of surrender of the fortress of Bidar, but as his 
son refused to give it up, Isma‘11 ordered that he (Amir Barld) should 
be trampled to death by a furious elephant. Finding no alternative, 
his son evacuated the fort and retired to Udgir, with as many jewels 
of the BahmanI Sultans as was possible to carry in concealment. 
Thus ‘Adil Khan got possession of Bidar. 101 

Amir Barld was made a peer of Bijapur, and after his assist¬ 
ance to Isma‘11 ‘Adil Khan in taking possession of Raichur and Mudgal 
(1530), Bidar was restored to him on condition of cession of Kalyani 
and Qandahar to Bijapur. But as he did not keep his promise Isma‘Il 
set out with his army to occupy them, and, although Burhan I came 
to the aid of Amir Barld, both of them sustained a severe defeat near 
Naldurg. 

Not long after, Amir Barld was reconciled to Isma‘11 ‘Adil Khan 
whom he helped in his struggle against Golconda. But he again 
severed his connection with Bijapur and joined Ahmadnagar. While 
he and Burhan Nizam Shah I, were retreating towards Daulatabad 
closely pursued by the armies of Bijapur and Berar, he suddenly 
expired (1542). 

Amir Barld was succeeded by his son ‘All Barld, who ruled till 
1580. Among the rulers of Bidar he was the first to assume the title 
of “Shah”. His relations with the other Deccani powers have mostly 
been described in the history of Ahmadnagar. In 1564, he join¬ 
ed the confederacy of the Muslim States of Ahmadnagar, Bijapur 
and Golconda against Vijayanagara and took part in defeating the 
latter in the famous battle (popularly known as the battle of Tali- 
kota) fought at Rakshasi-Tangadi (January, 1565). 

He was a man of culture and fond of poetry and calligraphy 
and his tomb at Bidar and Rangin Mahal (“painted palace”) built 
by him bear testimony to his fine taste for architecture. 101a 


467 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


On the death of ‘All Band his son Ibrahim Band Shah ascend¬ 
ed the throne and reigned till 1587. He was succeeded by his 
younger brother Qasim Band Shah II. After the battle of Rakshasi- 
Tangadi, the strength of Bijapur, Ahmadnagar and Golconda in¬ 
creased so much that it was not possible for a small kingdom like 
Bldar to cope with them and naturally it gradually dwindled in ex¬ 
tent. Qasim Barid II died in 1591 and was succeeded by his infant 
son, but one of his relatives named Amir Barid dethroned him and 
became king under the title of Amir Barid II. After a reign of 
about ten years he, too, was expelled by one of his relatives—Mirza 
‘Ali Barid (1601). He reigned till 1609 and was succeeded by Amir 
Barid Shah III, the last Sultan of Bidar. He joined the confederacy 
of the Deccani powers, viz., Ahmadnagar, Bijapur and Golconda, 
organized by Malik ‘Ambar and fought with them against the 
Mughuls (1616). 

As his relation with Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah II was far from cor¬ 
dial, the latter invaded Bldar, and after defeating him, annexed it 
to Bijapur (1619). He and his sons were brought to Bijapur and 
kept “under surveillance.” 10113 

VI. THE QTJTB-SHAH1 DYNASTY OF GOLCONDA 

Sultan Quli Qutb-ul-Mulk, 102 who laid the foundation of a sepa¬ 
rate dynasty of rulers in Golconda, belonged to a Turki family and 
was born at Hamadan in Persia. He came to the Deccan in his 
youth during the reign of the BahmanI Sultan, Muhammad Shah III, 
and started his career as a body-guard of this monarch. By his 
extraordinary courage, skill, and sagacity, he rose from one posi¬ 
tion to another till he became the Governor of Telingana, the eastern 
province of the BahmanI kingdom. He had also received the lofty 
title of Qutb-ul-Mulk. 103 

When the weakness of the BahmanI government encouraged 
different provincial governors to become autonomous within their 
jurisdictions, Sultan Quli also took advantage of the situation and 
assumed a similar position on the death of Mahmud Shah BahmanI 
in 1518. He never assumed the title of “Shah” or the royal dignity. 
Neither the assertion of Firishta that he declared independence in 
1512 nor the view of some modern historians that he severed his con¬ 
nection with the BahmanI kingdom and became independent in 1518 
is tenable. The decipherment of the inscription of the Jami ‘Masjid 
at Golconda, built by Sultan Quli, commemoration tablet of which 
bears the date 924 A.H. or A.D. 1518, proves that the ruling monarch 
was then Mahmud Shah BahmanI and not Sultan Quli, but it does 
not go to prove in any way that he asserted his independence some- 


468 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 

time that year on the demise of that monarch. On the contrary, 
available evidences show that he never assumed the royal title. 104 

During the long period of his rule, he devoted most of his ener¬ 
gies in extending the frontiers of his kingdom. On the north, he 
took possession of the district of Haft Tappa from Berar, and, on 
the south, he conquered various places one after another including 
Rajconda, Devarconda, Ganpura, Kovelaconda, and Pangal. 

He tried his utmost to bring as much of the Telugu-speaking 
country as possible in his possession and continued his campaigns 
one after another. He defeated Shitab Khan (i.e., Sitapati) of 
Bhogikula and captured Bellamconda, Indraconda, Kambhammet 
and Warangal, etc., and it was not possible for Shitab Khan to check 
his advance, as the power of Shitab’s ally, Gajapati Prataparudra, 
the king of Orissa, on whom he depended, had been greatly weak¬ 
ened by his recent discomfiture at the hands of Krishnadevaraya 
of Vijayanagara. Sultan Qull then occupied Kondapalli, Ellore, and 
Rajahmundry belonging to the Gajapati, and compelled him, by a 
treaty, to give up his territories between the mouths of the Krishna 
and the Godavari. Next, he laid siege to the fortress of Kondavidu 
belonging to Vijayanagara, but here he ultimately sustained a serious 
defeat. 

Sultan Qull had troubles with Bijapur and Bldar whose rulers 
made a joint effort to take the fortress of Kovelaconda, but their 
plan was upset by the sudden death of IsmaTl ‘Adil Khan (1534). 
Sultan Qull retaliated on Bldar by carrying on depredations in it 
and besieging Kohir. It was at last agreed that this fortress should 
be ceded to him. 

Sultan Qull lived till the age of ninety-eight when he was 
assassinated at the instigation of his second surviving son Jamshid 
(September, 1543). 105 

Sultan Qull was not only a skilful general and a strategist, but 
also an efficient ruler who established law and order in his country. 
He was a great builder as well. The Golconda fort was, to a large 
extent, built by him and the city was beautified with mosques, 
palaces and gardens. Jami ‘Masjid, a very beautiful structure, out¬ 
side the fort, was erected by him. 

He was a devout and God-fearing man and belonged to the 
Shiah creed which was established as the State religion. 

Jamshid Quth Khan ( 1543-1550 ) 

Sultan Qull was succeeded by his son Jamshid, who caused his 
elder brother Qutb-ud-din to be blinded and plotted to seize his 


469 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


% 


younger brother Ibrahim, who, coming to know of his brother s in¬ 
tention, fled to Bidar for protection and assistance. He was cor¬ 
dially received by ‘All Barld Shah who championed his cause and 
proceeded with the Prince against Jamshid. They marched trium¬ 
phantly to the very gates of the fort of Golconda which was be¬ 
sieged. At this juncture, Jamshid sought the assistance of Burhan 
Nizam Shah I, who immediately sent an army to Golconda. Un¬ 
able to oppose these combined forces, ‘All Barld retreated towards 
Bijapur, but on the way, as he attempted to seize the properties 
of Ibrahim, the latter left him and retired to Vijayanagara where 
he was cordially received and given a jaglr. He remained there 
for seven years. 

Jamshid possessed great tact and foresight, and was an astute 
diplomat. When he came to the throne, it was Burhan I only who 
offered his congratulation by sending his envoy Shah Tahir, and 
there was practically no Deccani power whom he could count as his 
ally, but he soon changed his position. As has been related in the 
history of Burhan Nizam Shah I, he became a party to the quad¬ 
ruple alliance (1543) and joined Ahmadnagar against Bijapur. But 
it was in 1548 that he gained a very advantageous position and 
raised the prestige of Golconda above all other Deccani kingdoms. 
Both Bijapur and Ahmadnagar were then in earnest to win his sup¬ 
port, and ‘All Barld, who had been imprisoned by Ibrahim ‘Adil 
Shah I, also made entreaties to him, to secure his release. The posi¬ 
tion of Jamshid was thus almost similar to that of an arbiter in the 
Deccan. He then exhibited his greatest tact and diplomacy. In¬ 
stead of incurring the displeasure of any party, he maintained his 
neutrality, and, at the same time, won over ‘All Barld by securing 
his release and placing him back on his throne. 

After these, he returned to his capital, but was attacked with 
cancer and, after suffering for about two years, died in 1550. 

His minor son, Subhan Qull, was then raised to the throne but 
he had soon to make room for his uncle Ibrahim, who came from 
Vijayanagara, deposed him, and ascended the throne. 

Ibrahim Qutb Shah ( 1550-1580) 

Ibrahim Qutb Shah received the support of all sections of the 
people and established law and order in the kingdom. As has been 
mentioned above, he was the first Sultan of the Qutb-Shahi dynasty 
to assume the title of “Shah”. 


470 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 


0 


His inter-state relationship, including the part he played in con¬ 
nection with the battle of Talikota, has been described at length in 
the history of Ahmadnagar. 

Continuing the policy of Sultan Quli, he carried on conquests in 
the Telugu-speaking areas, and invaded the kingdom of Vijayanagara. 
The famous temple of Narasimha at Ahobalam was sacked by his 
commander, Murhari Rao, a Maratha Brahmin (1579), who also in¬ 
vaded Udayagiri, Vinukonda and Kondavidu. There is no doubt that 
as a result of these invasions Ibrahim gained possession of consider¬ 
able territories from Vijayanagara. 106 

The Sultan also devoted much time and energy for the consoli¬ 
dation of his kingdom. All rebellions and lawlessness were sup¬ 
pressed wtih a stern hand. Telingana was full of highway robbers 
and thieves, and travelling was fraught with great risks, but it was 
to his credit that he cleared the roads from the oppression of these 
marauders. 

Jagdeva Rao Naikwari, the prime minister, made a conspiracy 
to depose him and place his brother Daulat Quli on the throne. The 
Sultan executed one of the accomplices of Jagdeva, who, being afraid 
of his own safety, fled to Berar, but there, too, when his manners 
became overbearing, he was ordered to quit immediately, and, this 
he did, but came back to the Qutb Shah! territory. Being defeated 
here, he finally left for Vijayanagara. 

There was a revolt of the Naikwaris under the leadership of 
Suria Rao, the commandant of the Naikwaris in the fort of Gol- 
conda, but this rising was suppressed with a strong hand and Suria 
Rao and other Naikwaris of this fort were executed. 

Not only did Ibrahim establish peace and security in his king¬ 
dom but also made it prosperous. Trade and commerce increased 
enormously. “Telingana, like Egypt, became the mart of the whole 
world. Merchants from Toorkistan, Arabia and Persia, resorted to 
it; and they met with such encouragement that they found in it in¬ 
ducements to return frequently.” 107 

Ibrahim was a great patron of art and architecture and erected 
several beautiful buildings. The fortifications of Golconda were 
extended and strengthened, and the city was beautified with gar¬ 
dens, hammams, wide streets, and shops of various kinds. He esta¬ 
blished alms-house (or the Lungur), numerous colleges, one dam at 
Budwal and two tanks, one at Ibrahimpattam and the other called 
Husain Sagar. He constructed also a strong bridge, 600 feet long 
and 36 feet wide, on the Musi, originally called Narva, known later 


471 


4 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

on as “Purana Pul ” or “old bridge ”. It was supported by twenty- 
two pointed arches. 108 

This reign saw the beginning of Dakhani Urdu poetry at Gol- 
conda, and four poets viz., Mulla Khiyali, Mahmud, Firuz and 
Ahmad composed their poems in this language. 

Of all his actions, Ibrahim is remembered by the Hindus of 
Telingana specially for his patronage of Telugu literature. Many 
Telugu poets like Addanki Gangadhar Kavi, Pannaganti Telega- 
narya, and Kandukuri Rudra Kavi flourished in his court. Addanki 
Gangadhar Kavi, the most well-known of them, composed an elegant 
poem Tapatisama-Varanamu Upakhyanamu and dedicated it to the 
Sultan, who is called Malkibharam in Telugu literature. Among 
other things it gives accounts of the conquests of Sultan Qull and 
those of Ibrahim in the Telugu areas. The poet says that many 
learned men well-versed in Hindu scriptures adorned the court of 
this Sultan. He was very liberal in his rewards to the Telugu poets 
and tried his best to encourage them. Amir Khan, a Qutb Shah! 
officer of high rank, was also a patron of Telugu literature. 

Though Ibrahim took a prominent part in bringing about the 
fall of the Hindu kingdom of Vijayanagara, his treatments of his 
Hindu subjects, specially his patronage of their literature and their 
appointment to high posts, show that he tried to gain the goodwill 
and sympathy of the bulk of his population—the most essential re¬ 
quisites of a stable government. 109 

He died in 1580 at the age of fifty and was succeeded by his 
son Muhammad Qull Qutb Shah. 

Muhammad Quit Qutb Shah ( 1580-1612) 

Muhammad Qull Qutb Shah inherited a peaceful and prospe¬ 
rous kingdom, which enjoyed peace and happiness during his reign. 

In 1586, an alliance was formed with Bijapur by the marriage 
of the Sultan’s sister, Malika Zaman, with Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah II, 
and thus, an attempt was made to establish a feeling of cordiality 
between the two kingdoms. 

As the walled city of Golconda became congested and un¬ 
healthy, and there was scarcity of water in it, shifting of the capital 
appeared to be a necessity, and in 1590, the plan for the construc¬ 
tion of the new capital at Hyderabad, on the river Musi, was ready 
for execution. Muhammad Qull tried his utmost to make the city 
as grand as possible. It was embellished with fine palaces, gardens, 


472 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 


and baths, and proper arrangements were made for supply of water 
in all its parts. Two stately edifices, viz., the Jdmi 9 Mosque and 
the majestic Chahar Minar or ‘four minarets’—“a square building 
of four broad and very lofty open arches, with four minarets 220 
feet high at each corner” were built in the centre of the city, add¬ 
ing to the grandeur and beauty of the capital. Besides, hospitals 
and colleges were also established for the benefit of the people. 110 

Venkata II, the king of Vijayanagara, tried to recover the 
Kondavidu areas, but Muhammad Qull proceeded with a big army 
and defeated him. The Sultan occupied Kurnool, Nandial, Gandi- 
kota and Cuddapa and laid siege to Penukonda. Venkata II was 
forced to sue for peace, and although there was a temporary respite, 
the war was soon renewed. Muhammad Quli again laid siege to 
Penukonda, but scarcity of provisions in his camp and apprehension 
of inundation of the Krishna due to approach of the monsoon which 
would cut off his retreat, compelled him to raise the siege and retire 
to his capital, after making necessary arrangements for protection 
and administration of the newly conquered areas. But Venkata II 
soon started the offensive and laid siege to Gandikota, which, in spite 
of the utmost efforts of the Qutb ShahJi forces, could not be saved. 
Although the Vijayanagara army recovered some other forts also, the 
Kondavidu areas remained in possession of the Sultan of Golconda, 
but Qutb Shah was forced to recognize the Krishna as the boundary 
between the two kingdoms. 

During the reign of this Sultan, Shah Abbas, the Safavi King of 
Persia (1587-1629) sent Aghuzlu Sultan, one of his relatives, in 
1603, on an embassy to Muhammad Qull, with valuable presents of 
jewels, carpets and horses etc., and on his arrival at Golconda, the 
ambassador was accorded a grand reception. He stayed at Hydera¬ 
bad for six years and then returned to Persia with suitable presents 
for the Shah. The principal object of the embassy, as has been re¬ 
lated, was to put the proposal of marriage of one of the sons of the 
Shah with Hayat Baksh Begam, the Sultan’s daughter, but the mis¬ 
sion was not successful. 1103 

In 1609, a conspiracy was made to dethrone Muhammad Quli 
and place his brother Muhammad Khudabanda on the throne, but the 
Sultan seized the ringleaders before they could create any mischief. 
They, along with Khudabanda, were imprisoned in the fort of Gol- 
conda where the Prince died in 1611. 

In this year, the English East India company established a fac¬ 
tory at Masulipatam, an important port in the Qutb Shahx kingdom. 


473 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


As Pratap Shah, the Raja of Bastar, revolted, the Sultan sent an 
army against him. Being defeated, the Raja fled to an impregnable 
fortress in the forest, and in spite of reinforcements, the Qutb Shah! 
army could not force him to surrender, and a sudden heavy rain¬ 
fall, spoiling a great part of the gunpowder, and want of provisions, 
compelled them to retreat. It was with great difficulty that they 
returned to Golconda. 

The Sultan died in 1612, after an illness of two days only. Mu¬ 
hammad Quli Qutb Shah has left to posterity a great name for town- 
planning and architecture. The foundation of Hyderabad and con¬ 
struction of fine buildings, gardens and baths etc., with which his 
new capital was embellished, show his excellent taste as a builder, 
and he spent a big amount every year for the construction of public 
buildings. Of the palaces erected by him, special mention may be 
made of Chandan Mahal, Hira Mahal and Nadi Mahal. 

Pie was a man of charitable disposition and a lover of justice. 
A sum of sixty thousand hurts or two lakhs and forty thousand rupees 
was distributed to the poor every year. 

‘‘Intelligent and learned,. . . .and of literary bent of mind, Mu¬ 
hammad Quli kept company with the learned. ,,110b He established 
several khankas and madrasas at Hyderabad and gave rewards libe¬ 
rally to distinguished literary men. “It is related, that out of four 
lacs of hurts secured as revenue collection from the city, a large and 
a greater portion was disbursed in rewarding the Saiyids and Ule¬ 
mas and supplying them with two free meals per day.” 111 

Muhammad Qutb Shah ( 1612-1626 ) 

As Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah left no son, his nephew Mu¬ 
hammad Qutb Shah, son of Mlrza Muhammad Amlin, succeeded him 
to the throne. He was also the son-in-law of the late Sultan, whose 
daughter Hayat Baksh Begam he had married. 

He joined the confederacy of the Deccani powers against the 
Mughuls and tried to put a stop to Mughul aggression in the south. 
Although prior to/ the battle of Bhatvadi, Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah II join¬ 
ed the Mughuls with a view to strengthening his position against 
‘Ambar, Muhammad Qutb Shah did not forget the interests of the 
Deccan, and fully aware of the strength of the Mughuls and the 
Bijapurls, he formed a defensive and offensive alliance with ‘Ambar. 
He remained firm to Ahmadnagar and fought on its side in the battle 
of Bhatvadi (1624). 


474 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 

But he was more inclined towards the pen than the sword. He 
had received proper education in his young age and was fond of the 
association of the learned. He was well acquainted with various 
arts and sciences and could write both in prose and verse. Among 
his writings were ghazl, tarkib band and rubaiya; “his pen name 
was Zil-ul-lah (the shadow of God)”. 112 It was in the fifth year of 
his reign that the Tdrlkh-i-Muhammad Qutb Shah, the well-known 
history of the Sultans of Golconda, was completed. 

To add to the beauty and grandeur of the capital city, he erected 
buildings and laid out gardens. 

He died in 1626, and was succeeded by his son ‘Abdullah Qutb 
Shah, at the age of twelve. 

‘Abdullah Qutb Shah (1626-1672) 

During ‘Abdullah’s long reign of forty-six years, the kingdom 
had to face serious problems, but he was quite incapable of wielding 
the sceptre at such a critical time. He was indolent, and sensual, 1123 
and the administration was practically run by his mother Hayat 
Baksh Begam till her death in February, 1667, and then by Sayyid 
Ahmad, his (‘Abdullah’s) eldest son-in-law. “The clever diplomacy 
of these two had for half a century saved the Qutb Shahi State from 
being annexed by the Mughuls.” 112b 

After his accession to the throne, Shah Jahan, who was well- 
acquainted with the Deccan politics, made up his mind to press for¬ 
ward his policy of annexation there. The first victim was Ahmad- 
nagar which was incorporated in his empire in 1633. Next, he turn¬ 
ed towards Golconda, and ‘Abdullah, in terror, accepted the terms 
dictated by the Mughul Emperor. He acknowledged the Mughul 
suzerainty and agreed to pay an annual tribute of eight lakhs of 
rupees (1636). 

Thus barred in the north, Golconda engaged in a career of 
aggrandizement in the Carnatic and the conditions there were very 
favourable. Shorn of all its past glory and strength, the kingdom 
of Vijayanagara was confined to a small area. ‘Abdullah sent an 
army against it in April, 1642, and captured some of its territories, 
Venkata III, the reigning king, having fled to the forests. Golconda 
made repeated attacks on the tottering Hindu kingdom, and, in this 
work, Mir Jumla, the prime minister of ‘Abdullah, played an im¬ 
portant role. 

Muhammad Sayyid, who is known as Mir Jumla, came to Gol¬ 
conda as an adventurer from Ardistan in Persia. He was a man of 


475 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


wonderful talents, and, making the best use of his opportunities, he 
made his mark as a diamond merchant and rose to power and wealth. 
His extraordinary abilities attracted the attention of ‘Abdullah who 
made him his Wazir. He proved his efficiency both in civil and mili¬ 
tary administrations and wielded great influence in the kingdom, but 
it was in the Carnatic that he showed his real mettle by his military 
exploits which enhanced the territories of Golconda and made him 
fabulously rich. Both the Sultans of Golconda and Bijapur were 
active in devouring the dilapidated kingdom of Vijayanagara. Mir 
Jumla wrested parts of Neilore and Cuddapa and occupied the terri¬ 
tories on the eastern coast up to Pulicat. He penetrated further 
south and proceeded as far as Vellore, where he met Mustafa Khan, 
the ‘Adil Shah! general, and arrived at a settlement with Bijapur, 
defining their respective spheres of aggrandizement in the Carnatic. 

By plundering Hindu temples and searching out hidden trea¬ 
sures, Mir Jumla accumulated a vast fortune, and according to The- 
venot, 112c he had twenty maunds of diamonds in his possession. His 
jagir in Carnatic was like a kingdom, three hundred miles in length 
and fifty miles in breadth, with an annual revenue of forty lakhs of 
rupees, and it contained several valuable diamond mines. He had 
under his command 5,000 cavalry, 20,000 infantry, and an excellent 
park of artillery. He was almost like an independent ruler and ab¬ 
sented himself from the court of Golconda. Alarmed at the growing 
power of the Wazir , the Sultan attempted to bring him under his 
control, but Mir Jumla entered into intrigues with Bijapur and 
Persia. 

Aurangzib, who was then Mughul viceroy of the Deccan and 
eager to conquer Golconda, wanted to win him over to his side with 
a view to utilizing his services in the projected invasion. The wealth 
of Golconda, prevalence of Shiahism among its inhabitants, frequent 
arrears in payment of its annual tribute, and above all, the imperia¬ 
listic policy urged Aurangzib to pursue an offensive action. He open¬ 
ed negotiations with Mir Jumla, when an incident furnished the cause 
of immediate military operations, so desired. Muhammad Amfn, 
son of Mir Jumla, who had been his father’s deputy at the court of 
Golconda, was arrested and imprisoned with his family for his in¬ 
solent behaviour to the Sultan (1655). 

Aurangzilb utilized the situation to his advantage and obtained 
orders from his father directing ‘Abdullah Qutb Shah to release Mir 
Jumla’s family, and in case of his non-compliance, to invade Gol¬ 
conda. Without allowing a reasonable time to Qutb Shah, Aurang¬ 
zib sent his eldest son Muhammad Sultan against him (1656). All 


476 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 

efforts of the Sultan to prevent hostility was nullified by him, as he 
was bent upon crushing this kingdom. 113 Hyderabad was attacked 
and occupied, and the Mughul soldiery plundered it. Aurangzlb him¬ 
self arrived there and besieged the fort of Golconda where the 
Sultan had retired. 

But Golconda was saved this time by the intervention of Dara 
Shukoh and Jahanara whom ‘Abdullah’s agent at Delhi convinced 
of Aurangzlb’s most unjust and unwarranted attack on it. On re¬ 
ceipt of his father’s direction, Aurangzlb was compelled to raise the 
siege (1656). The Sultan of Golconda promised to pay a consider¬ 
able war indemnity, and arrears of tribute which amounted to one 
crore of rupees, and surrender the district of Ramgir (modern 
Manikdurg and Chinoor). He had also to give his second daughter 
in marriage to Muhammad Sultan and promise in secret to make him 
his heir. Mir Jumla, who had already joined the imperialists, was 
appointed prime minister. 

After this, the affairs in the Qutb Shahl State went from bad to 
worse. ‘Abdullah, who had narrowly escaped death at the hands of 
his enemies in 1656, was so frightened that he never afterwards ap¬ 
peared in public even to administer justice, and spent his time in 
frivolous sensuality, the natural consequences of which were mis¬ 
rule and confusion in the kingdom. Even his own family was not 
free from discord and unrest. 113a Amidst these, he breathed his last 
in 1672. 


Abu-l Hasan Qutb Shah ( 1672-1687 ) 

‘Abdullah had no male issue but three daughters only, the eldest 
of whom had been married to Sayyid Ahmad, who became prime 
minister and virtual ruler of the kingdom; the second daughter was 
married to Muhammad Sultan, and the third to Abu’l Hasan, who, 
on his father’s side, was a descendant of the Qutb Shahl family. On 
the death of ‘Abdullah, there was a contest between the first and 
third sons-in-law for the throne in which Sayyid Ahmad was defeat¬ 
ed and imprisoned, and Abu-’l Hasan elevated to the throne. 114 

Sayyid Muzaffar, a leading general, who had taken the most 
important role in the overthrow of Sayyid Ahmad, became prime 
minister, but he concentrated all power in his own hands, and the 
king became a nominal figure-head. Abu-’l Hasan could not long 
reconcile himself to this lot, and with the help of Madanna, “the Brah¬ 
man factotum of Muzaffar,” he deprived the latter of the premier¬ 
ship. Madanna was raised to his master’s place and conferred the 
title of Surya Prakash Rao, while his brother Akkanna was appointed 


477 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


commander-in-chief. But the Sultan did not gain by this change of 
premiership and the power exercised by Muzaffar passed into the 
hands of Madanna. The king led a dissipated life and disorders and 
oppressions were rampant. “With a grasping and suspicious para¬ 
mount Power, a sensual king, a venal aristocracy, and an ignorant 
and timid people, the reform of the kingdom was hopeless,” 115 and 
its fate was sealed. 

Aurangzfb’s long-cherished desire of annexing Golconda had 
not yet been fulfilled, and he therefore turned towards giving effect 
to his ambition. Grounds for invasion were not wanting. The 
Sultan was leading a dissolute life, leaving the administration of the 
kingdom in the hands of the infidels, Madanna and his brother 
Akkanna. “In 1677 he had given Shivaji a more than royal wel¬ 
come on his visit to Hyderabad and promised him a regular subsidy 
of one lakh of hurts for the defence of Golconda. After Shivajis 
death the alliance had been renewed with his successor and the sub¬ 
sidy continued.” 116 On his part Shivaji consented to pay to Qutb 
Shah an annual tribute of six lakhs of hurts. Such “fraternizing 
with infidels” was the worst offence of Abu-’l Hasan. 117 In 1685 he 
had also acted against the Mughuls by sending military assistance to 
Bijapur against them, and lastly, the war indemnity promised in 
1656 and the annual tribute of eight lakhs of rupees, according to the 
terms of the treaty in 1636, were long in arrears. 

Open rupture occurred as a result of interception of a letter of 
Abu-’l Hasan to his agent in which he had accused the emperor of 
attacking Sikandar ‘Adil Shah and promised to send an army of 
40,000 men to his assistance. Enraged at this, Aurangzib sent hiis 
son Shah ‘Alam against Hyderabad (1685) and although, at the out¬ 
set, he could not make much headway, the seduction and consequent 
defection of Mir Muhammad Ibrahim, the commander-in-chief of Gol¬ 
conda, largely decided the fate of the campaign. The resistance fell 
through and the Mughuls proceeded to Hyderabad. No defence of 
the city was organized and the Sultan fled to the fortress of Golconda. 
The Mughul army occupied Hyderabad and carried on extensive 
plunder there. 118 Placed in such a critical position, Abu-’l Hasan 
made repeated entreaties for peace, which was at last concluded but 
did not last long. 

One of the conditions of the peace was that Madanna and 
Akkanna should be dismissed, but the Sultan having put off the 
matter, the discontented Muslim nobles and two widows of the late 
king formed a plot and caused their assassination in the streets of 
Golconda (March, 1686). 119 


478 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 

After the fall of Bijapur in September, 1686, Aurangzlb was 
free to concentrate his attention on the Qutb.Shahl kingdom, and, in 
February, 1687, he reached the outskirts of the fort of Golconda. In 
the meantime, Abu-’l Hasan had again taken shelter in this fort and 
the Mughuls took possession of Hyderabad for the third time. The 
regular siege of Golconda lasted for seven months and a half. The 
fort had sufficient stocks of food and ammunition to stand a long 
siege, and the garrison fought with great valour and successfully 
resisted all efforts of Aurangzlb to capture it. Despite sufferings due 
to heavy rains, famine, pestilence and incessant attacks of the ene¬ 
mies, he tried all possible means with grim determination to paralyze 
the defence, but they proved futile. At last, gold wrought 
wonders 120 and ‘Abdullah Pani, surnamed Sardar Khan, a high officer 
of the fort, was seduced. He treacherously opened the postern gate 
of the fort, thus allowing the enemies to enter into it and overpower 
the defenders. 

By way of contrast to this traitor shines forth an instance of 
undaunted heroism and noble self-sacrifice, rare in the annals of any 
country; ‘Abd-ur Razzaq Lari, surnamed Mustafa Khan, a devoted 
and faithful noble, spurned all tempting offers of Aurangzlb and 
fought valiantly till he was seriously wounded. 

Thus was Golconda captured by Aurangzlb (1687) and Abu-’l 
Hasan made a captive. The latter was sent as a State prisoner to 
the fort of Daulatabad for the rest of his life on a pension of Rs. 50,000 
a year, and the kingdom annexed to the Mughul Empire. 

APPENDIX I 
(By the Editor) 

Notes on the chronology adopted in this Chapter 

The dates of some of the rulers given in this Chapter differ from 
those mentioned in the Cambridge History of India (CHI), Vol. Ill, 
pp. 704 and 708, as shown in the following list. The justification of 
the dates adopted in this Chapter, in each case, is indicated below. 


Serial 

No. 

Name of the ruler 

Date in CHI 

Date in this 
Chapter 

I. 

Murtaza Nizam Shah I 

1565—1586 

1565—1588 

II. 

Murtaza Nizam Shah II 

1603—1630 

1600—1630 

III. 

Mallu ‘Adil Shah 

1534 

1534 

1534—1535 

IV. 

Ibrahlim ‘Adil Shah I 

1534 

1558 

1535—1557 

V. 

Muhammad ‘Adil Shah 

1627—1657 

1627—1656 

VI. 

‘Ala-ud-din Tmad Shah 

1504—1529 

1504—1530 


I. The date given in CHI. Ill, p. 461, of the ruler’s death is 1588, 
and this agrees with the date of Firishta. 


479 





THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


II. According to CHI. Ill, the fall of Ahmadnagar and the ac¬ 
cession of Murtaza both took place in A.D. 1603. The date 1600 
for the fall of Ahmadnagar is supported by Akbar-nama (Translation 
of Beveridge, Vol. Ill, p. 1159 footnote). On p. 148 of CHI. IV 
it is clearly stated that Murtaza was on the throne in January, 1602. 

III. It is stated in CHI. Ill, p. 439, that Malta was deposed in 
March, 1535, and this agrees with Firishta’s account. 

IV. The date 1557 is supported by Firishta (Cf. Briggs, III. 

112 ). 

V. The date of the death of Muhammad ‘Adil Shah is given by 
Sir Jadunath Sarkar as November, 1656 ( Aurangzib , IV, 2nd Edi¬ 
tion, p. 155). 

VI. In CHI. Ill, p. 708 the date of the death of Ala-ud-dTn is 
given as A.H. 937 and it is equated with A.D. 1529. But the 
A.H. 937 really corresponds to the period 25 August, 1530, to 14 
August, 1531. 


APPENDIX II 
(By the Editor) 

The causes of the Grand Alliance of the Muslim States in the 
Deccan against Vijayanagara which destroyed that empire require a 
little more elaboration. According to Firishta, Ibrahim Qutb Shah 
of Golconda sent an envoy named Mustafa Khan to Husain Nizam 
Shah of Ahmadnagar to induce him to join the confederacy. The 
arguments advanced by the envoy may be summed up as follows 
in the words of Firishta: The ruler of Vijayanagara, “who had re¬ 
duced all the rajas of the Carnatic to his yoke, required to be check¬ 
ed and his influence should be removed from the countries of Islam 
in order that their people might repose in safety from the oppres¬ 
sions of unbelievers, and their mosques and holy places no longer 
be subject to pollution from infidels.” 121 This implies that apart 
from the obvious and the generally accepted view that the object 
of the confederacy was merely political, namely to destroy a power¬ 
ful Hindu ruler in the neighbourhood, the sacrilege of Muslim holy 
places by the troops of Vijayanagara was another cause. Prof. 
H. K. Sherwani probably voiced the opinion of many when he dis¬ 
believed the statement of Firishta and observed: “It is hardly 
thinkable that with the ‘Adil Shah as an ally and colleague there 
should have been desecration of mosques.” 122 But it is somewhat 
curious that in the same article Sherwani gives a different opinion 
later. Describing the second invasion of Ahmadnagar he writes: 
“It is related that the army of Vijayanagara, led by Ramraj, again 
perpetrated every possible atrocity on the people, laid waste the 
countryside and did not spare even mosques. Naturally, it was not 
to the liking of ‘All ‘Adil Shah that crimes committed on the oc¬ 
casion of the first invasion of Ahmadnagar should be repeated and 
this time he had allied with Ramraj on the express condition that 
mosques and other sacred edifices should not be desecrated.” In 
his support Sherwani states in f.n. 26, p. 263: “Fer. II, 127, Briggs, 

480 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 

III, 224, Basatin, 89, is quite explicit that it was ‘against the under¬ 
standing with ‘Add Shah that Ramraj’s army caused such depreda¬ 
tions to mosques and Qurans’ during his attacks on Ahmadnagar. 
This must have been one of the potent causes of the eventual al¬ 
liances of the Deccani Sultans against Vijayanagara.” 123 

It is evident from the above that during the first invasion of 
Ahmadnagar the Vijayanagara troops had desecrated mosques and 
Qur‘ans, otherwise such an understanding would be entirely uncal¬ 
led for. 

Sherwani is, however, even more explicit while stating the im¬ 
mediate causes of the Battle of Talikota. On p. 360 ( JIH , XXXV) 
he writes: “No state had suffered more than Ahmadnagar at the 
hands of the armies of the Southern Empire, for they polluted the 
mosques and dishonoured women and put to fire and sword every¬ 
thing and every person who came in their way. . . . Ramraj’s men 
who had committed great outrages at Ahmadnagar, and omitted no 
mark of disrespect to the religion of the faithful, singing and per¬ 
forming. .. .their worship in every mosque.” Though Sherwani does 
not give any reference, the last passage is from Firishta (Briggs, III, 
p. 122), and there is a similar account on the preceding page. It is 
evident, therefore, that though Sherwani dismisses Firishta’s account 
as exaggeration on p. 259, he accepts the same on p. 361 (JIH, 
XXXV). 

The historian is thus faced with two intriguing questions: 

(1) Did the troops of Vijayanagara desecrate the mosques? 

(2) If so, can this be regarded as a ‘potent cause’ of the Muslim 
confederacy against Vijayanagara? 

As regards the first, all that can be said is that though we have 
no conclusive evidence to support it, it is not unlikely that the Hindu 
troops did retaliate, on occasions, against the systematic sacrilege of 
the Hindu temples and images of gods by Muslim troops and even 
kings. 

As regards the second, the answer must be in the negative, for 
it is unreasonable to look for a hypothetical cause when we have 
obvious explanations for the rivalry between Hindu and Muslim 
rulers. The view that the sacrilege of the Hindu troops of Vijaya¬ 
nagara was the reason for the deliberate destruction of the city of 
Vijayanagara by the Muslim rulers after their victory, is hardly 
worth serious consideration and cannot be accepted as justification 
or even excuse for acts of unparalleled vandalism of the Muslims, 
particularly as the alleged grievance is not yet definitely proved. 


1. H. K. Sherwani, The Bahmanis of the Deccan, p. 394. 
la. For references see below footnote No. 104. 

2. G. Yazdani, Bidar, Its History and Monuments , p. 13. 

Briggs III, 497; the date of the death of Amir Barid given here is wrong 
but the date in p. 92 (Briggs III) is correct. 

3. Zafar-ul-Walih, 170, quoted by H. K. Sherwani in his article “Independence 
of Bahmani Governors” PIHC, 1945, p. 161. 

481 

M.B.—31 



THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


3a. Ibid., 161. 

4. Madsir-i-Rahimi, II, 526. 

5. Basatin-us-Salatin, 272. 

6. Haig: Historical Landmarks of the Deccan, 18, 101. 

7. Sarkar: History of Aurangzih, IV, 2. 

8. “Foreword” by Sir Jadunath Sarkar in J. N. Chowdhuri’s Malik Ambar. 

9. Tarikh-i-Firishta, Vol. II, 93; Chowdhuri, Malik Ambar, pp. 5-6. 

10. Tarikh-i-Firishta, II, 93. 

11. Briggs: Firishta, III, 206. 

12. Ibid., 207-209. 

13. Ibid., 214. 

13a. For details see below section on Berar. 

14. Briggs. Ill, 52, 216. 

14a. Ibid., pp. 52, 216-7. The complaint made by Isma‘Il about the treatment 
he received at Ahmadnagar might have served as an additional cause of 
friction between Bijapur and Ahmadnagar. 

14b. Cf. Chapter XIII, section on Gujarat. 

15. Briggs. Ill, 71. 

16. Sherwani, Telingana under Ibrahim Qutb Shah, JIH, XXXV, p. 42. 

17. Tarikh-i-Muhammad Qutb Shah, 113-115. Briggs, III, 382-84. 

18. Briggs III, 387. 

19. Ibid., 387. 

20. Ibid., 387-388. 

21. Ibid., 238. 

22. Ibid., 397. 

23. Ibid., 118. 

23a. For a different version, see Sherwani, JIH, XXXV, p. 260 (Ed.). 

24. Parenda is situated about seventy-five miles south-east of Ahmadnagar. 

25. Ausa is situated about one hundred and thirty miles south-east of Ahmadnagar. 

26. Briggs, III, 241. 

27. Ibid., 408-409. Sherwani, JIH, XXXV, p. 265. 

28. Briggs, III, 125. 

29. Briggs, III, 123-125. 

30. Ibid., 126. 

31. JIH, XXXV, 374-375. 

32. Purchas His Pilgrims, X, 93: K.A.N. Sastri, A History of South India (2nd 
edition), 284; Briggs, III, 130 footnote. 

33. Briggs, IH, 130. 

34. Robbert Sewell, A Forgotten Empire, pp. 206-208. The Portuguese historian 
Faria-y-Souza says: “The Muhammadans spent five months in plundering 
Vijayanagara.... In his share of the plunder, ‘Adil Shah got a diamond, as 
large as an ordinary egg and another of extraordinary size, though smaller, 
together with other jewels of inestimable value.” Commentaries of Alfonso 
Albuquerq, Hakluyt Society, II, pp. CXII, CXIII. 

34a. For details see below p. 451. 

35. Chowdhuri, Malik Ambar, 8-9. 

36. Briggs, III, 257-259. 

37. Ibid., 269. 

37a. Some confusion may be caused by the fact that Briggs in one place mentions 
the lady as Khadlia (III. 161) but in another place (III. 278) names her as 
Chand Blbi. Khadlja became a widow only a short time ago and it is more 
likely that Ibrahim wanted her back in Bijapur. This view is also taken in 
CHI. Ill, p. 461. 

38. Ibid., 284. 

39. Ibid, 287. 

39a. The name is written as Ahang Khan in CHI. Ill, p. 464 with a footnote that 
it is also written as Abhang Khan. But the latter form is found in the Tazki- 
rat-ul-Mulk (Sarkar’s copy, pp. 511, 573) and the Futuhat-i-Adil Shahi (pp. 
267a, 268a), both written in the first half of the seventeenth century A.D. 

40. The Burhan-i-Maasir says that Bijapur sent thirty thousand cavalry and Qufb 
Shah ten thousand cavalry and twenty thousand infantry to Ahmadnagar. 
Burhan-i-Maasir, Sarkar’s MSS. Vol. Ill, 1475. These figures appear to be 
an exaggeration. 

41. Madsir-i-Rahimi, II, 479-481; Tdrikh-i-Firishta II, 158-162; Burhan-i-Maasir, 
Sarkar’s MSS, III, 1475, 1492; Beveridge, Akbarnama, III, 1028, 1045-1048, 1050. 

41a. Briggs, III, 306-309, CHI, III, 465. 


482 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 


41b. Akbamama of Shaikh Faizi Sirhindi, Elliot VI, 144; Akbamama of Abu-’l-Fazl 
tr. by H. Beveridge, p. 1159. 

42. Maasir-i-Rahimi, Ii, 482, 484-495, 497-499. Beveridge, Akbamama, III, 1114, 
1128-1129,1132,1142- 1144, 1157-1159; Tdrikh-i-Firishta, II, 162-164. 

43. Tazkirat-ul-Mulk, Sarkar’s MSS. 571-572; Futuhat-i-Adil Shahi, 267a-267b 
(Sarkar’s copy); Maasir-ul-Umard III, 7. 

44. Tdrikh-i-Firishta, II, 165. 

45. Chowdhuri, Malik Ambar , 23-25; Tazkirat-ul-Mulk, 576-577; Tdrikh- 

i-Firishta, II, 164; Futuhat-i-Adil Shahi, 269b, 270a (Sarkar’s copy). 

46. Tdrikh-i-Firishta, II, 165; Beveridge, Akbamama, III, 1212; Ma’dsir-ul-Umard, 

III, 7-8; Tazkirat-ul-Mulk, 574. 

47. Basatin-us-Salatin, 270; Tdrikh-i-Firishta, II, 166. 

48. Tazkirat-ul-Mulk, 576-578. 

49. Maasir-i-Rahimi, II, 511. 

50. Futuhat-i-Adil Shahi, 271a, translated by Sarkar. 

51. Chowdhuri, Malik Ambar, 52-53; Futuhat-i-Adil Shahi, 271a; Basatin-us- 
Salatin, 263-264. 

52. Tazkirat-ul-Mulk, 578-581; Futuhat-i-Adil Shahi, 271a, 271b; Basdtin-us- 
Saldtin, 263-265, 267. 

53. Iqbalnama, 44-45; Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri, pers. text (Syed Ahmad’s edition) 85-86, 
88; tr. (R and B, Vol. I), 178-179, 183; William Finch in Purchas His Pilgrims, 

IV, 39. Chowdhuri, Malik Ambar, 58. 

54. Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri, pers. text 107-108; tr. (R and B, Vol. I) 219-21; Iqbalnama, 
65-66; Maasiri-Rahimi, II, 520; Basatin-us-Salatin, 271-272. 

55. Chowdhuri, Malik Ambar, 70; Madsiri-i-Rahimi, II, 527. Later on, Khirki 
was named Aurangabad, according to the name of Aurangzlb. 

56. Tuzuk-i-Jahdngiri, pers. text 153-154; tr. (Vol. I) 312-14; Iqbalnama, 84-87; 
Ma'dsir-i-Rahimi, II, 523-531. 

56a. Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri, tr. Vol. I, 338. 

57. Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri, pers. text 188, tr. (Vol. I) 380; Iqbalnama, 100; Khafi 
Khan I, 291. 

58. Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri, pers. text 305, 321-322, 330-331 tr. (R and B, Vol. II) 155- 
57, 188-90, 206-8; Iqbalnama, 175-176, 181-182; English, Factories in India (1618- 
1621), 207 , 210-211,-217-218, 231, 240, 243, 249, 257 , 259, 287 , 296—for disloca¬ 
tion of trade. 

59. Futuhat-i-Adil-Shahi, 287a, tr. by Sarkar. 

60. Tatimma-i-Tuzuk-i-Jahangir! (Printed in Syed Ahmad’s edition) 386, 391; 

Iqbalnama 224, 234. 

60a. Chowdhuri, Malik Ahbar, p. 116. 

61. Futuhat-i-Adil-Shahi, 289a, 289b, 290b, 291a, 291b; Tatimma-i-Tuzuk-i-Jahan¬ 
gir!, 391-392; Iqbalnama, 234-237; Dilkasha, Sarkar’s MSS., 90-92. 

62. Tatimma-i-Tuzuk-i-Jahangir!, 392-393; Iqbalnama, 237-238. 

63. Chowdhuri, Malik Ambar, 163. 

64. Ahmadnagar Gazetteer, 395; 423-424. 

65. Tazkirat-ul-Mulk, 578; Futuhat-i-Adil-Shahi, 268a, 270b. 

65a. For details of the fall of Ahmadnagar, see above, pp. 207-8. 

66. Briggs, III, 4-8. 

66a. See above, Vol. VI, pp. 304-05. 

67. Briggs, III, 22-29. 

68. P. M. Joshi: Relations between the Adil-Shahi Kingdom of Bijapur and the 
Portuguese at Goa during the 16th century, NIA, II, (1939-40), 363. 

69. Ibid., 363; Briggs, III, 29-30; CHI. Ill, p. 434. 

70. Briggs, III, 30-31. 

71. Ibid., 46-47. 

72. Ibid., 47-48. CHI. Ill, 434-435. 

72a. For details see above, Vol. VI, pp. 314-16 and Ch. XV. 

73. K. A. N. Sastri, A History of South India, 276. For details, see Ch. XV. 

74. For details, see Ch. XV. 

75. NIA. II, 364-365. 

76. CHI., Ill, 443-444. See above, section on Ahmadnagar, p. 421. 

76a. See above, pp. 424 ff. 

77. Briggs, III, 135, 254-255. 

77a. See Ch. XV. 

78. Bijapur by H. Cousens, 17, 60; Architecture at Bijapur by M. Taylor and J. 
Fergusson, 32. 


483 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


79. Briggs, III, 144-146. 

80. Ibid., 146-148. 

81. Ibid., 171-173. 

81a. See above pp. 430ff. 

81b. See above pp. 437ff. 

82. Meadows Taylor: A student’s Manual of the History of India (4th Edition), 
(1879), pp. 304-305. 

83. Ibid., 305. 

84. Briggs, III, 169-170. 

84a. For details, see above, chapter on Shah Jahan. 

84b. Khafi Khan I, 531-534, 537. Sarkar: Aurangzih, I, 32-4. 

85. Sarkar, History of Aurangzih I, 253-254 (1912 edition). 

85a .Further sources of Vijayanagara History (K. A. N. Shastri) p. 341. 

86. K. D. Swaminathan, The Nayakas of Ikkeri, 73-74; Proceedings of Indian 
History Records Commission, XVI 50-51. (For other campaigns of Ran- 
daula based on Macleod: De Oost-Indische Campagnie, II, See the chapter 
on Vijayanagara.—Editor). 

87. K. D. Swaminathan: The Nayakas of Ikkeri, 89. See pp. 498 ff. 

88. Ibid., 89; C. S. Srinivasachari: A History of Jinji and, its rulers, 174-186; 
Sarkar, History of Aurangzih, I, 254. For details, see the Chapter on Vijaya¬ 
nagara. 

89. Sarkar, History of Aurangzih, IV, 155. 

90. Ibid., 155; Basdtin-us-Salatin, 346-348. 

91. V. Bridhagirison: The Nayaks of Tanjore, 141-144. 

92. K. D. Swaminathan: The Nayakas of Ikkeri, 95, 106-107, 110. 

93. Alamgirndma, 988-1021; Sarkar, Aurangzih, IV, 118-144. 

94. K. K. Basu, Some court poets of Ali Adil Shah II of Bijapur (Summary) 
PIHC (1943), p. 379. 

95. Sarkar, Aurangzih , IV, 158. 

95a. Ibid., 181. _ 

95b. Maasir-i-Alamgiri, tr. by Sarkar, p. 169. 

95c. Ibid., 171; Dilkasha; 202-203; Basatin-us-Saldtin, 540. 

96. Briggs, III, 485-486; CHI., Ill, 398. 

" 97. Briggs, III, 214-215; CHI., Ill, 435. 

98. Briggs, III, 217-221; CHI., Ill, 436. 

98a. Briggs, III, 254-255. 

99. G. Yazdani, Bidar, its history and monuments, 13. For Amir Band’s activi¬ 
ties, see above pp. 466-7. 

100. Briggs, III, 57. 

100a. Ibid., 60. 

101. Ibid., 60-64. 

101a. G. Yazdani, Bidar, its history and monuments, p. 13. 

101b. Basatin-us-Saldtin, 272-273; G. Yazdani, Bidar, its history and monuments, 
p. 14. 

102. “Sultan” does not signify his royal title; it was a part of his name. 

103. Briggs, III, 321-322; 339-345. 

104. Ibid., 323, Journal of the Hyderabad Archaeological Society (1918), p. 89; 
JIH, Vol. 33, pp. 281-283; PIHC (1945), p. 159-162. 

105. Briggs, III, 323-324, 377. 

106. N. Narayana Rao, Two Muhammadan patrons of Telugu literature in the 
16th century, PIHC (1945), p. 297; Briggs, III, 438; K. A. N. Sastri, A History 
of South India, 287. 

107. Briggs, III, 446. 

108. Tarikh-i-Muhammad Quth-Shdhi, 165; Briggs III, 446; JIH, XXXV, p. 266; 
Sherwani: “Cultural and administrative set up under Ibrahim Qutb Shah,” 
Islamic Culture (1957), p. 242. 

109. Islamic Culture (1957), 130-131, 246; PIHC (1945), 296-298. 

110. Briggs, III, 451-452; M. Taylor and J. Ferguson, Architecture at Bijapur, 48; 
Journal of the Pakistan Historical Society, Vol. VI, pp. 224-253. 

110a. H. K. Sherwani, “Political and military aspects of the reign of Muhammad 
Quli Qutb Shah,” JIH, April, 1962. 

110b. K. K. Basu, “A chapter from Golconda History”, Journal of Bihar and Orissa 
Research Society, XXVIII, pt. II, 179. 

111. Ibid., 179. 

112. Hadigat-us-Saladn, Sarkar’s MSS., 65; Journal of Bihar and Orissa Research 
Society, XXVIII, pt. II, 180. 


484 


MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM (II) 


112a. Bernier, pp. 194-5; Tavernier, I, p. 158. 

112b. J. N. Sarkar, History of Aurangzib, IV, 395. 

112c. Indian Travels of Thevenot and Careri, edited by S. N. Sen (Published by 
the National Archives of India, 1949), p. 144. 

113. For details see chapters on Shah Jahan. 

113a. Bernier, 194-195; Tavernier, I, 158. 

114. Khafi Khan, II, 309-313. 

115. Sarkar, Aurangzib, IV, 400. 

116. Ibid., 401. 

117. Ibid., 402; Maasir-i-Alamgiri, tr. by Sarkar, 175. 

118. Khafi Khan, II, 306. 

119. Ibid., 308. 

120. Ibid., 361. 

121. Briggs, III, 125. 

122. JIH, XXXV, 259. 

123. Ibid., p. 263. 


485 


CHAPTER XV 


VIJAYANAGARA 

Achyutadevamya ( 1530-1542 ) 

The history of Vijayanagara up to the death of Krishnadevaraya 
(1509-29) has been discussed in the preceding Volume (pp. 271-325)* 
As mentioned above (Vol. VI. p. 317), he chose as his successor 
Achyutadevaraya, his half-brother, in preference to his infant son and 
other legitimate candidates. This sowed the seed of dissension which 
troubled Achyuta almost throughout his reign. 

Ramaraya (also called Ramaraja), the son-in-law of Krishna¬ 
devaraya, proclaimed the infant son of the latter as Emperor, and 
began to rule over the empire in his name. Ramaraya’s attempt to 
seize the capital was, however, foiled by Saluva Narasimharaya 
Dandanayaka, the prime minister of Krishnadevaraya at the time of 
his death, who took possession of it in the name of Achyuta and 
held it for him until his arrival from Chandragiri. Achyuta, how¬ 
ever, found it advantageous to placate Ramaraya; and therefore 
after reaching the capital and celebrating his coronation he entered 
into an agreement with Ramaraya according to which he took the 
latter as his partner in the administration of the empire. This estrang¬ 
ed from the King Saluva Narasimharaya Dandanayaka, who retired 
to the Chola country of which he was the Governor, and entering 
into a conspiracy with the chiefs of Ummattur and Tiruvadi stirred 
up a rebellion in the south. Achyuta was obliged to march at the 
head of his army against the rebel Saluva Narasimharaya who op¬ 
posed the royal army and was defeated; he fled to Travancore and 
took refuge with his ally, the Tiruvadi. The royal army under the 
command of Achyuta’s brother-in-law, Salakaraju Tirumala, pursued 
him thither and having inflicted a defeat on the Tiruvadi compelled 
him to submit and surrender the arch-rebel Narasimharaya Danda¬ 
nayaka whom they carried as a prisoner of war. Achyuta returned 
to Vijayanagara by way of Ummattur and ;§rirangam where he re¬ 
ceived the submission of the local chiefs. Shortly after this the 
death of the infant son of Krishnadevaraya eased the political situa¬ 
tion and Achyuta invaded Bijapur and recovered the Raichur doab. 
But while Achyuta was engaged in suppressing some rebellion, 
Ramaraya removed all the old servants of the crown from positions 
of responsibility and appointed his own kinsmen and friends in their 


486 


VIJAYANAGARA 


place. He took also into his service 3,000 Muslim soldiers whom 
Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah discharged from his service on his accession to 
the throne in 1535. Feeling confident of his power, he seized 
Achyuta as soon as he returned from Tirupati, and cast him in pri¬ 
son. Though at first he proclaimed himself as the king, the oppo¬ 
sition of the nobles forced him to abandon his scheme. He then pro¬ 
claimed Achyuta’s young nephew, Sadashiva, emperor and began 
to rule in his name. Ramaraya’s usurpation was not accepted by 
all the subjects of the kingdom. The nobles in the extreme south 
of the empire refused to acknowledge his authority and withheld 
the payment of tribute. He was therefore obliged to lead an ex¬ 
pedition to bring them back to subjection; but the campaign was pro¬ 
tracted and he became involved in a long tedious war without any 
chance of success. In his absence, the officer whom he entrusted 
with the government of the capital and the custody of Achyuta turn¬ 
ed traitor; and having set him at liberty and restored him to power 
assumed the office of the prime minister. He was, however, mur¬ 
dered soon by Salakaraju Tirumala, who then took possession of the 
government and began to rule the country in the name of his bro¬ 
ther-in-law. 

It has already been related above (p. 450) how Ibrahim ‘Adil 
Shah of Bijapur seized the opportunity and invaded Vijayanagara 
and how he composed the differences between Achyuta and Rama- 
raya and induced them to enter into an agreement. According to 
its terms Achyutaraya was to be the emperor with full authority 
over the whole empire excluding the estates of Ramaraya which 
he should be allowed to rule as an independent prince with full 
sovereign powers. Having thus settled the affairs of Vijayanagara 
Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah marched away to his kingdom. The terms of 
this agreement were faithfully observed by both the parties; and 
Achyuta ruled the empire in peace until his death in 1542. 

Venkata I and Tirumala I (1543) 

Achyuta was succeeded by his young son, Venkata I. As he 
was not of age, his maternal uncle, Salakaraju China Tirumala be¬ 
came the regent of the kingdom, though most of the nobles were 
opposed to him. Tirumala was not loyal to his nephew; being de¬ 
sirous of making himself king, he began to plot against the king. 
The queen-mother, Varadambika, became suspicious of her brother’s 
good faith, and appealed to Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah to help her in secur¬ 
ing the throne for her son. But he was bought off by Tirumala 
and the appeal of the queen-mother made the position of her son 
more precarious than ever. 


487 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Ramaraya, who was closely watching the trend of events at 
Vijayanagara, now stepped into the field. He proceeded to Gutti 
where Achyuta’s nephew, Sadashiva, was imprisoned, set him at 
liberty, and proclaiming him the emperor sent an appeal to Ibrahim 
‘Adil Shah for help. In response to the request, ‘Adil Shah invaded 
Vijayanagara kingdom and advanced upon the capital. The people 
of the city, greatly alarmed at the danger, made Tirumala their 
king. He defeated ‘Adil Shah very near his capital and put him 
to flight. To clear his path of all rivals, Tirumala strangled his 
nephew and massacred all the members of the royal family on whom 
he could lay hands. He became suspicious and in his fear he attack¬ 
ed friend and foe alike. His rule degenerated into downright tyranny. 
He was against everyone, and everyone in the kingdom was against 
him. The people in their distress appealed to ‘Adil Shah for help. 
He came readily, not so much to help them as to seize the kingdom 
for himself. His hauteur and high-handed behaviour roused hosti¬ 
lity all round and he was obliged to retire into his own kingdom 
as quickly as he came. 

Ramaraya saw that the time for him to make a bid for the 
throne had at last come. He gathered together his forces and pro¬ 
ceeded to take possession of the empire in the name of Sadashiva, 
the lawful heir to the throne. Tirumala did not easily submit. 
He offered stubborn resistance but suffered defeat everywhere. At 
last, in the battle of the Tungabhadra, Ramaraya overthrew him 
and put him to death. The inhabitants of the capital heaved a 
sigh of relief, and throwing open the gates of the city welcomed 
Ramaraya and his ward, the new emperor. 

Sadashiva and Ramaraya ( 1543-1564) 

Sadashiva ascended the throne about the middle of 1543. As 
his rivals were all destroyed by Salakaraju Tirumala he became the 
undisputed master of the whole of Vijayanagara empire. His rule was 
only nominal till 1552, the actual ruler of the empire being Rama¬ 
raya. But in 1552 he had to recognise Ramaraya as his co-regent, 
as the latter, not content with actual power, assumed the royal titles, 
as if he were a crowned monarch himself. 

The accession of Sadashiva brought in its train certain import¬ 
ant changes in the administration and the policy of the empire. 
In the first place, the old civil service on which the stability of the 
empire depended was considerably weakened, if not actually des¬ 
troyed. The Brahmin officers who formed the bulwark of the State 
fell into disfavour with Ramaraya, as they upheld loyally the cause 
of Achyuta and opposed his usurpation. The first step which he 


488 


VIJAYANAGARA 


took after placing Sadashiva firmly upon the throne was to dismiss 
all the hostile officers from the service of the State and appoint to 
places of trust and responsibility his ov/n relatives, friends and 
followers. So long as the central government was strong, and could 
exact obedience to its commands, the effects of this change were not 
felt; but as soon as the centre showed signs of weakness, the people 
who rose to power by Ramaraya ? s favour, freed from the shackles 
of the civil service, began to manifest discontent and disloyalty and 
destroyed the unity of the empire. 

Secondly, enormous increase of Muslim officers to responsible 
positions in the government undermined the strength of the State. 
In his eagerness to seize power Ramaraya enlisted in his service as 
many Muslim mercenaries and adventurers as he could get and offer¬ 
ed them facilities to get a knowledge of the internal affairs of the 
empire. With the increase of Muhammadans in the army and the 
service of the government, the loyalty of the one and the safety of 
the other were considerably jeopardised. 

Another important fact that must be noted here is the change in 
the attitude of the government of Vijayanagara in her relations with 
the Muslim kingdoms. Though the Rayas ever since the foundation 
of the kingdom came into contact with the Musalmans, they never 
interfered in the relations between the Muslim States of Deccan. 
Ramaraya was the first ruler of Vijayanagara to entangle himself in 
the inter-State politics of the Muhammadan kingdoms. Although he 
achieved by means of his great military strength and cleverness con¬ 
siderable success and established his influence over the Muslim king¬ 
doms, the rapid growth of his power so alarmed his allies and enemies 
that they joined together ultimately and brought his downfall in the 
fateful battle of Rakshasi-Tangadi (Talikota). 

The Southern Expedition ( 1543-44) 

As soon as Ramaraya performed Sadashiva’s coronation at Vija¬ 
yanagara, he was obliged to bestow immediate attention to the affairs 
of the Southern provinces of the empire, where owing to a number 
of causes great unrest prevailed. The Southern chiefs and noble¬ 
men, who a few years earlier defied Ramaraya, when having impri¬ 
soned Achyuta he seized power, were no more inclined to submit to 
his authority than before. Moreover, the Portuguese missionaries 
were making trouble in the extreme south. They converted large 
number of Paravas of the Fishery Coast to Christianity and induced 
them to recognise the king of Portugal as their overlord, thereby 
encroaching on the sovereignty of Vijayanagara. Further, their in- 


489 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


trigues with the rebellious chiefs of the South and plundering ex¬ 
peditions of the Portuguese Governor of Goa against the rich 
South Indian Hindu shrines created a situation which must have 
caused grave concern in the capital. Ramaraya therefore despatch¬ 
ed a large army under his cousins, China Timma and Vitthala, to 
put down the rebels, foil the attempts of the Portuguese and restore 
the imperial authority all over the South. 

The expedition set out from Vijayanagara. At first China 
Timma captured Chandragiri in the north of the Chittoor district; 
and having put down the rebels with a stern hand he brought the 
whole of Tondaimandalam to subjection. He next marched into the 
Chola country, reduced the fort of Bhuvanagiri and attacked the 
port of Nagore where he destroyed the enemies, probably the Por¬ 
tuguese, and restored the wealth of God Ranganatha which they 
had seized. Then he crossed the Kaveri, and having entered 
Pudukkottai region, exacted from the local chiefs tribute which they 
had refused to the imperial government, taking advantage of the 
unsettled conditions of the empire. 

China Timma advanced farther south and reached without 
opposition Madura, where he met the Paindya king, obviously of 
Tenkasi, who came to him soliciting his help against Bettumperu- 
mal, the ruler of Tuticorin and Kayattar. Though the forces of the 
‘Five Tiruvadis’ (small principalities) of Travancore met the in¬ 
vading army of China Timma at Tovala Pass they were beaten and 
dispersed. The rest of Travancore was then invaded. Its ruler 
(Tniquitibirim’) was defeated but received into favour and was 
allowed to rule over a large part of his old territory. The victori¬ 
ous general China Timma set up a pillar of victory at Cape Comorin. 

Ramaraya and the Portuguese 

Ramaraya had also to come to an early understanding with the 
Portuguese. They were the masters of the seas. All the sea-borne 
trade, specially the all-important trade in horses, passed through 
their hands. The Portuguese, who were friendly to Vijayanagara 
in the days of the great Krishnadevaraya, had turned hostile and 
manifested a tendency to fish in the troubled waters. They were 
guilty of destruction of the Hindu temples, plunder of the rich 
South Indian shrines, the mass conversion of the Paravas of the 
Fishery Coast, and attempt to extend their temporal power under 
the cloak of religion. Though all these hostile acts loudly called 
for reprisals, Ramaraya was not strong enough to chastise them. He 
could not afford to quarrel with them, as that would drive them 
into the hands of the Muslim States. He therefore concluded a 


490 


VIJAYANAGARA 


political and commercial treaty with them in 1547 as a consequence 
of which friendly relations were once again restored between the 
two powers. The friendship, however, did not last long, and a few 
years later Ramaraya was obliged to take action against them in 
1558. He planned a double attack upon the Portuguese. While 
he personally led an expedition against San Thome for chastising 
the Catholic missionaries of the place, an army was despatched at 
the same time under his cousin Vitthala against Goa, probably to 
divert the attention of the Portuguese authorities there and pre¬ 
vent them from sending help to the people of San Thome. Both 
the expeditions were successful. Ramaraya plundered the rich 
inhabitants of San Thome, exacted a large tribute from the authori¬ 
ties, and taking with him five important citizens of the port as host¬ 
ages against his demand for a tribute of 100,000 pagodas, returned 
to Vijayanagara. Vitthala, accompanied by the Ikkeri chief, San- 
kanna Nayak, marched on Goa and captured a part of the old town, 
called Pain Goa (Panjim). These victories probably taught the 
Portuguese a much-needed lesson; and they seemed to have been 
restrained from provoking hostilities with Vijayanagara in the sub¬ 
sequent years of Ramaraya’s rule. 

Reference has been made in Chapter XIV to the internecine 
wars among the five Muslim States in the Deccan, which naturally 
induced the weaker States, threatened with destruction, to seek the 
help of some powerful ally. Ramaraya, who was the head of the 
greatest State in the south, was frequently approached for help; 
and he joined them, partly from motives of gain, but mostly for 
preserving the peace of the Deccan and preventing any one of the 
neighbours from growing so powerful as to become a menace to 
others. Ramaraya was, in fact, a staunch believer in the doctrine 
of balance of power, which h& perhaps imbibed from his friend and 
ally Burhan Nizam Shah of Ahmadnagar. And perhaps it was more 
to enforce this doctrine than from motives of self-aggrandisement 
that he involved himself frequently in wars with the Muslim rulers 
of Deccan. 

Of the five Deccani Sultanates which sprang from the ashes of 
the old Bahmani kingdom, Ramaraya, in the twenty-one years dur¬ 
ing which he ruled Vijayanagara, was obliged to wage war on 
four, viz., Bijapur, Ahmadnagar, Bidar and Golconda. 

Reference has been made to these wars in the preceding Chap¬ 
ter. Though conflict with Bidar is not mentioned in the Muslim 
sources, the Keladinripa Vijayam, a history of the Nayak kingdom 
of Ikkeri, describes at some length a war between them. The causes 
of this war are not recorded. Probably Barid Shah showed some 


491 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


partiality towards Nizam Shah and brought trouble upon his own 
head. Briefly stated, the events of this war are as follows: when 
the news of Vijayanagara’s intended invasion reached Bldar, Band 
Shah collected his armies and proceeded to the frontier to repel the 
invaders. A fierce engagement took place; and Band Shah who was 
personally leading the force was defeated and taken prisoner to¬ 
gether with his ministers. As a consequence of this defeat Band 
Shah had to join ‘All Adil Shah and fight against their enemies. 

The Battle of Rakskasi-Tangadi (1565) 

The battle of Talikota or Rakshasi-Tangadi 1 described in the pre¬ 
ceding chapter, was the Waterloo of Vijayanagara history. Though 
Vijayanagara empire flourished for nearly another century, with the 
fall of Ramaraya on the field of Rakshasi-Tangadi in 1565, its glory 
began to wane and it ceased to be the dominant power in the Deccan, 
and the Rayas never attempted once again to recover their lost 
ground. The history of this great battle is, however, immersed in 
obscurity. Excepting the fact that the Vijayanagara army was 
practically annihilated and Ramaraya was slain, everything else 
concerning the battle is doubtful and uncertain. This is due in a 
great, measure to the wilful distortion of facts by Muslim historians, 
and the absence of contemporary evidence with the help of which 
their accounts may be checked and truth ascertained. 

First of all, the name of the battle itself calls for discussion. 
The battle of Talikota is a misnomer. Though all the Muslim 
writers state that the Great Battle was fought near the village of 
Talikota, it did not take place, as shown by the accounts given by 
themselves, anywhere near the village but at a distance of about 
twenty-five miles to the south of it, somewhere on the southern bank 
of the Krishna. The Hindu accounts unanimously refer to it as the 
battle of Rakshasi-Tangadi, 2 and state that it was so called because 
it was fought between the two villages of Rakkasige and Tangadige, 
situated on the northern bank of the Krishna near its confluence 
with the river Malapahari. As this is roughly in agreement with the 
topographical details furnished by Muslim historians, it seems certain 
that the actual site of the battle was the plain between the villages 
of Rakkasige and Tangadige, as stated in the Hindu records. 3 

Similarly, the causes which led to the formation of the confe¬ 
deracy of the Deccani Muslim rulers against Ramaraya and the out¬ 
break of the war which ended in his downfall and death are not de¬ 
finitely known. Firishta, no doubt, attributes it to the insult which 
Ramaraya is alleged to have offered to Muslim women and faith. 
This, however, is not supported by independent evidence. The real 


492 


VIJAYANAGARA 


cause appears to have been the jealousy which the Sultans of the 
Deccan, specially the rulers of Ahmadnagar and Golconda, felt at 
the growing power of Vijayanagara, and the ascendancy which Rama¬ 
raya established over the Muslim States of the Deccan. True, Rama¬ 
raya annexed, as stated by Firishta, some territories belonging to 
his enemies, and treated perhaps the envoys of some of them with 
scant courtesy; but that was not uncommon in medieval India; and 
Ramaraya did not violate the code of international morality, as then 
understood, in dealing with his enemies. It is not reasonable to sup¬ 
pose, as is generally done, that the Sultans of the Deccan, enraged 
by the outrageous conduct of Ramaraya, joined against him to de¬ 
fend their faith, protect the honour of their women and save their 
kingdom from his high-handed aggressions. Again, it is extremely 
doubtful whether the rulers of all the five Deccan Muslim States 
joined the confederacy against Ramaraya. Irnad Shah of Berar, 
for one, did not participate in it. ‘Adii Shah appears to have 
sat on the fence until almost the very end, leaving the Sultans of 
Ahmadnagar and Golconda to bear the brunt of the fight. Although 
Firishta attributes to ‘Adil Shah the credit of fostering the alli¬ 
ance of Muslim rulers against Ramaraya, and other Muhammadan 
writers make him one of the principal leaders of the league, he held 
aloof, according to the unanimous testimony of the Hindu records, 
until almost the end of the war, when he was constrained to join the 
Sultans of Ahmadnagar and Golconda by threats, cajolery and pro¬ 
mises of territorial concession. Nor is opinion less divided about the 
duration of the war. The Muhammadan historians make it a very 
short affair. The Muslim armies assembled at Talikota and, advanced 
to the bank of the Krishna where they were opposed by Ramaraya. 
A fierce engagement took place on 23 January, 1565; after the fighting 
had gone on for a few hours, Ramaraya fell into the hands of the 
enemy and his army took to flight. This settled the fate of the 
mighty Hindu empire. The battle is said to have lasted but a while, 
not even the space of a few hours. This is incredible. Considering 
the extent, the resources, the man-power, and the past military re¬ 
cord, it is inconceivable how the armies of the Deccani Sultans which 
severally and conjointly suffered defeats repeatedly on so many occa¬ 
sions at the hands of Ramaraya could have overthrown him within 
a space of less than four hours. According to the Hindu accounts, 
on the contrary, the war lasted for more than six months, during 
which several battles were fought, victory veering now to one side 
and now to another. One battle especially is said to have raged 
with intense fury for 27 days, and in the final engagement the 
Sultans of Ahmadnagar and Golconda suffered and retreated from 
the field in confusion. What the Sultans failed to achieve by force 


493 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


of arms they gained by treachery. The Muslim historians are not 
in agreement about the circumstances under which Ramaraya was 
slain. According to Nizam-ud-dln Ahmad, the earliest Muslim 
historian who describes the battle, the combined armies of Husain 
Nizam-ul-Mulk, ‘Adil Khan Qutb-ul-Mulk and Malik Barid were on 
the point of defeat when a chance shot from one of the guns of 
Husain carried off Ramaraya’s head, and the Hindu army gave up 
fighting. While attempting to flee, they were surrounded and cut to 
pieces. Caesar Frederick attributes Muslim victory to the treachery 
of the Muslim troops in the service of Ramaraya. Treachery was 
not confined to Mussalmans in Ramaraya’s service only. In Kela- 
dinripa Vi jay am it is stated that his ally, ‘Ali Adil Shah, who had 
been pretending to be neutral, owing to fear of his fellow Muslim 
rulers, secretly joined them and fell upon him unexpectedly. Taken 
unawares, Ramaraya was not able to offer effective resistance and 
while attempting to defend himself gallantly he was captured and 
beheaded. The Vijayanagara Army which was already thrown into 
confusion by the treachery of their Muslim comrades was panic- 
stricken by the sudden tragedy and immediately took to flight. 

Though the rule of Ramaraya ended in a great military disaster, 
which nearly destroyed the Vijayanagara empire, it was without 
doubt a period of unprecedented glory. Ramaraya was indeed one 
of the greatest Hindu monarchs who ever ruled over South India. 
It was not without justification that he was spoken of by the people 
of his age as Bade Ramaraya or Ramaraya the great. During this 
time, the authority of the Rayas of Vijayanagara, according to tradi¬ 
tions, extended all over South India and Deccan, from Setu in the 
South to the Narmada in the North. This is true in a sense; for all 
the Muslim rulers of the Deccan had to submit at one time or another 
to his power and carry out his behests. Ramaraya was a great sol¬ 
dier and diplomat. The skill with which he planned the campaign 
against Ibrahim Qutb Shah reveals his profound grasp over military 
strategy, and his dealings with the Deccani Sultans, their nobles 
and the Portuguese show his mastery over the art of diplomacy. 
His influence over the internal administration of the empire was 
not quite salutary. With the object of strengthening his power he 
destroyed very early in his career the civil service which kept under 
check the centrifugal tendencies of the amarandyakas (fief-holders). 
Though no harm was done during the rule of Ramaraya when the 
power of the central government was strong, the evils made them¬ 
selves manifest in the years of anarchy which immediately followed 
the disaster of Rakshasi-Tangadi. Ramaraya was a great patron of art 
and letters. Many writers in Sanskrit and Telugu flourished at his 
court. Some of the finest buildings and temples were built in his 


494 


VIJAYANAGARA 


time. His outlook on religion was broad and liberal. Himself a 
staunch follower of iSrivaishnavism, he never placed any restraint 
on liberty of worship of the adherents of other sects. Vaishnavas, 
§aivas, Jains, Muhammadans, Christians and Jews were all treated 
equally and enjoyed the same privileges. Notwithstanding the wars 
in which he was frequently engaged he looked after the welfare of his 
subjects; and the people were on the whole happy and contented 
under his rule. 


Saddshiva and Tirumala ( 1566-1570 ) 

According to the village kaijiyats in the Andhra area, for six 
years after the battle of Rakshasi-Tangadi anarchy reigned supreme. 
Several causes contributed to produce this result. The break-down 
of the power of the central government and the absence of proper 
local administrative machinery to enforce its authority let loose 
the forces of disintegration. The kinsmen and the friends to whom 
Ramaraya entrusted the administration of the kingdom asserted their 
independence and began to fight among themselves for strengthen¬ 
ing their power and extending their dominion. Of the many nobles 
who usurped power and rose to prominence, the Nayaks of Madura, 
Tanjore and Gingee deserve special mention. The first, who had 
his amaram (fief) in the marches of Travancore, quickly subdued 
all the territory extending to the south of the Kaveri and established 
himself at Madura. The second, who had a few simas on the banks 
of the Coleroon, made himself master of the fertile Chola country. 
And the last who was probably the commandant of the fort of 
Gingee seized the major part of Tondaimandalam and bengan to 
rule it as if he were an independent prince. To add to the confu¬ 
sion, the Pdlayagars, to whom the task of maintaining law and order 
and protecting the highways was entrusted, turned bandits and 
robbed the countryside and spread terror in the minds of the people. 

Tirumala, who after the death of his brother Ramaraya made 
himself the regent of the kingdom and the protector, was unable to 
check the progress of anarchy. In the first place, he had no army, 
and to recruit fresh forces, he had no money. Secondly, family dis¬ 
sensions added considerably to his trouble. Timma or Peda Tiru¬ 
mala, the son of his brother Ramaraya, aspired to become the re¬ 
gent in succession to his father, and unable to contend against his 
uncle appealed to ‘All ‘Adil Shah for help. The latter, desirous of 
profiting by the family quarrels at Vijayanagara, complied with 
Tirumala’s request and sent forces to his assistance. Tirumala, 
who had returned to Vijayanagara after the departure of the Mus¬ 
lim army, found that under these circumstances, it was not possible 


495 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


for him to carry on the government from the city. He returned to 
Penugonda, and anticipating an attack from the city, strengthened 
its fortifications. As a matter of fact, ‘Adil Shah sent an army 
under Khizr Khan to invest the fort; but the commandant Savaram 
Chennappa Nayadu beat back the attack. At the same time Tiru- 
mala persuaded Nizam Shah to invade the Bijapur territory 
from the north and make a diversion in his favour; and ‘Adil Shah 
had to beat a hasty retreat to protect his dominions. By a sudden 
turn of events, he was able to carry the war into the enemy’s terri¬ 
tory. The Sultans of Ahmadnagar and Golconda who were embroil¬ 
ed in a war with ‘Adil Shah, invited Tirumala to join them; and in 
response to this invitation, he sent one of his sons with ten thousand 
men. Tirumala gained nothing by this alliance; instead he involved 
himself in fresh troubles. For, the Sultans of Ahmadnagar and Gol¬ 
conda made up their differences with ‘Adil Shah and returned 
to their kingdoms; and the latter, to punish Tirumala for making 
common cause with his enemies, invaded the kingdom of Vijaya- 
nagara. The main objective of the invasion was the capture of 
the fort of Adoni where one of Ramaraya’s cousins to whom he 
entrusted the government of the district asserted his independence. 
To prevent however Tirumala from sending troops he despatched 
an army against Penugonda. ‘Adil Shah succeeded in achiev¬ 
ing his object. Though the army sent against Penugonda was de¬ 
feated and driven back by Tirumala, he reduced Adoni to subjection 
and made himself master of the entire Krishna-Tungabhadra doab. 

Tirumala was not able therefore to check the treacherous acti¬ 
vities of the amaranayakas (fief-holders). And by the time he 
could equip himself with an army and concert measures to restore 
royal authority they became too strong to be tackled easily. Tiru¬ 
mala was a realist. He knew that, under the circumstances, it was 
impossible to restore the old state of affairs. The amaranayakas 
who usurped the royal domain were too many. He was old and 
had no time to embark upon a systematic re-conquest of the empire. 
Tirumala therefore resolved to compromise with the Ndyaks and 
bring them back to subjection. By tacitly approving of their usur¬ 
pations he won them over to his side. As a consequence of this, 
though the royal authority was restored throughout the empire, the 
empire itself lost its character. It was no longer a military empire 
of which the Raya was absolute master. Instead it became a conglo¬ 
meration of semi-independent principalities of which he was the 
head. The changed character of the empire brought in its train 
an important innovation in the administration. To keep the araara- 
ndyakas under control, Tirumala divided the empire into three sub¬ 
divisions, roughly corresponding to the three main linguistic areas 


496 


VIJAYANAGARA 


of which it was composed, and entrusted the government of each of 
them to one of his three sons. ISrirahga, the eldest, was placed in 
charge of all the Telugu districts with Penugonda as his headquarters. 
Rama, the second, was to rule the Karnataka from Srirangapattana; 
and Venkatapati, the youngest who resided in Chandragiri, was to 
look after the affairs of the entire Tamil country. 

Tirumala successfully overcame the obstacles that beset his 
path: he brought back the rebellious amaranayakas to subjection, 
and arrested the forces of disintegration which were fast under¬ 
mining the foundation of the empire. Having accomplished the 
task of rejuvenating the empire he assumed the title of ‘the reviver 
of the decadent Karnataka empire’ and formally crowned himself 
in 1570 A.D. as the emperor at Penugonda. It is said on the autho¬ 
rity of certain foreign travellers, that Tirumala, or at his instance 
one of his sons, specially Venkatapati, assassinated the emperor 
Sadashiva before the coronation. This is not probably true. In 
the first place Sadashiva was quite harmless, and he gave no trouble 
to Tirumala in governing the empire. Secondly, there is ample 
epigraphic evidence to show that Sadashiva did not fall a victim 
to the assassin’s knife before Tirumala’s coronation, but was alive 
until A.D. 1576, long after the death of the latter and the accession 
of his son, ISrirahga I. 

Tirumala did not rule long—probably for not more than a year 
—and abdicated in favour of his son Sriranga. He spent the remaining 
days of his life in retirement, studying philosophy and religion. To 
him belongs the credit of giving the lease of life to the framework 
of the empire of Vijayanagara for a century more. 

The reign of Sriranga (1572-1585) was full of troubles caused by 
the invasions of the Sultans of Bijapur and Golconda who were 
helped by the treacherous nobles of Vijayanagara, and he lost terri¬ 
tories both in the coastal Andhra and Northern Karnataka. The 
Bijapur army was, however, defeated. There is a tradition that 
iSrirahga fell a prisoner into the hands of the Bijapur army, but 
this rests on very doubtful authority. The Muslims seized many 
forts including Udayagiri in the Nellore District and Kondavidu. 

The next king, Venkata II (1586-1614), not only re-conquered 
from the Muslims most of the territories lost by his predecessor, but 
also crushed the nobles and the Palayagdrs who attempted to carve 
out independent kingdoms for themselves. 

The disputed succession after the death of Venkata II led to 
a civil war which lasted for four years and ended with the accession 
of Ramadevaraya (1618-1630)* His reign was full of rebellions, in 

497 

M.E,—32 



THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


which the Nayaks of Madura, Gingee and Tanjore, who had played 
a prominent role in the civil war, also figured prominently. The 
Sultan of Bijapur took advantage of this to seize Kurnool. 

The reign of the next king, Venkata III (1630-1641), also wit¬ 
nessed another civil war lasting for four or five years during which 
many petty chieftains, who were practically independent, fought 
among themselves, and some of them, even including the king, 
sought for the help of the Muslim Sultans of the Deccan. As a re¬ 
sult the Sultan of Bijapur conquered the Kannada districts and the 
Sultan of Golconda invaded the east coast. Venkata III opposed 
him but was defeated and died shortly after. 

His nephew, Sriranga III, who had joined the Sultan of Bijapur 
against him, now proclaimed himself Emperor and ruled for seven 
years (1642-1649). He settled matters with the Sultan of Bijapur 
and with his help recovered the fort of Udayagiri which was seized 
by the forces of Golconda. It is worthy of note that the Nayaks or 
Chiefs, though still paying nominal allegiance to the ‘Emperor’ of 
Vijayanagara, not only rendered no help to him in driving away the 
Muslim invader and caused difficulty to him by breaking into re¬ 
volts, but even invited the Sultan of Golconda to invade* Vijaya¬ 
nagara territory promising to attack their ‘Emperor’ from behind. 
Accordingly the forces of Golconda invaded Vijayanagara. Sriranga 
quickly despatched an ambassador,to Gingee to win over the Nayak; 
and the latter consented to delay the despatch of his forces, pending 
the arrival of instructions from his allies, the Nayaks of Madura 
and Tanjore. Taking advantage of the respite Sriranga marched at 
the head of his troops and in a battle fought on the bank of Vengallu, 
he inflicted a crushing defeat on the Golconda army, and chased 
them as far as Kandukur in the north of the Nellore district. 
Srlranga’s triumph was, however, shortlived, for the Sultan of Gol¬ 
conda obtained help from Bijapur, and unable to resist the advance 
of the combined armies of the two Muslim rulers, he abandoned 
Kandukur and retired to the interior of his dominions. The armies 
of Golconda and Bijapur made their appearance on the Vijayanagara 
frontier; the former under Mir Jumla overran the eastern parts of 
the Kurnool district, and the latter under Khan-i-Khanan reduced 
Nandyal, Sirivolla, Kanigiri and other forts farther west. At this 
stage the Sultan of Golconda suspended the war, probably due to an 
agreement with Sriranga III. 

The situation in the South became serious. The Nayaks of 
Madura, Tanjore and Gingee joined together and set up the standard 
of rebellion. Sriranga withdrew his forces from the north, and pro¬ 
ceeded to the south burning and plundering the country until he 


498 


VIJAYANAGARA 


reached Chetipattu in South Arcot district, where he lay encamped 
awaiting the arrival of the rebels. Though the Nayaks gathered to¬ 
gether a large army, they were not confident of victory. They, there¬ 
fore, sought help from the Sultans of Bijapur and Golconda promis¬ 
ing them to pay a large sum of money. 

The Sultans, in fact, needed no invitation. The Mughul em¬ 
peror, Shah Jahan, commanded them to conquer and partition the 
empire of Karnataka between themselves. In obedience to his com¬ 
mand, they sent their respective armies to conquer and annex the 
dominions of the Raya of Vijayanagara. Mustafa Khan, who com¬ 
manded the Bijapur army, marched through Malnad and arrived at 
Sivaganga in the Bangalore district, where the ambassadors of the 
Nayaks of Madura, Tanjore and Gingee met him and requested him 
for help. Mustafa Khan complied with their request, and marched 
on Vellore, directing Khan-i-Khanan who was at Kurnool to do the 
same. ISriranga knew that the chances of his success lay in prompt 
action. He decided to strike at once before the Nayaks could join 
the Bijapur general. He sent an ambassador to Mustafa Khan to 
put him off the scent by carrying on negotiations of peace. He hast¬ 
ened with all his forces to the south, inflicted a crushing defeat 
on the Nayak of Gingee and compelled him to submit. Next he 
attacked the Nayaks of Tanjore and Madura and would have van¬ 
quished them also, but for Mustafa Khan, who having obtained in¬ 
formation of his activities marched on Vellore. ISriranga was there¬ 
fore obliged to relinquish the operations, and return with all speed 
to protect his capital. 

While Mustafa Khan and Khan-i-Khanan were marching on 
Vellore, Mir Jumla, at the instance of the Sultan of Golconda, pro¬ 
ceeded along the east coast, conquered Vinuconda, and laid siege to 
the fort of Udayagiri. Though ISriranga sent reinforcements to streng¬ 
then the garrison, the commander of the fort turned a traitor and 
surrendered the fort to the Muslims in March, 1645. Mir Jumla next 
turned west, and having invaded the territories of the Matli chiefs 
of Chittiveli captured many important forts belonging to them. Un¬ 
able to offer effective resistance, the Matlis submitted and acknow¬ 
ledged the supremacy of Golconda. 

iSriranga was utterly helpless- He was surrounded by enemies 
on all sides. He made in vain an appeal to people to protect their 
religion, temples and the Brahmins; but the Nayaks of Madura, 
Tanjore and Gingee made up their minds to get rid of Sriranga once 
for all, offered heavy bribes to the Bijapur generals, and persuaded 
them to conquer Penugonda and Kolar which were still under his 
control. 


499 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


While Mustafa Khan and Khan-i-Khianan were busy in the 
western Telugu country, the Nayaks marched on Vellore. Though 
Srirahga sent an army into the southern districts to distract their 
attention, it produced no fruitful results; but in an engagement 
which took place in December, 1645, between him and the Nayak 
army, iSrirahga suffered a defeat and crept into the fort. He then 
made an attempt to come to an understanding with the Nayaks. 

The combined attack of the Muslim powers on the empire of 
Vijayanagara seems to have at last awakened the fear of common 
danger in the minds of the Nayaks; for with the exception of the 
treacherous Tirumal Nayak of Madura, they joined Srirahga. At 
the head of a large army consisting of 10,000 horse, and 1,40,000 
foot soldiers he advanced against Mustafa Khan. A battle was 
fought in which, though victorious, he could gain no advantage 
owing to the desertion of the Nayaks of Kangudi and Mysore. 

ISrirahga retreated to his capital, and Mustafa Khan, having 
first reduced the territories of Jayadeva Rao to subjection, followed 
him there. The Nayaks became friendly to Srirahga and promised 
to send him men and money to defend his capital; but before help 
could reach him, Mustafa Khan arrived in the neighbourhood, and 
he was obliged, unprepared as he was, to give him battle. In a 
fierce engagement which took place near Vellore on 4 April, 1646, 
he suffered defeat, and crept into the fort, to which Mustafa Khan 
laid siege soon after. The Nayaks, who were jealous of one ano¬ 
ther, could not arrive at a\ny decision to help their king. In the 
meanwhile Mir Jumla, having completed the conquest of Chittiveli, 
moved towards the east, captured Ponneri, Poonamalli, Kanchipuram 
and Chingleput one after another in quick succession and was en¬ 
camped in the neighbourhood of Vellore. The Nayaks were divided 
among themselves; the Nayaks of Tanjore and Gingee were weak, 
and it was not possible for them to oppose the Golcomda army; but 
the Nayaks of Mysore and Madura united their forces and attempted 
to ward off the danger. They suffered, however, a severe defeat at 
the hands of Mir Jumla, who then marched on Gingee and laid siege 
to the fort. 

Mir Jumla’s victory over Madura a|nd Mysore and his invest¬ 
ment of Gingee roused the jealousy of Bijapur; and Mustafa and 
Khan-i-Khanan hastened to the neighbourhood with their forces with 
the object of preventing him from capturing the fort. On the ap¬ 
proach of Bijapur generals, Mir Jumla entered into an agreement 
with them and retired into the Qutb Shahi territories leaving them 
free to prosecute their designs. After Mir Jumla’s departure, the 
Bijapur armies laid siege to Gingee and captured it. With the fall 


500 


VIJAYANAGARA 


of the fort, the Nayak kingdom of Gingee came to an end, and the 
territories which belonged to it passed into the hands of the Sultan 
of Bijapur. The Nayak of Tanjore was frightened, atfid, without 
striking a blow, submitted to the Sultan early in 1649. 1 2 3 4 

Sriranga was now a king without a kingdom, and a refugee with¬ 
out a place where he could take shelter. He therefore fled to 
Mysore which still retained a measure of its independence. The 
flight of Srirahga was the signal for the systematic subjugation of 
small principalities which had not yet come within the fold of the 
Muslim States, and the Vijayanagara empire, which was founded 
three centuries ago, came Anally to an end. 

1. There is wide divergence of views on almost every aspect of this battle, except 
its date and result. The account given here is materially different from that 
given above, in Chapter XIV (pp. 424-25). The Editor has thought it better to 
present both views to the reader. 

2. Regarding the name and location of these two villages, cf. p. 425. Saletore 
mentions the names as Rakshasa-Tangadi (Social and Political Life in the 
Vijayanagara Empire, Vol. I, pp. 22-3). The name of the second village is 
also written as Tangadi (Editor). 

3. This is self-contradictory. As the author says, the two villages were on the 
northern bank of the river, while he admits that the battle took place on the 
southern bank of the Krishna, which is generally accepted. (Editor). 

4. Frequent references in this chapter to the wars and alliances between Vijaya¬ 
nagara and the Muslim States in the Deccan should be read along with Chapter 
XIV which also refers to them. 


501 



CHAPTER XVI 


EUROPEAN SETTLEMENTS 

I. PORTUGUESE ENTERPRISE AND DOMINANCE 

IN THE INDIAN OCEAN 

By about 1500 A.D. Portuguese competition with the Moors for 
the control of trade in the Indian Ocean became irresistible. On 
account of the geographical position of their kingdom, the Portu¬ 
guese had become the natural guardians of Christendom against the 
Moors of Africa. Impelled by religious fervour and by crusading 
zeal, the Portuguese brought all their latent energies to serve the 
cause of commerce and colonisation. Prince Henry, the Navigator, 
(1394-1460) promoted maritime exploration, and visualised the 
founding of a maritime Empire. He fitted out several expeditions 
that sailed down the west coast of Africa. Within twenty years 
of his death the Portuguese had proceeded beyond the delta of the 
Niger. The then king of Portugal resolved to establish a Christian 
Empire in West Africa and to found a fortress on the Ivory Coast. 
Diego Cao voyaged southwards from the mouth of the Congo to 
the modern Walvis Bay (1487). Bartholomew Dias, who followed 
him, prepared the way for Vasco da Gama. He rounded the southern¬ 
most point of Africa and indeed reached Mossel Bay. He gave the 
name of the Cape of Tempests to the Table Mountain and its head¬ 
lands and promontories. His voyage is one of the main landmarks 
of geographical exploration and removed all doubt as to the possi¬ 
bility of reaching India by sea. 

Meanwhile, the Portuguese King sent a Jew, by way of Cairo, 
to the Red Sea in order to explore the way to> the land of the legen¬ 
dary Christian King, Prester John of Ethiopia, as well as the way to 
India. This Jew came to the Malabar Coast and eventually reached 
Abyssinia. He wrote that the ships, which sailed down the coast 
of Guinea, might be sure of reaching the termination of the con¬ 
tinent, by persisting in a course to the south; and that when they 
should arrive in the Eastern Ocean, their best direction must be 
to inquire for Sofala and the Island of the Moon. 

Vasco da Gama started from Portugal in the summer of 1497; 
and after finally doubling the Cape of Good Hope, on Christmas 
Day, he came alongside of a land to which he gave the name of 


502 


EUROPEAN SETTLEMENTS 


Natal in remembrance of the birth of Christ. He then passed Sofala 
and finally reached Mozambique in March, 1498. All along the 
African Coast, between Sofala and Zanzibar, Muhammadan colo¬ 
nists had founded settlements and controlled the trade in ivory and 
gold. At Mombasa he secured the services of a Gujarati pilot, sail¬ 
ed straight north-east across the Arabian sea and finally reached the 
coast of Calicut on 21 May, 1498. He did not stay long on the 
Indian coast and embarked on his return voyage in August, 1498. 1 

The Portuguese landing in India “was fortunate both as to place 
and time.” The Malabar Coast was then divided between petty 
chiefs who were too weak and torn by internecine strife to resist the 
Portuguese. It was a halfway house between Ceylon, Malacca and 
the Spice Islands on the one hand, and the Persian Gulf, the Red 
Sea and the ports of East Africa on the other. The Empire of Vijaya- 
nagara controlled the towns of Bhatkal and Honavar on the coast, 
but did not interfere in the affairs of the Rajas of the coast. The 
Portuguese quickly perceived that their true interest lay in peace¬ 
ful commerce and friendship with Vijayanagara. The Bahmani 
Empire was torn by internal factions and steadily disintegrating. 
One of its offshoots, the kingdom of Bijapur, ruled over the coastal 
country of Goa, but lacked an efficient navy. The Portuguese 
allied themselves against Bijapur with powerful pirate chiefs on 
the coast, like Timoja, and with the Hindu Rajas of Honavar, Banki- 
pur and Bhatkal, who were all feudatories of Vijayanagara. As the 
Mughul Empire had not yet risen, there was no power, either in 
the north or in the south of India, to effectively bar the establish¬ 
ment of the Portuguese dominion on the coast. 

Calicut under the Zamorins enjoyed then a high degree of pros¬ 
perity. The Zamorin was kind to all classes of merchants who 
came to his kingdom, tolerated all creeds and allowed perfect free¬ 
dom to all in mercantile affairs. Cochin was the best of all the 
ports in the Malabar Coast, as it was connected by means of lagoons, 
backwaters and creeks with all the pepper-producing districts of the 
neighbourhood. Its ruler was subordinate to the Zamorin and jea¬ 
lous of him. Other important ports of the coast were Quilon which 
carried on trade with China, Arabia and other countries, Cranga- 
nore, and Cannanore which, though nominally under the Zamorin, 
were practically independent. 

Vasco da Gama had, even during his first voyage, excited the 
jealousy of the Arab merchants of the East African ports. It 
quickly spread to the Arab and Moplah traders of the Malabar 
Coast. At Calicut he encountered violent and open opposition from 


503 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


the Mussalman merchants and only the armed guards of the Zamo- 
rin protected the Portuguese from their fury. A second expedition, 
under Alvarez Cabral, reached Calicut in 1500, seized an Arab 
vessel lying in its harbour and sent it as a present to the Zamorin. 
The Arabs stormed the Portuguese factory and put all its occupants 
to the sword, while Cabral retaliated by bombarding Calicut and 
setting fire to its wooden houses. He then went away to Cochin 
and Cannanore whose friendship he had secured. 

Cabral was now convinced that, for his own safety, he must 
force Calicut into submission and root out the Arab trade of that 
place. A fresh expedition under Vasco da Gama, which started in 
1502, threatened the rulers of Mozambique and Kilwa on the African 
coast into submission, destroyed a pilgrim ship to Mecca, and de¬ 
manded from the Zamorin the banishment of every Muhammadan 
resident from Calicut. He strengthened the factories at Cochin and 
Cannanore and left a squadron to patrol the Malabar Coast and to 
destroy all Arab vessels coming to it from Red Sea. He put for¬ 
ward a definite claim to dominion over the Indian coast and the 
Arabian sea. On his departure the Arab merchants and the Zamorin 
attacked the Raja of Cochin who bravely held out until relieved by 
the arrival of the next Portuguese fleet in 1503. 

Their artillery gave the Portuguese a great advantage in sea 
warfare. Even on land the Portuguese proved themselves to be the 
better fighters. Their reputation was greatly raised by Duarte 
Pacheco’s gallant defence of Cochin against the whole army of 
Zamorin. The next Portuguese expedition under Lopo Soares des¬ 
troyed all the ports in which Arab influence prevailed, and prevented 
any ships coming to or leaving Cochin except their own. Soares 
burnt Cranganore and laid a good part of Calicut in ruins. 

The Portuguese power still lacked organisation and order and 
their isolated factories were in danger if the seasonal winds should 
prevent navigation and if their squadrons in the Indian Ocean should 
disappear. Their power in India had passed beyond the stage when 
it could be managed by an annual fleet and by a few isolated fac¬ 
tories. Francisco de Almeida was appointed the first Viceroy of the 
Portuguese in the East (1505) with full power to wage war, con¬ 
clude treaties and regulate commerce. He aimed at securing the 
control of the East African Coast, to subdue all the Malabar ports at 
which the Arabs still survived, to strengthen the Portuguese fac¬ 
tories, to divert the whole export trade of India and East Africa 
to the Cape route and to secure for Portugal a monopoly over the 
trade of the Indian Ocean. But he knew that he would have to 


504 


EUROPEAN SETTLEMENTS 


encounter the opposition of the powerful navies of Turkey and 
Egypt which championed the cause of the Arabs. He easily sub¬ 
jugated the Muhammadan ports of East Africa, and then proceeded 
to the subjugation of the yet hostile Malabar ports. He befriended 
Vijayanagara, on the advice of the Timoja, built a fort at Canna- 
nore, and settled a disputed succession at Cochin which was made 
the seat of his government. He sent his son to explore Ceylon and 
to close the sea-route through the Maldives which was now taken 
by the Arabs in order to avoid going near the Malabar Coast. The 
Zamorin was crippled in 1506 and the ruler of Ceylon agreed to 
pay a tribute of cinnamon and elephants. 

The third part of Almeida’s task was to break the naval powers 
of Egypt which was supreme in the Red Sea, and of Turkey which 
had access to the Persian Gulf at Basra. Meanwhile a new expedi¬ 
tion from Portugal under Affonso de Albuquerque strengthened the 
Portuguese communications on the East African Coast, and captured 
Socotra, but failed to reduce Ormuz at the mouth of the Persian Gulf. 
After an initial success, the combined fleets of the Egyptians, the 
Zamorin and the King of Gujarat were worsted after a long and 
stubborn struggle off Diu (spring of 1509). This victory “secured 
to Christendom the naval supremacy in Asia and turned the Indian 
Ocean for the next century into a Portuguese sea.” 

Albuquerque, the next Governor, built up a great territorial 
power in India. He was convinced that it was beneath the dignity 
of Portugal to have factories which existed only by the sufferance 
of native rulers. His struggle was against the combined forces of 
the Muhammadan world. His efforts were directed towards the 
conquest of Goa, Malacca, Aden, and Ormuz which he considered 
essential for his purpose. 

The plan of Albuquerque formed strategically a complete whole 
and consisted of three series of operations: (1) the control of the 
Persian Gulf and the Red Sea; (2) the establishment of the head¬ 
quarters of the Portuguese power at a central port on the west 
coast of India; (3) the destruction of Mussalman trade in the Malay 
Peninsula and the Far East. 

The conquest of Goa was Albuquerque’s first achievement 
(February, 1610). 2 But as the city was quickly recaptured by the 
‘Adil Shah, he had to undertake a second expedition; he recaptured 
the place and fortified it against any surprise attack. Goa stood 
midway between the ports of Malabar and those of Gujarat and 
dominated the entire coast from the Gulf of Cambay to Cape Como¬ 
rin. The conquest of Goa put “the seal on Portuguese naval supre- 


505 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


macy along the south-west coast,” and involved territorial rule in 
India. 

The conquest of Malacca was the next great achievement of 
Albuquerque. It was situated favourably on the Malaya shore, in 
the middle point of the Straits between Sumatra and the main¬ 
land; and its inhabitants included Muhammadan Malayas and large 
bodies of foreign merchants,—Chinese, Javanese, Gujaratis, Bengalis, 
Burmese from Pegu and Chittagong, Ceylonese cinnamon-dealers 
and even Japanese. Albuquerque captured the place after several 
days of bombardment and street fighting. He then opened direct 
relations with the kingdom of Siam and despatched ships to ex¬ 
plore the Moluccas and other Spice Islands. 

In 1512 he had to relieve Goa from a fresh siege to which it 
was subjected by Bijapur. 

His next attempt was to extend Portuguese supremacy to the 
mouths of the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf. Aden, and not Soco¬ 
tra, was the real gate of the Red Sea. Albuquerque’s first attack 
on it was a failure, as also his endeavour to reach the port of Jiddah. 
He captured Ormuz, and laid the foundation of a strong fort at 
the island whose markets abounded in furs from Russia, silks from 
Baghdad and Central Asia, and horses from Arabia, for which there 
was always a great demand in India. 

Albuquerque was greatly worn out by these exertions and his 
heart was broken when he learnt, as he came within the sight of 
Goa, that he had been superseded by Lopo Soares, his bitter oppo¬ 
nent, while the King had no word of thanks to offer him. 

Albuquerque thus enlarged and fulfilled the aims of Almeida. 
He gave the Portuguese power a territorial base in India, while 
Malacca, Ormuz and the uncaptured Aden were to serve as strate¬ 
gic points for Portuguese shipping. In view of the paucity of man¬ 
power in Portugal, Albuquerque encouraged the lower classes of 
the Portuguese settlers to marry Indian women. He maintained 
friendly relations with Vijayanagara and even tried to secure the 
goodwill of Bijapur. He created regular bodies of trained troops 
from among Indians. 

Albuquerque’s immediate successor failed to capture Aden, but 
he constructed a fortress near Colombo. Nuno da Cunha, Viceroy 
(1529-38), captured Mombasa on the African coast, established 
settlements at San Thome near Madras and at Hooghly in Bengal, 
and thus developed commerce on the eastern coast. In 1535 he got 
possession of Diu in Kathiawar, and its gallant defence both by sea 


506 


EUROPEAN SETTLEMENTS 


and land against the Turkish Admiral and the Sultan of Gujarat in 
1538 was a remarkable achievement. 

Joa de Castro, Viceroy (1545-48), decisively defeated the Bija- 
pur forces which advanced against Goa. His successors systema¬ 
tised commerce, but made no further conquests. 

In 1571 the Asiatic Empire of Portugal was divided into three 
independent commands, viz., a Governorship at Mozambique con¬ 
trolling the settlements on the African coast; (2) a Viceroyalty at 
Goa in charge of the Indian and Persian territories; and (3) a 
Governorship at Malacca to control the trade of Java and the Spice 
Archipelago. 

The Portuguese dominion was based upon command of the sea 
and upon possession of forts at strategic points along the coast. 
They were bitterly jealous of all rivals at sea. Gujarat and Calicut 
were forced to abandon construction of fresh ships or even armed 
rowing boats. Ormuz was not to construct ships and its people 
were not to carry arms. The fortified factories of the Portuguese, 
from Quilon and Cochin on the South, to Daman and Diu on the 
north, were sufficient to coerce all their Indian rivals. 

Besides controlling the whole of the export trade to Europe, 
the Portuguese monopolised the port-to-port trade on the Malabar 
Coast and the trade from the Indian to the Persian Coast on the one 
side and Malacca on the other. All this was retained as a jealous 
monopoly of the King, though the private trade of the officials and 
their frauds were notorious. The Portuguese treatment of their 
native subjects and opponents showed “a consistent and systematic 
cruelty and barbarity lower even than the standards of a cruel age.” 
Above all, their spirit of crusading enthusiasm soon degenerated 
into an unreasoning and fanatic desire to convert all and sundry 
of their Asiatic subjects to their own faith, even at the point of 
the sword. After 1540, the Portuguese Government in India 
markedly came to be dominated by priests—Dominicans, Francis¬ 
cans and Jesuits—who displayed an intolerant bigotry and intro¬ 
duced all the horrors of the Inquisition into India. 

The Portuguese monopoly of the Indian Ocean remained un¬ 
broken till 1595, fifteen years after the fatal union of Portugal and 
Spain. Philip II of Spain neglected Portuguese dominions in India 
and involved Portugal in his costly and disastrous European wars. 
Ceylon first rebelled against the Portuguese about 1580. In 1595 
the first Dutch fleet rounded the Cape of Good Hope in defiance of 
the Portuguese. By 1602 they had deprived Portugal of the hold 


507 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


over the Straits of Sunda and of the route to the Moluccas and of 
the Spice Islands. In 1603 they blockaded Goa itself. Soon after, 
they made themselves masters of Java. They expelled the Portu¬ 
guese altogether from Ceylon in the years 1638-58. In 1641 they 
captured the great port of Malacca and in 1652 got possession of 
the Cape of Good Hope as well. 

The English were not also behind-hand. In 1611 an English 
squadron under Middleton defeated the Portuguese fleet off Bom¬ 
bay. Four years later came their great victory over the Portuguese, 
off Swally, in the Surat roads. In 1616 they entered into direct 
commercial relations with the Zamorin of Calicut. Two years later 
they began to trade' in the Persian Gulf. In 1622 they had captured 
Ormuz and established a factory at Gombroon. In 1654 the Portuguese 
had to recognise the right of the English to reside and trade in all 
their eastern possessions. 

Nor was it only from the hands of European rivals that the final 
blow to the Portuguese power came. In 1632 the Mughul Emperor, 
Shah Jahan, completely destroyed their settlement at Hooghly and 
carried away, as prisoners, more than a thousand of the Portuguese 
inhabitants. The Portuguese and half-caste pirates who had esta¬ 
blished themselves at Chittagong and raided the coasts of Bengal 
and Arakan were easily defeated by the King of Arakan. The des¬ 
cendants of those pirates, known as the Ferinqhis who infested the 
whole of the Eastern Bengal Coast, were totally swept away about 
1665, by the Mughul Viceroy of Bengal. 

The man-power of Portugal was too small to maintain a far- 
flung empire, and was further thinned by disease, ravages and the 
demoralisation brought about by the inter-marriage of the Portu¬ 
guese settlers with Africans and Indians. Their religious fanaticism 
absorbed a good portion of their energies. Even before the time of 
Albuquerque, priests, monks and friars had flocked in large number 
to Portuguese India. In 1538, Goa was made the seat of a Bishop; 
in 1557 it was raised to the dignity of an Archbishopric; and other 
Bishoprics were created at Cochin and Malacca, and for China and 
Japan. The priests displayed great devotion to duty and did much 
to spread education. They established at Goa, in 1560, the hated in¬ 
quisition which burnt or punished in other cruel way, unbelievers, 
relapsed converts and all who were dangerous to the faith in the eyes 
of the priests. They did not give freedom even to the ancient Syrian 
Christians of the Malabar Coast. In 1552, the complaint was made 
that the Portuguese towns in India were largely depopulated owing 
to the forced conversion of Hindus and Muhammadans and that 


508 


EUROPEAN SETTLEMENTS 


every ‘gentile’ was driven to church with sticks and blows every 
fortnight. The Portuguese zeal for conversion was redoubled after 
their union with Spain. The Synod of Diamper (Udayampura) in 
1599 tried to suppress completely the Syrian Christianity of Malabar. 
The chief results of this intolerant policy were a practical denial 
of justice to all non-Christians and the depopulation of Goa and 
other Portuguese towns. 

The Portuguese Indian Church was organised under the guid¬ 
ance of St. Francis Xavier, the Apostle of the Indies, who came to 
Goa with the Jesuits in 1542. 23 To St. Xavier is due the conversion 
of the Paravars, the fishermen tribe who lived on the Coromandel 
Coast between Cape Comorin and Adam’s Bridge, as well as the 
Mukkuvas, the fishermen of the Malabar coast. St. Xavier also tra¬ 
velled to Malacca and Japan for this purpose. Before his death in 
1552, the great Apostle of the Indies is said to have converted some 
seven hundred thousand men, who belonged mainly to the lowest 
classes of the population. He was a great churchman, and a saint 
who was able to win the hearts of all. 

There was no continuity in Portuguese government; offices were 
sold to the highest bidders; there was much illicit private trade and 
bribery; lack of discipline and irregular pay turned soldiers and sailors 
into dacoits and thieves. The later history of the Portuguese in 
India is a continuous record of poverty and misery. They lost Bas- 
sein in 1739 to the Marathias. The old Goa Pourado (Golden Goa) 
whose glories were sung by Camoens, the famous Portuguese poet, 
in his epic poem, Os Lusiadas, describing the brilliant achievements 
of his nation in Europe and Asia, is now a city of broken houses and 
ruined palaces. New Goa or Panjim which was the seat of the later 
Portuguese Viceroys was founded in the eighteenth century. 

Portugal was the first nation to give to Europe a knowledge of 
the legendary countries of the East. The Portuguese discovery of 
the East produced a number of brilliant writers, of whom Camoens 
was the greatest. His epic Os Lusiadas is a poetic historical record 
of the memorable voyage of Vasco da Gama; but the real hero is the 
spirit of the nation. More important than the poets, who sang of 
the deeds of the Portuguese in the east, are the histories and works 
of (1) Duarte Barbosa (d. 1521), (2) Gaspar Correa (1495-1561), 
(3) Joao de Barros (1496-1570), (4) Diogo do Couto (1542-1616), 

(5) the Commentaries of Bras de Albuquerque, the natural son of 
the great Governor, who supplemented the Letters of his father, 

(6) Dom Joao de Castro (1500-1548), (7) Garcia Da Orta (d. 1570) 
and several Jesuit writers. The effect of the maritime exploits of 
the Portuguese is fully reflected in their literature; and the decay 


509 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


of their political power and naval strength was also marked by 
literary decay. 

II. THE DUTCH AND THE ENGLISH 
1. Early Enterprises 

As mentioned above, The Union of Portugal and Spain’ under 
Philip II in 1580 hastened the downfall of the maritime and com¬ 
mercial supremacy of the Portuguese in the East. The Protestant 
powers of England and Holland began to prey on Portuguese com¬ 
merce. In 1582 the first English voyage round the Cape of Good 
Hope was attempted. Already in 1580 had the Spanish monopoly 
of the Magellan route been successfully challenged by Sir Francis 
Drake. In 1591 Lancaster rounded the Cape of Good Hope and 
voyaged to Cape Comorin and the Malay Peninsula. The Dutch ex¬ 
pedition under Houtman to Sumatra and the Spice Archipelago was 
a counterpart of Lancaster’s voyage. The volume of Portuguese 
trade with India diminished markedly after 1580. In 1596 Spain 
became bankrupt and Portugal had to suffer the consequence. 3 

In 1599 the English declared that they had a perfect and free 
right to trade in all places where the Portuguese and the Spaniards 
had not established any fort, settlement or factory. Captain Lan¬ 
caster led the first voyage of the English East India Company in 
December, 1599, and arrived at Achin (in Sumatra) in 1602. The 
second expedition of the English Company under Sir Henry Mid¬ 
dleton traded with Bantam and Amboyna (one of the richest of the 
Spice Islands to the south of the Moluccas). The next expedition 
brought home a rich cargo of pepper from Bantam and of cloves from 
Amboyna. 

As many as fifteen voyages had been fitted out by Holland be¬ 
tween 1595 and 1601. The Dutch avoided small and separate voy¬ 
ages by individual traders. In 1602 they combined together the 
several Indian companies formed within their State into the Dutch 
United East India Company, with an exclusive right to trade with 
India and the East Indies for twenty-one years. This Company was 
endowed with ample powers of attack and conquest; it was a national 
undertaking and the embodiment of the newly-achieved indepen¬ 
dence and sense of unity of the Dutch nation. 4 

The Dutch also attempted to secure control of the Straits of 
Sunda between Sumatra and Java. In 1609 they made the Raja of 
Bantam their dependent ally, and three years later, secured Jakarta 
in Java, in spite of English opposition, and seven years later they 

510 


EUROPEAN SETTLEMENTS 


built on its site the famous city of Batavia. They seized the best 
islands of the Archipelago either by conquest from the Portuguese 
or by treaties with the native chiefs. Thus, Ternate in the Moluccas 
became a Dutch ally in 1607. Amboyna, the richest island in the 
Southern Moluccas, was seized in 1618. They were able to mono¬ 
polise the nutmeg and clove islands of the Archipelago as against 
their new rivals, the English. 

The English asserted their counter claims and argued that long 
before the Dutch had occupied the islands, Drake had visited them. 
They vigorously denied that the small coast settlements and factories 
of the Dutch amounted to an effective occupation of a great Archi¬ 
pelago. The first three voyages of the English Company had traded 
with Bantam and the Spice islands. 

2. English East India Company 

In 1599 an influential body of London merchants formed a plan 
for the formation of a Company to monopolise the eastern trade. In 
1593 the Levant Company had got an extended charter permitting 
them to trade overland with India. This endeavour, however, com¬ 
pletely failed. Several of the promoters of the East India Company 
had been servants of the Levant Company. After some demur con¬ 
sequent on pending negotiations with Spain then, Queen Elizabeth 
incorporated these merchants into a Company and gave them for 
fifteen years the right of trading with India and all the countries 
beyond the Cape of Good Hope and Magellan except with those 
territories in the actual occupation of the Spanish and Portuguese. 5 

The English beginnings in India were not very promising, on 
account of Portuguese rivalry. Captain William Hawkins journeyed 
from Surat to the Mughul Court (1608), but failed to get permission 
to erect a factory at Surat. In 1611 Captain Middleton landed at 
Swally near Surat in spite of Portuguese opposition, and got permis¬ 
sion from the Mughul governor to trade at the place. The victory 
of Captain Best in the Surat roadstead broke the tradition of Portu¬ 
guese naval supremacy and an English factory was permanently esta¬ 
blished at Surat. 6 From this place the English extended their trading 
operations inland and soon built subordinate factories at Ahmadabad, 
Burhanpur, Ajmer and Agra. Sir Thomas Roe, the royal ambassa¬ 
dor from King James I to the Mughul Emperor, succeeded in getting 
two farmdns by 1618, ‘one of the King and the other of the Prince 
(Khurram) confirming our trade and continuance’ as well as ex¬ 
emption from inland tolls. 


511 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


The Dutch Factory at Surat was comparatively powerless and 
did not have much influence with the Mughul authorities. But they 
established themselves in greater strength on the east coast. In 
1610 they established a fortified settlement at Pulicat (to the north 
of! Madras) whose backwater, the Pulicat Lake, afforded a safe 
shelter for the ships of those days, and from which they contrived to 
drive away the English (1623). Both the English and the Dutch 
competed for the trade of Masulipatam which was the chief sea-port 
of the great inland kingdom of Golconda and largely traded in dia¬ 
monds, rubies, and textiles. In 1614 and again in 1624 the English 
had serious quarrels with the Dutch at this port. In 1628 they 
abandoned Masulipatam in despair and attempted to settle at Arma- 
gaon (Arumugam) further south. Two years afterwards, they re¬ 
vived their factory at Masulipatam. Chinsura on the Hooghly river, 
then the most inland place in the Gangetic delta accessible to ships, 
was also settled by the Dutch. 

The history of the English settlements in Western India in the 
seventeenth century may be divided into three periods: the first com¬ 
mences with the establishment of an English factory at Surat (1612); 
the second begins with the formation of an English settlement at 
Bombay (1665); and the third commences from 1687 when Bombay 
superseded Surat and became the headquarters of the English on 
the West coast. 

Thomas Stephens, a Jesuit, was the first Englishman to visit 
Western India. He reached Goa in 1579 and resided there for many 
years. In 1583 Ralph Fitch and a few other Englishmen reached 
India by way of the Persian Gulf. John Mildenhall, a London mer¬ 
chant, reached Agra in 1603 after a tedious overland journey and 
attempted to obtain from Akbar a farman for trade in Gujarat. Two 
years after Mildenhall had left Agra, Captain Hawkins landed at 
Surat. After the victory of Best Thomas Aldworth, a merchant of 
energy and great determination who stayed on at Surat, the English 
secured permission for the establishment of factories at Surat and 
three other places in the Gulf of Cambay. 

After the victory of Captain Downton, came Sir Thomas Roe 
whose embassy is to be regarded as a distinct triumph for the English. 
By 1616 the English had contrived to establish four factories at 
Ahmadabad, Burhanpur, Agra and Surat. 7 They were looked up to 
by the Mughuls to keep open the path of pilgrimage to the holy 
cities of Islam. 

The chain of events that led to the establishment of the English 
in Bombay is interesting. Its situation enabled it to control the 


512 


EUROPEAN SETTLEMENTS 

whole coastal trade in the West and to threaten the Portuguese and 
the Dutch of the neighbourhood. 8 It was thus only as the satisfac¬ 
tion of a long-expressed wish that in 1661 the Portuguese gave Bom¬ 
bay as part of the dowry of their princess, Catherine of Braganza, 
on her marriage with Charles II. The importance of Bombay was 
little understood by the English at the time; and even the Portuguese 
were not able to appreciate this till after its cession to the English. 
In September, 1662, an English fleet of five ships arrived in Bombay 
in order to take over the place. But the Portuguese refused to 
give it up and denied that the neighbouring island of Salsette was 
included in the treaty of cession. The fleet left a body of soldiers 
under General Shipman, a large number of whom perished for lack 
of sufficient food and protection in the unhappy neighbourhood. A 
long and bitter correspondence ensued between the English and the 
Portuguese monarchs. The Portuguese Viceroy of Goa suggested to 
his king that he might purchase the island from the English after 
it should be formally handed over to them, according to agreement. 9 

Humphrey Cooke who commanded the remnants of the first 
English expedition to Bombay accepted the cession of merely the 
port and harbour which alone were offered by the Portuguese who 
were entrenched in the neighbouring island of Salsette and levied 
fines and imposts on English boats and traders. Sir Gervase Lucas, 
a staunch Royalist, was appointed to succeed Cooke in 1666; but he 
was not more successful. He quarrelled with the Company’s 
factors at Surat and died within a few months after he had landed 
at Bombay. His lieutenant, Captain Gray, who succeeded him, was 
proud, wasteful and extravagant, while his power was disputed. 

Meanwhile the Company’s factory at Surat was faring equally 
badly. Sir George Oxenden, Governor of Surat (1662-68), had to 
encounter French and Dutch rivalry; he gallantly defended the 
factory and the property of many Indian merchants when Shivaji 
plundered the city in 1664. But Oxenden was jealous of the royal 
governors of Bombay and quarrelled with them, while the Mughuls 
held him responsible for the acts of the latter. 

King Charles made up his mind to get rid of Bombay which 
was coveted by the Company though it pretended that its possession 
would only entail on it much difficulty and expense. A royal 
charter was prepared by which the island was transferred to the 
Company in return for an annual rent of £ 10, and Oxenden took 
possession of the island, in September 1668, in the name of the 
Company. 10 

513 

M.E.—33 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Gerald Aungier was the next President of Surat and Governor 
of Bombay (1669-77). He was the true founder of Bombay’s great¬ 
ness. He fortified the port, constructed a dock, established a court 
of justice, created a police force and a militia, and made the settle^ 
ment an asylum for merchants of every class and caste. He secured 
the lives and properties of the English during Shivajfs second sack 
of Surat. He suggested to the Directors, as early as 1671, that the 
seat of the Presidency should be removed from Surat to Bombay. 
Under him Bombay became the best naval station in the Indian 
coast and a harbour of refuge from Maratha and Malabar pirates. 11 

Under the Governorship of Rolt (1677-82), the Directors re¬ 
trenched expenditure and reduced the garrison, and the result was 
that Bombay’s very existence hung in the balance for a time. Dr. 
John Fryer who travelled for nine years in India and Persia (1672- 
81), wrote bitterly about the low condition into which the English 
prestige had fallen. 12 

In 1682, Sir John Child, brother of the famous Sir Josia Child 
who then wielded great influence among the Directors, was appoint¬ 
ed Chief of the Company at Bombay and Surat. From his time 
began the general decline of Bombay which continued till the close 
of the first quarter of the eighteenth century. 13 

After Child, there followed several weak Governors, including 
Sir John Gayer. In Gayer’s time, what was known as the New or 
English Company which had been founded in rivalry to the old 
Company, sent out one Sir Nicholas Waite to Surat as its own re¬ 
presentative, and bitter bickerings occurred between the two Gov¬ 
ernors to the great detriment of English reputation. 14 

On the Coromandel Coast the English attempted a landing at 
Pulicat, first in 1611 and again in 1614, but failed on account of 
Dutch opposition. The English first landed at Masulipatam in 1611; 
two years later, they were permitted to erect a fortified factory 
there. The eagerly sought-for diamonds, and the valuable silks, 
calicoes and salt-petre were all there ready for sale. On account of 
the rivalry of the Dutch, the English resolved, in 1628, to abandon 
their factory and never to return except under a direct grant from 
the Sultan of Golconda. In 1630 when Masulipatam was desolated 
by famine and plague, the English returned to Masulipatam and 
obtained, two years later, the long-coveted permission from the 
Sultan of Golconda, the Golden Farmdn, which opened an era of 
prosperity. 

When the English first abandoned Masulipatam in 1628 they 
took shelter at Arumugam (Armagaon) 40 miles north of Pulicat. 


514 


EUROPEAN SETTLEMENTS 


It was a poor place but important historically because it was the 
first site territorially acquired by the English in India and on which 
a fort was built. 

Francis Day, a member of the Council of Masulipatam, pitched 
upon a narrow strip of land, three miles to the north of the flourish¬ 
ing Indo-Portuguese colony of San Thome. He obtained from the 
local Naik a grant of the site and permission to build a fort and 
form a settlement thereon in return for an annual rental of £ 600. 

Without waiting for permission from England, Day began to 
build a fort, and named it Fort St. George, probably because part 
of it was finished by St. George’s Day, 1640. The attitude of the 
Directors was very discouraging. The English merchants at Surat 
and Bantam, however, realised the advantages of Madras, as a half¬ 
way house, for trade with the Archipelago. 15 

After Day’s departure in 1644, trade languished and the mer¬ 
chants remained idle and disheartened. England was then dis¬ 
tracted by the civil war and the confusion in the Carnatic was wor¬ 
sened by the Muslim aggression. The Raja of Chandragiri was in¬ 
volved in troubles on all hands. By 1647, Mir Jumla, the general of 
the Sultan of Golconda, had become the master of all the country 
round Madras and the English factors hastened to make their peace 
with him. 16 

Mir Jumla confirmed all the privileges that the English had 
obtained from the previous Hindu ruler when they gave him help 
against San Thome. The years 1646-47, when this revolution was 
being effected, were marked by a great famine in the land when a 
large number of people died of starvation. 17 As many as 3,000 died in 
Madras alone during the period from September, 1646 to January, 
1647. In 1652, Madras was raised to the rank of the Presidency, 
independent of Bantam, and Aarom Baker was its first President. 
But the Directors suddenly ordered very unwisely the reduction of 
Madras again to the status of subordinate agency (1654). It was 
not until four years later that Madras was again restored to the rank 
of a Presidency independent of Bantam and directly responsible to 
the Court of Directors, while all the factories in Bengal and on the 
Coromandel Coast were subordinated to it. 

Thenceforward, Madras stood as the type of the system of forti¬ 
fied factories, which the conflicts of the Indian powers in south¬ 
eastern India rendered indispensable for the safety of European 
trade. 


515 


TOE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


With the Restoration, Madras entered on a new period of life. 
Sir Edward Winter, President (1662-65), was given summary powers 
to punish all private traders.. He improved the sea-trade with 
Bengal and Bantam and threatened the hostile Indian powers with 
retaliation on the sea. He began a costly scheme of fortifying Madras 
which displeased the Directors and led to his recall. But he took 
advantage of the unpopularity of his successor, Foxcroft, who was 
an uncompromising old Puritan, accused him of treasonable words 
towards King Charles, and had him kept in confinement for three 
years during which he ruled as Govenor (1665-68). At last Winter 
retired and Foxcroft was restored to office which he enjoyed only 
for a year. 18 

Sir William Langhorne, Governor during 1670-78, put a bold 
front against the aggressions of the French and of the Dutch, pro¬ 
moted the prosperity of the Black Town, developed the English 
garrison and formed a body of native peons, called the Black Guards. 
Dr. Frayer, who visited the city in 1673, gives a good account of the 
life of the Europeans. 

Streynsham Master, the next Governor (1678-81), framed re¬ 
gulations for the proper administration of justice and the conduct 
of civil servants, and cleverly kept Shivaji at a distance from Madras. 
Trade became brisk, a larger investment was made, and Master may 
very well be called the Second Founder of Madras. 

Important events took place during the governorship of Elihu 
Yale (1687-92). 19 Madras got a Corporation with a Mayor and 
Aldermen. From Yale’s time, until 1746, when the French under 
La Bourdonnais captured Madras, all the Governors were merchant 
princes who had two definite objects in view, viz., the advancement 
of the Company’s trade and the accumulation of a private fortune 
for themselves. The Directors no longer grumbled nor grew angry 
at their servants’ private trade; they found that the latter could 
grow wealthy by private trading and could yet advance the Com¬ 
pany’s interests. The most famous of these merchant-governors was 
Thomas Pitt. 20 

In Bengal, in the first stage, the English Agent at Masulipatam 
sent up a few factors to establish factories at Hariharapur and at 
Balasore. The former factory fell into decay; and Balasore also 
would have been abandoned, had it not been for the strong recom¬ 
mendation of Francis Day that the factory should be retained and 
improved. Gabriel Boughton, who was in favour with Prince Shah 
Shuja, Viceroy of Bengal, got for the English permission to trade 
throughout the province free of customs and other dues. 21 The 


516 


EUROPEAN SETTLEMENTS 


factory at Hooghly, established in 1651, did not prove promising. 
In 1657, an attempt was made at improving the Chief Agency at 
Hooghly and the subordinate agencies at Balasore, Cassimbazar and 
Patna. 22 

There was, however, a set-back on account of the civil war of 
succession in the Mughul Empire and of the oppressions practised 
by the officials of Mir Jumla, the Viceroy. Under the rule of Nawab 
Shayista Khan (Viceroy from 1663) and with the help of an Imperial 
farman, and with the pirates of Arakan and Chittagong finally put 
down, the English trade increased, particularly in silk and salt¬ 
petre 23 

In 1681, the Directors appointed William Hedges, one of their 
number, to the Agency of Hooghly which was henceforth to be dis¬ 
tinct from Madras. But Hedges found trade low, the Mughul officials 
quarrelsome, and the interlopers threatening, while the Viceroy, 
Shayista Khan, was indifferent. 

Hedges was convinced that the English should seize some con¬ 
venient spot and fortify it. 24 He proposed to build a fortified settle¬ 
ment on the island of Saugor at the mouth of the Hooghly. The 
Directors suggested that Chittagong might be taken and fortified. 
In the end they resolved to make war on the Mughuls and got per¬ 
mission in 1686 to declare war against Aurangzib. Saugor was too 
much exposed to storms. Chittagong was too distant and Hooghly 
was impossible. After their expulsion from Bengal and after trying 
various sites, the English at last pitched upon Kalikata, the site of 
Calcutta, as satisfying all their objects. 

When the Afghans revolted in Bengal and ravaged the whole 
Galley of the Hooghly, the English at Calcutta as well as the Dutch 
at Chinsura asked for permission from the Viceroy to fortify their fac¬ 
tories and to raise troops, and were allowed in general terms to de¬ 
fend themselves (1697). The English began to build walls and 
bastions around their factory, and the next year they were permitted 
to rent the two neighbouring villages of Sutanuti and Govindapur. In 
1700 the Directors constituted Bengal into a separate Presidency, 
(the Presidency of Fort William) with Sir Charles Eyre as its first 
President. He was soon succeeded by John Beard, a trusted ser¬ 
vant who strengthened the fortification and increased the garrison. 
On AurangzTb’s death in 1707 the English, fearing a civil war, built 
two bastions to their fort by the river side and boldly threatened 
retaliations on Mughul officials for any injury that might be done 
to them. The Emperor, Bahadur Shah, and Murshid Qulf Khan, the 


517 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Viceroy, recognised and confirmed their privileges, and the English 
looked hopefully towards an era of peace and prosperity. 


1. It is worthwhile to emphasize the fact that “Columbus’s voyage to America 
was an integral part of the process of Atlantic exploration initiated by Prince 
Henry, the Navigator. Columbus’s knowledge of Atlantic winds and tides had 
been mostly acquired on Portuguese ships; his inference that a westerly course 
would bring him to Cipangu was to a great extent founded on data furnished 
by Portuguese pilots”. (Jayne, Vasco da Gama and his successors, 1910, 
p. 51). 

2. For unfavourable versions of the capture, cf. Firishta (Briggs’s Transl.), Vol. 
Ill, p. 34 and Rowlandson’s Tuhfat, p. 135. 

2a. For a sympathetic estimate of St. Xavier, cf. Sir J. Stephen, Essays in Eccles¬ 
iastical Biography (1849)—Founders of Jesuitism. 

3. When war was declared between England and Spain in 1584-85, the English 
met the difficulty by directly breaking into the Portuguese preserves on the 
West African coast and in the Indian Ocean. When Spain tightened her hold 
on the Straits of Gibralter and on Sicily, Sardinia and Naples, the prosperity 
of the English Levant Company, which traded mainly in the products of 
Turkey, Syria and Egypt, was menaced and the English were forced to seek 
a new route. Spain attempted to close in on the Dutch at the Straits of 
Malacca and persuaded the native princes of the Malay Peninsula to shut 
them out effectively from that region (1598-1601). In 1602, the Dutch con¬ 
centrated all their energies in the formation of a united and armed national 
trading company. Their fleet routed the Portuguese near Bantam in Java and 
got possession of the passage to the Moluccas and the Spice Islands. In 1603, 
they threatened Goa itself, and by 1619 they became masters of Java and 
Ceylon. The Cape of Good Hope also fell into their hands later. 

The exclusive possession of the Spice Islands became their great goal. 
Their first endeavour was to secure the entire control of the Straits of Malacca, 
the narrow sea between Sumatra and the Malay Peninsula. They entered 
into an alliance with the ruler of Achin (at the north-western extremity of 
Sumatra) which commanded the entrance to the Straits. They allied them¬ 
selves with the kingdom of Johore on the opposite coast and tried to capture 
Malacca from the Portuguese. By 1641, the Dutch had become complete 
masters of the Straits. 

4. The Dutch Government unified all the minor companies into one great Dutch 
United East India Company with a monopoly of the Eastern trade for 21 years. 
The Company was divided into six committees representing the six provinces 
which subscribed to the common capital. The Government nominated the 
Directors, audited the accounts, supervised the instructions to the servants 
and appointed an Executive Committee of seventeen who served as an inter¬ 
mediate body between the Government and the Company. The Company was 
empowered to make war or peace, seize foreign ships, establish colonies, con¬ 
struct forts and coin money. Even from the very beginning, the Company 
had a large working capital and willingly spent large sums on troops and 
fortresses. The Dutch Government supported the Company in all its under¬ 
takings, subsidised its expeditions and made it a semi-national concern. 

5. The number of subscribers to the Company was 217. The first Governor and 
Committee-Men (i.e., the Chairman and the managing committee) were nomi¬ 
nated in the charter and their successors were to be annually elected by the 
share-holders. The Governor and Committee-Men frequently submitted for 
confirmation all their most important acts to meetings or ‘General Courts’ of 
all the subscribers of the Company. 

At first the Company conducted their trade by means of separate voyage , 
each separate voyage being undertaken by a minor group among the subscribers 
who furnished the capital required for the voyage, shared the profits and 
wound up the whole concern themselves, the capital being returned to each 
subscriber at the end of the voyage. In 1612 a new arrangement, known a 9 
joint stock, was adopted by which for each joint stock, subscriptions were 
raised for several voyages extending over a period of years instead of for a 


518 



EUROPEAN SETTLEMENTS 


single voyage. But each group of voyages closed its affairs and wound up 
its profits in the same way as each separate voyage. 

6. Surat traded largely in the fine cotton fabrics and muslins of Upper India 
as well as in indigo, which was produced in large quantities in the neighbour¬ 
hood of Agra. Surat was then one of the chief centres of maritime trade 
from the Straits of Malacca to the Persian Gulf, and caravans started from 
it for all the inland parts of India and for the great cities of Golconda, Agra 
Delhi and Lahore. By their control of Surat and Ormuz, the English were 
able to protect the pilgrim route to Mecca from the Indian Coast from moles¬ 
tation by the Portuguese and the pirates. 

7. The English factory at Surat became very prosperous and there “caravans 
came and went to all the inland capitals of India, Golconda, Agra, Delhi, 
Lahore; and the products of Asia from the Straits of Malacca to the Persian 
Gulf were piled up on the wharves of the Tapti. Merchants flocked in such 
numbers to Surat that during the busy winter months lodgings could scarcely 
be had.” A number of able Presidents were responsible for this prosperity in 
English trade. The terrible famine that raged in Gujarat in 1631 greatly in¬ 
jured the position of the English and on one occasion they had to withdraw 
their factories from Ahmadabad and Broach and even thought of abandoning 
Surat, while a Mughul governor threw the English President into prison for 
an act of piracy committed by Courten’s ships. But in spite of this set-back 
the Surat factors did not lose heart. The factory grew with a strength of 
its own until in 1657 it was constituted the sole presidency of the English in 
India. “Surat illustrates the position which the English quickly secured in 
the economy of the Mughal Empire, as sure source of revenue, as sea-police 
for the coast, and the patrol of the ocean-path to Mecca, gradually develop¬ 
ing into negotiators on behalf of the native government”. 

8. In 1626 both the English and the Dutch advanced from Surat and seized 
Bombay. But they could not retain possession of it for long. In 1653 the 
English factors at Surat urged upon the Directors to make the island a forti¬ 
fied station and to persuade the Portuguese in return for a consideration to 
take possession of that place and of Bassein also. In the following year the 
Directors drew the attention of Cromwell to this suggestion. 

9. He had a clear perception of the brilliant future of Bombay and wrote to his 
King at Lisbon that “only the obedience I owe your Majesty, as a vassal, could 
have forced me to this deed (i.e. the cession of the island) because I foresee the 
great troubles that from this neighbourhood will result to the Portuguese, and 
that India will be lost (to the Portuguese) the same day in which the English 
nation is settled in Bombay.” 

10. Oxenden gave the first impetus to the growth of Bombay. He clearly saw, 
even when no Suez Canal was looming in the distance, that Bombay would 
become key to India and he garrisoned the island and fortified it. His re¬ 
gulations were adopted as the model for all the military establishments of 
the company. 

11. He died in 1677 at Surat; and his Council wrote of him thus: “Multiplicity 
of words may multiply the sense of our loss, but cannot depict his greatness”. 
His character is best summarised in the following words of an appreciative 
historian: “The figure of Aungier stands out in bold relief on the pages of 
history—the first man in India who taught us the art of self-government and 
the wisdom of dealing with our neighbours—sage in counsel and bold in 
action.”' It was Aungier that, for the first time in the early history of the 
Company, realised the importance of a policy of religious toleration, unlike 
either the Portuguese or the Spaniards. With him commerce was more im¬ 
portant than conversion, and a careful study of his life will clearly show 
that he and Bombay were both born for each other; in fact, it was he who 
indicated to the Company what its policy should be in India in the future. 

12. He says that the Indians asked the English merchants: “What has your sword 
done? Whoever felt your power? We see Dutch outdo you; the Portugals 
have behaved themselves like men. You can scarce keep Bombai, which you 
got as we know, not by your valour but by compact (with the Portuguese); 
and you will pretend to be men of war or cope with our princes? It is fitter 
for you to live on merchandise and submit to us”. 

519 



THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


13. During his Governorship (1682-1690), there happened three serious and un¬ 
foreseen difficulties which contributed to the utter failure of his administra¬ 
tion, viz., (1) the military revolt under Keigwin (1683-84); (2) troubles from 
interlopers and pirates on a large scale; and (3) the policy of territorial expan¬ 
sion which only brought upon the Company bitter defeat and humiliation. 
Child had to eat the humblei pie from the Mughul Emperor who imposed most 
humiliating terms upon him. He did not survive long after his disgrace. 

14. The distressing events of the Governorships of Child and Gayer had a dis¬ 
astrous effect on the prosperity of Bombay. They seriously affected the growth 
of the population and prosperity of Bombay and brought the city to a chaotic 
condition. The favourite city of Aungier thus fell on evil days. There was 
plenty of crime, immorality and disease in the city; there was no control over 
the factors, nor any over their masters; and it became the fashion for the 
English to be vicious and reckless, as contemporary writers abundantly testify. 

15. Day went to England in 1641 to plead personally for his settlement before the 
Court of Directors, while Cogan, his successor, suffered much before he was 
excused from all blame and from responsibility for the charge of building the 
fort. Even as late as 1647, the Directors were of the view that the building 
of the fort was a very indiscreet step. The settlement was at first governed 
from Bantam and its trade chiefly consisted of Indian calicoe and muslins 
needed for the Bantam market. 

16. Agent Greenhill paid a visit to Sriranga Raya, either at Vellore or at Chandra- 
giri and obtained a cowle for the possession of Madras. A letter from the 
Madras factors to Surat, dated 21 January, 1646, tells us that Greenhill had 
returned from the king having got some addition to the privileges confirmed 
by him. “In the year Parthiwa, the month Kartika, the Moon in the wane, 
the king over all kings, the holiest and amongst all cavaliers the greatest, 
Sriranga Raya, the mighty King God, gives this cowle unto Agent Thomas 
Ivie, Chief Captain of the English and the Company of that nation”. 

Mir Jumla’s authority over the coast country round Madras became fully 
consolidated by 1647. He had in his service a number of European guns and 
cannon-founders and well appreciated the advantages of European help. From 
Cumbum he extended the dominion of Golconda, i.e., his own power, to Gandi- 
kota, Chandragiri and Tirupati. His dominion in the Carnatic covered an 
area 300 miles long and 50 miles broad. He maintained an army of 5,000 
well-mounted cavalry of his own, besides 4,000 horse of his Sultan’s. His 
infantry troops numbered 20,000; he had an excellent park of artillery and a 
large number of trained elephants. 

17. Pulicat suffered a loss of 15,000 and San Thome was injured equally badly. 
But, on the whole, in these years, fortune did not treat the English badly. 
Their trade indeed suffered from the prevailing famine and military opera¬ 
tions. But they had got the Raya’s confirmation of their privileges, and pre¬ 
served the friendship of the Muslim conqueror as well as a further confirma¬ 
tion of their rights. 

18. Thus closed an incident which had its parallel in both Bombay and St. Helena, 
in which the Company’s authority was set at nought by its own servants 
under pretence of protecting the King’s honour (c.f. Kaigwin’s Rebellion in 
Bombay). 

19.i In 1682 the English got permission from the Maratha ruler of Gingee to settle 
and trade at Port Novo and at Cuddalore. Job Charnock, the founder of 
Calcutta, took refuge at Madras on his expulsion from Bengal by the Mughuls 
who threatened to attack Madras also. But the storm blew over and Nawab 
Zulfikar Khan, the Mughul General in the campaign against Gingee, confirm¬ 
ed the privileges in Madras and other places. In 1690 the English purchased 
the fort of Tegnapatam, Fort St. David near Cuddalore, from Rajaram Chatra- 
pati, then ruling from Gingee. 

The scheme of starting a Corporation for Madras had originated with Sir 
Josia Child who thought that if influential natives were made Aldermen and 
members of the Corporation, they would easily persuade the people to pay 
taxes. The Mayor and Aldermen were to form a court for the trial of civil 
and criminal cases. The Mayor’s Court continues to this day under the name 
of the Presidency Magistrate’s Court and the Corporation also continues to 
this day. But though the Corporation was formed with a flourish of trumpets, 


520 


EUROPEAN SETTLEMENTS 


the taxes were not easily collected; and the people strongly resisted anything 
like the imposition of a house-tax. 

20. He was Governor for the unusually long term of 11 years from 1698 to 1709; 
and his term of office proved to be “the golden age of Madras in respect of 
the development of trade and increase of wealth.” His successful resistance 
to the attack of Daud Khan, the Mughul ruler of the Carnatic, the permanent 
fortification of the Black Town, the acquisition of numerous villages in the 
vicinity of Madras, and the firm control of the so-called Right Hand and 
Left Hand Castes of the Black Town which frequently quarrelled and came 
to blows—these are the chief events of his Governorship. But his most im¬ 
portant service was his defence of the Company and protection of its interests 
against the new Company that was formed in 1698, and its representatives. 

21. Latest research proves beyond doubt that Gabriel Boughton got the conces¬ 
sion of free trade for himself and not for the English in general. Cf. S. 
Chaudhuri “The Myth of the English East India Company’s Trading Privileges 
in Bengal,” 1651-1686, Bengal Past and Present, Sri J. N. Sarkar Centenary 
Volume, December 1970, pp. 287-292 (Editor). 

22. The number of factors in the Bengal settlements was more than doubled, their 
moral tone was greatly improved, and everything appeared to progress very 
satisfactorily. The English Agent wrote to the Directors as follows: “Bengal 
is a rich province. Raw silk is abundant. The taffaties are various and fine. 
The salt-petre is cheap and of the best quality.... The goods have been sold 
at a great advantage. Our operations are growing so extensive that we shall 
be obliged to build new and large warehouses”. 

23. Streynsham Master introduced a new system of management and account keep¬ 
ing in the Bengal factories. Later, he inspected the factories again when he 
was the Governor of Madras and took severe measures to correct the indis¬ 
cipline that marked the life of the Bengal factors. 

24. Job Charnock, the founder of Calcutta, tried three places on the Hooghly river 

before he fixed upon Calcutta, viz, Hooghly, Uluberia and the island of Hijli. 
The towns of Hooghly and Uluberia (at the point where the Damodar River 
joins the Hooghly) were both situated on the western bank and completely 
exposed to attack by the Mughul enemy advancing from the west. The island 
of Hijli near the mouth of the river seemed suitable enough at first sight; but 
it could be easily reached by the Mughul army and was, besides, in a mala¬ 
rious swamp. The last site which Charnock tried was Sutanuti on the eastern 
bank of the Hooghly. It could not be approached by the Mughul troops from 
the West and was strategically safe, being flanked by morasses on its eastern 
and southern sides. The English by sending their troops up the river could 
prevent the enemy from marching on Calcutta and even cut him off at his 

base. At a place, a few miles lower down the Hooghly than Calcutta, the 

river had scooped for itself a long deep pool which at high tide was accessible 
to heavy ships and which was the anchoring place of the great annual Portu¬ 
guese fleets to Bengal since 1530. That pool now forms the Calcutta Harbour. 

The foundation of Calcutta in 1690 marks the beginning of the fourth 
period of the history of the English settlements in Bengal. Job Charnock 

clearly saw that Mughul farmdns and promises would be no good protection 

to the English and, like Hedges, felt that they must possess a fortified place. 
Charnock had to fly from Hooghly before the Mughuls on the outbreak of 
war to the site of present Calcutta and to Hijli. In September 1687, he an¬ 
chored at Calcutta for a second time and opened negotiations for leave to 
build a factory. After trying several places on the river and sheltering them¬ 
selves at Madras for a year, Charnock and his men were invited to settle at 
Calcutta by the new Mughul Viceroy; and he returned to Calcutta in August, 
1690. Next year he secured an Imperial order allowing the English to con¬ 
tinue their trade in Bengal on a small yearly payment. 


521 


CHAPTER XVII 


POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE 

ORGANISATION 

I. NATURE OF THE MUGHUL GOVERNMENT 

The Mughul emperors ruled without any effective check on 
their authority. In theory they were only servants of the law, the 
Muslim law. They could neither supersede it nor modify it. But in 
actual practice this was true of the personal law of the Muslims 
alone. 

The Mughul emperors did not really claim the right to decide 
the religious beliefs of the Muslims. The law and practical attitude 
towards the Hindus has been mentioned above (pp. 234, 305-6, and 
later in chapter XVIII. Cf. also Vol. VI, pp. 617-622). The admini¬ 
strative organisation was recognised in practice as lying beyond the 
jurisdiction of the Qazls. Even in countries like Persia, Afghanistan, 
or Egypt, where almost the entire population had been converted to 
Islam, the Muslim rulers had felt it necessary to incorporate pre- 
Muslim customs in the organisation of the government. In India, 
where the preponderant bulk of the population refused to accept 
Islam, it was all the more difficult to organise government accord¬ 
ing to the Muslim law. The rulers exercised greater liberty in the 
organisation of the government. They acknowledged themselves 
as the agents of Islam, interested in its spread among the non- 
Muslims and in securing conformity to orthodox practices among the 
Muslims. In return, the theologians usually left them alone in the 
organisation of government. The practices of the first four Caliphs 
were exalted by the Muslim jurists as the Muslim policy. But the 
Shiahs differed violently from this view. Thus a good deal of lati¬ 
tude was left to the Muslim rulers in the organisation of the govern¬ 
ment. Most of the Mughul emperors, therefore, felt themselves at 
liberty to order things as they pleased provided what they did was 
not actually opposed to the Qur’an. 

The Mughul emperors assumed titles which placed their autho¬ 
rity far beyond the reach of the jurists. Akbar, Jahangir, Shah 
Jahan and Aurangzlb, all claimed to be the ‘shadow of God’, ‘Vakil’ 
(agent) of God on Earth, ‘Khalifa (deputy of the prophet) of their 
age and country’. This did not, however, amount to the assertion 
that there was a ‘divinity hedging round the crown’, much less did 


522 


POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION 


this assert the divine right of kings which the contemporary Stuarts 
were proclaiming in England. It was as successful agents for the 
spread of Islam that the Mughul emperors could claim to be the 
‘shadow of God on Earth’. Akbar did not claim the authority to do 
what he liked; he simply asserted that his innovations should not be 
condemned unless they were contrary to the Qur’an. Thus the 
Qur’an was recognised in theory at least as the fundamental law of 
the State. 

This should have tempered Mughul despotism and rendered it 
a ‘limited monarchy’. It failed to do so because there was no in¬ 
stitution in the Mughul State capable of effectively compelling the 
Mughul rulers to hold their hands if they ever transgressed the law. 
Twice under the Mughul emperors the theologians found them¬ 
selves in opposition to their rulers. When Akbar changed the reli¬ 
gious policy of the State and intended making the law of heresy and 
the discriminative code against the Hindus inoperative, Abdun- 
Nabi, his Sadr, opposed it and incurred his displeasure. He lost in 
the end and his successor lost many of his powers. Shiah Jahan’s 
Chief Qazi refused to proclaim Aurangzlb as Shah Jahan’s successor 
when Shah Jahan was still alive. Here was Islamic polity work¬ 
ing as the fundamental law of the Mughul State. But the re¬ 
semblance is only superficial. The Qazi was appointed by the em¬ 
peror and held office during his pleasure. Aurangzlb removed the 
inconvenient Qazi and found another, who declared that Aurangzlb 
was exercising royal power because his father Shah Jahan was in¬ 
capacitated from acting, presumably because Aurangzlb had im¬ 
prisoned him. Thus, the authority of theologians failed to make a 
limited monarchy of the Mughul government. It remained a 
despotism. 

But if the Qur’an formed the fundamental law of the Mughul 
State it may be argued that it was a theocracy. A theocracy with¬ 
out an independent religious head is impossible. It is further neces¬ 
sary that the authority of such a theologian should be recognised 
without dispute by the vast bulk of the population. The Mughul 
government lacked such an office. The Mughul government was no 
more a theocracy than the government of George II in Ireland. 

The Mughul government was then a despotism but of a peculiar 
brand. Its absolute authority was never so interpreted by its rulers. 
Theoretically, and to a large extent in practice, the judiciary was 
independent. Administration of justice through Hindu Panchayats 
and Qazis’ courts owed nothing to the king though he made provi¬ 
sions for the maintenance of the Qazis. The Mughul rulers made 
few laws of their own and did not claim the right to do so. 


523 


THE MTJGHUL EMPIRE 


II. THE EMPEROR 

There does not seem to have been any generally accepted law 
of succession. Dominion was not even supposed to run in the 
house of Babur alone. Mahdl Khvaja was Babur’s son-in-law. 
Claim to the throne does not seem to have been confined to the 
sons of the last ruler. Khusrav, Akbar’s grandson, was a hot 
favourite for the throne when Akbar lay dying. Nomination by 
the reigning monarch did not have much effect. Babur’s Prime 
Minister, Mir Khalifa, knew Babur’s wishes when he was trying to 
supplant Humayun. At Jahangir’s death, his nominee, Shahryar, 
was quietly passed over. Aurangzlb’s rebellion against Shah Jahan 
challenged the right of the reigning monarch both to nominate a 
successor and to take steps that his nominee should succeed him. 
The eldest son does not seem to have possessed any incontestable 
claim. Aurangzib was not Shah Jahan’s eldest son. Shah Jahan 
had become the eldest only after having Khusrav murdered. The 
empire was not considered an indivisible entity. Babur’s king¬ 
dom was inherited by Kamran and Humayun. Humayun’s domi¬ 
nion was divided between Hakim and Akbar. Aurangzib intended 
a fourfold division of the country. 

As the new ruler took his seat on the throne, the court would 
resound with the cries of ‘Badshah Salamat’, proclaiming to the rest 
of the country that a new king had ascended the throne. The new 
monarch announced a breach with his non-royal past by taking a 
title—a Salim would blossom forth into a Jahangir, a Khurram in¬ 
to a Shah Jahan. Presents would then be offered to the new king. 
A design for the new coins would be selected and a verse to adorn 
them chosen. The popular proclamation would come on the Friday 
following the accession. Before the Muslims assembled for the 
Friday prayers, the Imam would start by reading the Khutba . This 
would include prayers, among others, for the reigning monarch. The 
new monarch’s name would now be added to the list. 

The emperor was the fountain of all honours, source of all ad¬ 
ministrative power and the dispenser of supreme justice. These 
were not empty phrases. He summoned a few of his highest officers 
inside his private apartments to discuss necessary business with them. 
Once a week or oftener he held a court of justice. To these might 
be added the king’s appearance in a balcony early in the morning 
when he received such complaints and demands for redress as his 
subjects chose to present to him. 

The emperors came to the salutation balcony at sunrise soon 
after their morning devotions. Most imperial palaces had a special 

524 



POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION 


window— Jharokha —assigned for the purpose. This would overlook 
a spacious court where not only a large number of people could get 
together for Darshan, but where a review of troops could also be 
held. This done, the emperor felt himself free to receive petitions. 
BadaunTs complaints about the how people’ assembling here in 
Akbar’s time suggest that the institution worked effectively under 
Akbar. Under Jahangir we find admission to the enclosure jealously 
guarded by officials. Shah Jahan complained that he could not ob¬ 
tain even twenty petitions daily. 

At noon the emperor viewed from here elephant fights held 
tv/ice a week; lions fought buffaloes, leopards killed deers, jugglers 
performed their tricks to amuse the emperor. 

The Jharokha Darshan thus mainly served as a means of pro¬ 
claiming the king’s presence amidst his subjects. 

The king next appeared in the Diwan-i-‘Am. Shah Jahan came 
to it straight from the Jharokha. Aurangzib appeared twice here, in 
the forenoon and the afternoon. Akbar seems to have held it in the 
afternoon. The morning sessions under Shah Jahan were devoted 
to the inspection of workshops and stables; and public business pro¬ 
per seems to have been done in the afternoon only. Aurangzib held 
two public sessions for some years only and confined himself to one 
afternoon session later on. 

It was not a Durbar as we understand the term today—a place 
for formal audience and amusement of the king. It did not provide 
any Tamdsha. It was the king-in-court transacting State business 
in public. It was an assembly of officials presided over by the king. 

The court had a set of officers. The Mir-i-Tuzak acted as the 
chief secretary. The imperial news-writer daily attended the court, 
with two reporters. The Superintendent of the Royal Post was pre¬ 
sent with a staff of royal messengers. The Chief Huntsman, the 
Superintendent of the Royal camp, the Superintendent of the Im¬ 
perial Body-guard and Superintendent of the Guard were always in 
attendance upon the king. 

The business of the day began with the reading of the previous 
day’s orders. They were confirmed and then sent to various de¬ 
partments for proper action. After this the Diwdn or the Bakhshi 
read extracts from the official letters they had received from pro¬ 
vincial governors, district officers, commanders of garrison towns, 
and collectors of customs. The emperor would listen attentively 
and, where needed, issue orders promptly. Some of the high officers 
in the court would then submit the requests of the State servants 


525 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


serving in the mofussil from the private letters received by them. 
The emperor would pause a little for deliberation and then announce 
his orders, usually calling for a report from the Dlmdn, the Bakhshi 
or the Khan-i-Samcin. Sometimes the applicant was told to approach 
his immediate superiors. The imperial news-writer would also read 
extracts from the reports sent by his subordinates from different 
parts of the country. The Superintendent of various workshops or 
keepers of royal stores would also make reports and submit their de¬ 
mands. Royal messengers sent out by the emperor for bringing re¬ 
ports from local officials submitted them here. Royal Commissioners 
appointed to make investigation locally submitted their reports. 

Appointments of all the mansabddrs were made here; questions 
of their promotion, demotion and dismissal, the grant of jdglrs to 
them in lieu of salary, posting them to various jobs—all required 
the sanction of the emperor which was granted in the durbar. 
Usually the governors, faujddrs and garrison commanders had direct 
access to the imperial court with regard to the matters in which 
they were concerned. The provincial revenue officials, however, 
had to submit all their reports to the imperial dlmdn who then pre¬ 
sented the papers with his own recommendations. Even the under- 
dlwdns at the capital were required to submit their papers through 
the imperial dlmdn who read the appropriate portions with the sug¬ 
gestions in the open court. 

Ambassadors, distinguished visitors, defeated rebels, van¬ 
quished rulers and their representatives were all received in the 
durbdr bringing their presents with them. Here, again, were 
honours conferred on them, presents given and the terms to be 
granted to them announced. 

The great officers of the State sent to the provinces took their 
leave of the emperor and received his parting instructions; success¬ 
ful commanders returning from their expeditions were honoured by 
being received in the open court, sometimes even with their retinues. 

On festive occasions, the emperor received the presents of his 
mansabddrs, present and absent. He also announced his own gifts 
to them. The king’s birthdays, the lunar, and till Aurangzlb’s 
reign, the solar New Year’s Days, the Ids and the Dusserah were 
thus celebrated with great eclat. 

Two secretaries belonging to the imperial news-writers’ depart¬ 
ment were on duty every day by turn. Everything said or done in 
the court was recorded. 


526 


POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION 


The department of the Khdn-i-Sdmdn made heavy demands on 
the emperor’s time in the court. Superintendents in charge of vari¬ 
ous workshops had to be guided by the imperial taste. Thus all 
questions concerning workshops, buildings, roads, tents, gardens, im¬ 
perial sport or amusements, were decided here. 

The Ghusal Khdnd was a retired place for doing important work 
and holding important consultations where only the highly placed 
officials of the king were admitted. The commanders of expedi¬ 
tions about to leave, governors proceeding on their appointments 
were sometimes called to hold confidential consultations with the 
emperor here. Admission was regulated by permits. A Superinten¬ 
dent of the Ghusal Khdnd secured the observance of its rule of eti¬ 
quette. Under Shah Jahan, at least, if an official was held guilty 
of an offence against decorum in the Ghusal Khdnd he was not 
allowed to leave till he had paid the fine imposed on him. It was 
an unceremonial gathering. Jahangir would interrupt its proceed¬ 
ings by taking his usual cups of wine here. Akbar discussed reli¬ 
gious questions here. The emperor sat either on a throne, a chair 
or on the rich carpet specially spread for him. All members pre¬ 
sent were allowed to sit. 

The Khilwat Khdnd was any place where the emperor decided 
to hold confidential consultations in privacy. The Dtwdn and the 
Bakhshz were almost always present. Other officers concerned 
could be summoned if the emperor so desired. 

Every Wednesday the Dlwan-i-‘Am-o-Khas would be converted 
into a court of justice. The Superintendent of the Court presented 
the aggrieved persons, probably explaining in each case their grie¬ 
vances. The emperor would then do justice as he thought fit. 

The rest of the time of the emperor was spent in the harem, 
or at prayers, in sleep, or in amusements. 

It is necessary to remember that the Mughul emperor seldom 
missed attendance at one or another of these administrative confer¬ 
ences. As long as this continued, all went well with the empire. 
No fool could afford to be in the company of such a large number 
of highly placed officials without learning something from them. No 
one who was a fool could fail to be discovered as one by such dis¬ 
cerning persons. 

The Mughul Emperor thus formed the pivot on which the en¬ 
tire administration turned. In camp or in the palaces, well or ill, 
he never neglected business and thus always played an important 
part in the administration of the country. He presided over it, in¬ 
spired its activities, and very largely he determined its character. 


527 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


III. HIGH OFFICERS OF THE STATE 

No absolute ruler, however diligent, can discharge all the duties 
of the government at the centre, alone. He must have round him 
persons to whom he can entrust his commissions, who act as his 
eyes and ears, and spare him a lot of detailed work. Under the 
early Mughuls, Babur had Mahdi Khvaja as his Prime Minister and 
Zain-ud-dln as his Sadr. Humayun does not seem to have appointed 
any one to a position higher than that of a secretary; on his return 
from Persia Bairam Khan occupied an exceptional position in the 
State, but more as a great commander than as a high administrator. 
During Akbar’s minority Bairam Khan acted as his regent (Vakil), 
discharging all the functions of the head of the State in Akbar’s 
name. When Bairam Khan fell, the faction that had brought about 
his fall could not expect to step into his shoes. Though first Maham 
Anaga and then Munim Khan continued to guide Akbar’s admini¬ 
stration they occupied the position of the power behind the throne. 
Munim Khan could not issue orders on his own without at least mak¬ 
ing the pretence of consulting his young sovereign. 

Soon after this Akbar brought about a reorganisation of the 
government. The Vakil disappeared as an administrative officer, 
and the title was retained as an honorific office. Henceforward the 
Dlwdn signed all the State documents both as the Dlwdn as well as 
the Vakil. 

The Mughul ministry in Akbar’s reorganisation came to con¬ 
sist of the Dlwdn, the Mir Bakhshl, the Khdn-i-Sdmdn, and the Sadr 
as principal heads of the revenue, the military, the public works 
and industries and the judicial, ecclesiastical, and education depart¬ 
ments, respectively. This division of work continued throughout 
the Mughul period. Under the Ministers, but having the right of 
access to the emperor, were the Mustaufi (the Auditor General), the 
Superintendents of the Artillery, of Elephants and of War Boats, the 
Chief Qdzi, the Chief Mufti (Legal Adviser) and the Chief Muhtasib 
(Censor). 

The Dlwdn was the King’s minister par excellence. The work 
of every other minister came under his supervision. As the keeper 
of the King’s purse he had a say in all matters where any expenditure 
was to be incurred. All the earning departments were under his 
control. The Bakhshli , the Khdn-i~Sdmdn and the Sadr spent the 
revenues the Dlwdn raised. All the imperial orders were first re¬ 
corded in his office before being sent, and he alone issued orders 
on behalf of the king. Of course, the entire revenue administra¬ 
tion of the empire was under him. Thus, the smooth working of 
the administrative machinery very often turned on the way the 


528 


POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION 


Diwjdn’s office was run. The Mughul emperors were very fortunate 
in some of their Diwdns. Raja Todarmal, Raj'a Raghunath, Diwdn 
Sa’d-ullah Khan and Ja‘far Khan left traditions of public service 
which became the envy of the later ages. 

After the Diwtin came the Mir Bakhshi. The Mughul emperors 
never employed Commander-in-Chiefs of their entire army. This was 
not feasible because the Mughul army mainly consisted of the inde¬ 
pendent contingents of the Mansabdars. The Mir Bakhshi was his 
chief military adviser. He worked as the Inspector-General of the 
Contingents of the Mansabdars and their Paymaster holding annual 
reviews of troops and troopers. 

He was the nerve centre of the administration. All the news- 
writers outside the capital were his agents. The provincial Bakhshi 
was the news-writer-in-chief for his province. The provincial 
Bakhshi’s report usually was a review of the work of all the Man¬ 
sabdars in the province. The Mir Bakhshi was thus in a position 
to pass judgment on the work of all the public servants working 
outside the capital. 

At the capital, the Mir Bakhshi had several departmental heads 
under him. The Superintendents of artillery, elephants and war- 
boats were placed immediately under him. There was a separate 
Bakhshi of gentleman troops called Ahadis. 

The Khtin-i-Sdman was the third secular minister. In theory 
he was an under-minister only, being technically under the Diwdn. 
In actual practice, however, he had independent access to the em¬ 
peror and was usually allotted lump sum grants which he distributed 
as he thought fit. He represented his own requirements himself to 
the emperor in the court. He was the minister in charge of the 
household department, royal buildings, roads, gardens, purchase, 
stores and workshops. He thus performed the duties of modern 
ministers for public works, trade, industry and agriculture, besides 
acting as the controller of the royal household. 

Sometimes very near the king’s person, but administratively 
outside the king’s servants, was the Sadr. Associated with him 
there were a Chief Qazi and a Legal Remembrancer (the Mufti) 
and under him worked the Chief Muhtasib (Censor) and the im¬ 
perial collector of the jizya, at the capital, and Qdzis, Muhtasibs, col¬ 
lectors of the jizya , and Sadrs in the provinces. 

The Sadr was the Chief Justice, Minister for Ecclesiastical 
Affairs, Minister of Education, and Royal Alms, or all rolled into 

529 

E.M.— 34 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


one. But in the judicial department he functioned more as the Chief 
Qdzl than the Sadr. In Aurangzib’s reign there were separate Chief 
Qdzts and Sadrs. 

The Sadr’s main duty was patronage of learning, piety and 
scholarship. Akbar appointed provincial Sadrs besides the imperial 
Sadr. This curtailed the power of the Chief Sadr since recommen¬ 
dations for making grants did not always originate with him. Akbar 
seems to have made it necessary for his later Sadrs to take his orders 
in making grants. Under Jahangir this system continued. The 
Sadrs and the other officers under them were usually stipendiaries 
under Akbar. But Akbar gave his last Sadr a mansab. 

The Muhtasib was both an ecclesiastical and secular officer. As 
a secular officer he examined weights and measures and saw to it 
that fair prices prevailed in the market. He recovered debts and 
traced and handed over to their owners fugitive slaves. He saw to it 
that public streets or markets were not built upon. Under Aurangzib 
his ecclesiastical functions predominated, whereas he performed cer¬ 
tain border line functions as well; putting down the public sale of 
intoxicants, wine, bhang , Tddi (toddy), protecting sexual morality 
by preventing the prostitutes from carrying on their profession 
openly in the cities, and preventing gambling may be considered 
as his border line functions. Besides all this he had to secure the 
observance of the punitive law against the Hindus as promulgated 
by Aurangzib; thus, putting down of public worship by the Hindus, 
closing down of some of their shrines, the enforcement of sartorial 
regulations, prevention of the celebration of the Hindu festivals of 
DipavaVi and Holi, and putting down of newly erected temples were 
some of his duties. He reported apostasy and blasphemy and se¬ 
cured punishment of the guilty. So far as the Muslims were con¬ 
cerned, he had to secure the observance of the Muslim way of life 
as understood by Aurangzib. He put down music, prevented the 
lighting of lamps on Muslim tombs and shrines on Thursday, forbade 
the sale of toys representing animate beings, hindered the growth 
of the beards of uncanonical length and shape, and enforced sar¬ 
torial regulations. He prevented the public non-observance of the 
fast during the month of Ramzan. At prayer time he sent all 
Muslims to pray in the nearby mosque. 

The Ddrogd-i-Ddk Chaukl ran the imperial post. His agents 
were everywhere. At every stage, a horse was kept ready for use 
by his messengers. They brought news in all ways, on foot and 
on horse, by rivers or over the mountains. 


530 


POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION 


IV. TAXATION IN MUGHUL INDIA 

The Mughul emperors exploited several sources of revenue. 
They levied direct taxes on income and persons, profession and pro¬ 
perty. They made money by extensive commercial undertakings of 
various kinds. They raised substantial sums by indirect taxes such 
as customs duties, transit dues, octroi, sales tax, and the excise duty 
on manufactures. Administration of justice brought in a small sum 
in fines and judicial fees. The emperor was the heir to all property 
without proper title, and salvages from ship-wrecks were his. Re¬ 
gistration fee was paid when transactions were recorded or certain 
ceremonies performed. The emperors received presents from their 
officers and subjects as also from foreign rulers sending embassies to 
India. War often became a source of income; indemnity was some¬ 
times levied besides receipts from plunder. Under Babur and Huma- 
yun, and again under Aurangzlb, certain burdens were shouldered 
by non-Muslims which can be best described as taxes on religion. 

It is well to remember that there was always a difference be¬ 
tween what the citizens paid and the receipts credited to the trea¬ 
sury. Many officials levied charges which were not credited to the 
State; some of these formed customary authorised methods whereby 
they were allowed to supplement their salaries; others were not only 
not authorised but were from time to time forbidden by various em¬ 
perors. The first should undoubtedly be included among taxes where¬ 
as the second class can only be termed exactions. But both formed 
the burden the people had to bear. 

Among the direct taxes on income, the land revenue figured 
most. As in modern India, several systems of assessment and col¬ 
lection of land revenue prevailed in Mughul India. All of them 
were based on the principle that the land revenue demanded by 
the State should not ordinarily exceed one-third of the actual pro¬ 
duce and should never be more than one-half thereof. In certain 
States of Rajputana as little as 1/7 or 1/8 of the produce was paid. 
Aurangzib fixed one-half of the produce as the maximum. 

Of course, in certain cases a share of the actual produce, when 
harvested, was claimed. But sharing could take several other forms 
as well. Sometimes the standing crop was divided between the 
cultivator and the State. In some parts of the country, the cultiva¬ 
tor assigned one-third of his field to the State as it was brought 
under cultivation. To avoid bickering on both sides Kankut was 
resorted to. When the harvest was ripening, skilful appraisers 
were appointed who tried to estimate the probable yield of the crop. 


531 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


One-third of the estimated crop was then assigned to the State and 
was paid when the crop was harvested. 

Sharing was seldom considered a satisfactory method of col¬ 
lecting land revenue. It provided several occasions for defrauding 
the State. One way out of the difficulty was provided by resorting 
to an outright payment in cash irrespective of the crop area or the 
value of the crop. This was done by taking an average of the land- 
revenue paid by a cultivator for all his lands during the last ten 
years. Nasaq, as this system was called, seems to have been much 
favoured by Aurangzlb. 

But the Zabti was the system most in use in different parts of 
the Mughul empire. Developed by Akbar on the lines laid down 
by Sher Shah, it set up a demand schedule differing, though ever so 
slightly, from one assessment circle to another. There were more 
than 170 assessment circles in the empire, every one of them with a 
schedule of its own. The assessment circle represented an area 
where the same, or nearly the same, cash prices for agricultural pro¬ 
duce usually prevailed. The schedule of demand was based on the 
principle that one-third of the produce was due to the State. For 
this purpose the assessment rates of Sher Shah were used. These 
laid down the amount in kind due to the State from one bighci of land 
under different crops. Sher Shiah had prepared his schedule by tak¬ 
ing the average produce per bighci of various crops in fields of vary¬ 
ing fertility. The average seems to have been struck some time 
about 1542, and the lands selected must have been in the neighbour¬ 
hood of the capital, Agra. 

Akbar made various experiments for successfully converting 
Sher Shah’s demand in kind into cash. As we have seen above, he 
guarded against varying prices in different parts of the country by 
dividing it into about 172 assessment circles. In an assessment cir¬ 
cle, the average of the prices of various crops prevailing during the 
past ten years was struck and used for the conversion of the State 
demand into cash. 

Thus, wherever the Zabti prevailed the cultivators paid land 
revenue only for that portion of their land which was under culti¬ 
vation. As it was paid in cash, the rates per bighd differed from 
crop to crop. 

Under all types of assessments except the Nasaq , the State 
stood to gain if more land was brought under cultivation or if more 
valuable crops were substituted for those yielding lower prices. It 
became thus an urgent duty of the State to encourage agriculture. 

532 


POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION 


A graduated system of assessment was laid down when waste land 
was broken or fallow land brought under cultivation. The normal 
rate of assessment was reached in the fifth year, thus allowing a 
margin for initial expenses in the first four years. Advances were 
also given to the cultivators in order to enable them to defray the 
initial cost of the change. 

As the State demand was very high, whenever crops failed, re¬ 
missions were granted. Under Aurangzib it was customary to leave 
with the cultivator at least one-half of the actual produce in bad 
years. Though this may have made a big fall in the income of the 
State, it does not seem to have provided much relief to the cultiva¬ 
tor during famine. They left their land uncultivated and wandered 
away in search of food. 

The cultivators owned the land subject to the State’s claim to 
the revenue. They could sell, mortgage and give it in gift. Usually, 
there was not much buying of land because in most places enough 
wasteland was available for cultivation. 

The system of collection of land revenue introduced under Akbar 
safeguarded the rights of the cultivators. Every season surveyors 
visited the village, and with the help of the Fatwari, who was an 
employee of the village, recorded the area under various crops. On 
the basis of this record demand slips were issued early in the season, 
indicating the amount due in cash from every cultivator. The vil¬ 
lage Muqaddam collected the land-revenue some time in cash, some 
time in kind, but issued receipts for cash. He paid the whole de¬ 
mand for the village in cash and was granted 2J% for his pains by 
the State. Akbar abolished all customary cesses; the surveyor’s fee, 
the expenses of their board, and the Muqaddam’s commission were 
all paid by the State. A copy of the demand register was sent to the 
Diw\dn’s office. At the end of the collections for the season, an at¬ 
tested list of arrears was sent to the Diwan’s office. The arrears 
formed the first charge on the crop. Any amount received in ex¬ 
cess was credited to the next season’s land revenue. The collections 
were made twice a year in one lump sum. In Aurangzib’s reign the 
Nasaq revenue was realised in instalments. 

Akbar’s demand formed a lighter burden than the modern land 
revenue assessment except in ryotwari areas. No Zamindars—mere 
landlords —were recognised apart from the territorial chiefs. The 
cultivator today pays between 50% to 60% of the produce to the 
landlord, whereas a Mughul cultivator paid only 33 1/3% to the 
State. But peasant proprietors today pay about 16 2/3% of the 


533 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


produce which is about one-half of what was paid by the Mu'ghul 
cultivators. 

Much has been made of the extra exactions of the officials and 
their high-handedness. That they continued charging some of the 
taxes remitted by the emperors seems certain, but the burden of 
official exactions did not probably differ much from what it is today. 
The Mughul cultivator had to deal with his revenue officials or 
JdgVrddrs alone, whereas his descendant today is a victim to the exac¬ 
tions of the officials of the revenue, police, judicial and various other 
departments as well. 

Several estimates have been made of the total revenue of the 
Mughul empire including the land revenue. Abu-’l-Fazl estimated 
Akbar’s revenue at Rs. 13,21,36,831 and 12,00,000 betel leaves. ‘Abdul 
Hamid Lahori estimated Shah Jahan’s revenue at Rs. 38,68,16,584 
in the first decade of his reign. But this sum, huge by the standards 
of those days, and equivalent to about as Rs. 3,09,45,32,472 in its 
purchasing power today, did not represent the total receipt of the 
Mughul emperors. It excluded all presents received by the em¬ 
perors, tributes paid by feudatory princes of various grades, the 
savings represented by the employment of the contingent of feuda¬ 
tory princes, probably income from the jizya and the pilgrimage 
tax, judicial fines and fees, war indemnities paid by the vanquished 
rulers and savings in expenditure by deductions from the salaries of 
public servants and by employing forced labour paid lower than 
their usual wages. 


V. THE MUGHUL ARMY 

The Mughul army was composed of several categories. The 
most numerous was the cavalry. The infantry numbered very much 
on paper, but militarily its important part was formed by the mus¬ 
keteers. The heavy artillery was mostly used in sieges, but Babur 
had used them in open warfare and his successors kept up the prac¬ 
tice. The elephants had formed a pivot of the Indian army from 
time immemorial. Even the Mughuls found them useful. Cam¬ 
paigning in Bihar and Bengal necessitated the maintenance of a 
large variety and number of boats for military purposes. 

The cavalry was made up of three types of contingents. There 
were the soldiers serving under the Mansabddrs who undertook to 
bring to the field a certain number of soldiers indicated by either the 
swar rank or otherwise in their warrant of appointment. Another 
contingent consisted of the soldiers provided by the feudatory princes 
for imperial services. A third group consisted of Ahadls, gentlemen 


534 


POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION 


troopers usually owing obedience to no one else but to the king. 
The contingents of the Mansabddrs furnished the most numerous 
part of the cavalry. In theory, even State contingents were contin¬ 
gents of their Mansabdar- princes. The Mansabddrs were organised 
in different ranks ranging from the commanders of 10 to those of 
7000. In every rank there were three grades depending on the ratio 
between the zat and the swar rank of the commander. The actual 
number of troops brought into the field by the Mansabdar was at first 
indicated by their command. Towards the end of Akbar’s reign, the 
swar rank denoted the number of soldiers a commander was expect¬ 
ed to bring into the field. Later on, under Jahangir and his succes¬ 
sors, a commander was expected to furnish 1/3 of his swar rank 
in northern India, 1/4 in the Deccan and 1/5 for service outside 
India, in the campaigns beyond Kabul. 

A roll of soldiers employed by the Mansabddrs was kept. Akbar 
introduced the custom of taking detailed description of all the sol¬ 
diers paid for from the treasury. The Chahra, as it was called, se¬ 
cured that Mansabddrs brought to imperial service soldiers of ap¬ 
proved physique. Every horse carried a double brand, an imperial 
sign and the first word of the name of his commander. Their con¬ 
tingents were reviewed once a year though Aurangzib excused this 
obligation to all Mansabddrs of 3000 and above in the Deccan. 

As it was, even the original organisation of the Mughul army 
was defective. In the field or on the march, it was a cumbersome, 
slow-moving organisation into which an Akbar or a Todarmal might 
put some life. When Akbar appeared in Gujarat after 22 days’ rapid 
journey, not only were the rebels taken by surprise, even the Mughul 
commanders would not at first credit the story. Such feats were 
exceptional and as long as they did take place, the empire was safe. 
But the vast area of the Mughul camp with its followers always 
made it a slow thing and an easy target for attack. The imperial 
harem sometimes accompanied the emperor; in the Deccan we find 
Aurangzib now permitting, now forbidding, the families of the sol¬ 
diers from residing in the Mughul camp. But confusion was worse 
confounded by the fact that the Mughul commanders had no maxi¬ 
mum of ease or comfort on the field laid down for them. They 
wore no uniforms. There could be no orders against wear¬ 
ing Mufti while on active service. The result was that neither in 
dress nor in equipment did the great Mansabddrs ever try to effect 
any simplicity on, the battle field. It became a point of honour with 
some of them to appear as well-fed on active service as in the streets 
of the capital. Their luxurious standard of life became a scandal 
and made the Mughul army an easy target for attack by a vigilant 


535 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


and more hardy enemy as the Mariathas. This was made all the more 
possible because there were no State arrangements for transport in 
the Mughul army. A soldier or an officer carried whatever baggage 
he could afford to take with him. This militated against the enforce¬ 
ment of any standard of life in the army as legitimate or permissible. 

We have already seen that the lack of any State organisation for 
supply to the army on active service; gave an active enemy a chance 
of embarrassing and harassing the Mughul troops by falling on their 
supplies. This again became very apparent during the Maratha 
campaign. 

The Mughul soldiers were only indirectly recruited by the em¬ 
peror. The Mansabddrs raised them and paid them out of the money 
specially granted to them by the State. But the soldiers knew no 
higher loyalty than that to their own commander. Of course, when 
their commanders rebelled, the rank and file usually followed them 
in their rebellion. If their commander was killed in action, they 
fled knowing nobody to whom they could look to for orders or sup¬ 
port. 

There was lack of regimentation in the Mughul army. This led 
to a very low proportion of officers to men on active service. The 
five thousand soldiers under a Mughul amir knew only one com¬ 
mander. Thus, when the single commander was killed in action, 
even if the soldiers were ready to die in his cause and on his side, 
no one could come forward legitimately to lead them to action. The 
morale of the soldiers was therefore lower than it would have been 
in a well-officered army, such as the Maratha army proved to be. 
Panic could only be prevented by the appearance, actual or rumour¬ 
ed, of the commander as of Akbar at Haldighat, on the battle field. 
All other means proved usually abortive. 


536 


Chapter XVIII 

LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 

Sources and Character of Muslim Law 

As has been related in Volume VI, Chapter XIV, Muslim 
law or the Shar‘, which is the basis of the Islamic government and 
society, is considered divine by Muslims, and is, according to them, 
eternal and immutable. It is supreme over all persons and causes. 
The Islamic jurisprudence (fiqh), is derived mainly from the Qur’an 
and the Sunnah (the practices and traditions of the Prophet). The 
first of these, viz., the Qur’an , is its most important source. Next to 
it is the Sunnah or Hadis. It is believed that Prophet Muhammad 
was “the besf interpreter” of the Qur’anic revelation, and hence his 
acts and traditions constitute the best interpretations of the law and 
its application. In all those matters where the Qur’an is either 
silent or does not give a clear injunction, the authority of the Sun¬ 
nah or Hadis is unchallengeable. But as the law found itself inade¬ 
quate to meet the needs of the expanding Muslim State and society, 
two other sources were drawn upon. These were: the Ijmd‘ or con¬ 
sensus of opinion or universal consent (not of laymen but of learned 
mujtahids or jurists) and the Qiyas or analogy, that is the analogical 
reasoning with regard to the principles of the Qur’an and the teach¬ 
ings of Muhammad. But the first two sources, namely the Qur’an 
and the Hadis were considered the most valuable and were described 
as the usul-ul-usul or the ‘bases of the bases’ of Islamic jurispru¬ 
dence. 1 In the course of time the law became very complex on ac¬ 
count of conflicting interpretations by numerous mujtahids or jurists 
who held divergent opinions with regard to legal points and other 
matters that were not covered by direct injunctions of the Qur’an 
or the Hadis, and therefore, there grew up several well-defined 
schools of law. Leaving aside the schools of the Shiah and Khdriji 
sects, there emerged in the course of time four schools of law in 
orthodox Islam (Sunnism), which are considered the most authentic 
schools. These are: (1) the Hanafi, (2) the Maliki, (3) the Han- 
bali, and (4) the Shafi. The Hanafi School was generally speaking 
followed in Northern India throughout the medieval period. It is 
so even now. 

From the fact of its origin Muslim law is primarily religious, 
and the secular laws, if any, are subservient to the canon law. More- 


537 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


over, the basis of Islamic legislation is not legal; it is ethical. The 
Qur’an does not “lay down legal formulas, but indicates what is 
right conduct and what is wrong.” 2 It is for this reason that the 
Islamic law is not susceptible of change or growth. The one reliev¬ 
ing feature of the law, however, is that constant interpretation and 
re-interpretation play an important role in its development. This 
sometimes softens the rigidity of the law. Sometimes Muslim jurists 
wisely accept the fait accompli on the part of their rulers and states¬ 
men and recognise their enactments as legal. For example, when 
in 712 A.D. Muhammad bin Qasim, the conqueror of Sind, accorded 
the Hindus of Sind and Multan the status of zimmls which was the 
special privilege of Christians and Jews, the famous Muslim Jurist, 
Abu Hanifah, recognised this enactment as legal. It may be said 
that instances of such “accommodating character were rare, but they 
were there and on account of circumstances sometimes made Islamic 
wha't was originally considered un-Islamic.” 3 But the sources of 
Muslim law being trans-Indian, no Indian jurist, however learned 
and eminent, was considered competent enough to come forward 
with a bold interpretation of the above type. Nor was he considered 
capable of laying down a legal principle or elucidating any obscurity 
in the Qur'an or supplementing the Qur’dnic law, “by following the 
line of its obvious intention in respect of cases not explicitly provid¬ 
ed for by it.” 4 

Muslim Law and Non-Muslims 

All the schools of Muslim law were unanimous in holding that 
non-Muslims had no place in an Islamic state, and that if for any 
reasons they were suffered to exist they could not be allowed to en¬ 
joy the same rights as Muslims who alone were its citizens. The law 
for non-Muslims, particularly for the Hindus, was Islam or death, and, 
failing that, permission could be given to them, according to Hanafite 
school only , to live as zimmKs, i.e., people living under an agree¬ 
ment as second-grade citizens with certain disabilities imposed on 
them. They were guaranteed safety of their lives and allowed to 
follow their religion, but not to observe it in an offensive manner 
and not to carry on any religious propaganda and proselytism. They 
were also subjected to some legal and political disabilities, such as 
not being allowed to wear fine clothes, ride on horse-back or carry 
arms. They were discriminated against in the matter of testimony 
in law courts and in marriage and also in the matter of protection 
under the criminal law. 5 They were not allowed to build new 
temples or to repair the old ones. 6 Above all they had to pay an 
invidious tax, called the jizya, 1 which branded them as an inferior 


538 


LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


people. In the matter of land revenue and other taxes the law re¬ 
quired them to pay at double the rate that the Muslims paid. 

The Sultans of Delhi (1206-1526) found it impossible to enforce 
the strict observance of the law as described in the books of Muslim 
jurists. Some of them tried their utmost to conform to the Islamic 
law and practice and enforce it in their administration, but they did 
not succeed. Although they did not leave the Hindus undisturbed 
to follow their own laws and customs, yet circumstances obliged the 
Sultans to make a compromise with the law of the country. Never¬ 
theless the administration of impartial justice as far as the Hindus 
were concerned was unthinkable in that age. 8 

Akbar repeals the Islamic law in regard to non-Muslims 

The system described above remained in force during the reigns 
of Babur and Humayun and under Sher Shah who did not introduce 
any revolutionary change in their policy with regard to the status 
of the Hindus in the State. It was, however, intolerable to Akbar 
who was destined to be the first medieval Muslim ruler of Delhi to 
repeal the discriminatory laws against the non-Muslims so as to create 
one common citizenship and establish one uniform system of justice 
for all. This was done gradually, and it took nearly twenty years 
or more to complete the process. The first law, repealed in 1562, 
was with regard to the making of prisoners of war and their conver¬ 
sion and those of their families into slaves and Muslims. In 1563 
the Hindu pilgrims’ tax was abolished, and 1564 saw the abolition 
of the most discriminatory tax, namely, the jizya. The repeal of 
other Islamic laws followed, and one by one all social, religious and 
legal disabilities imposed by the Islamic law on the Hindus were 
repealed. 9 

Akbar accorded recognition to Hinduism and other religions 
in the land with the rights of legitimate propaganda and proselyt- 
ism. 10 He issued an ordinance permitting non-Muslims to build 
churches, synagogues, idol-temples and fire-temples without let or 
hindrance. 11 It was laid down at the same time that there should 
be no interference with anyone on account of his religion and that 
all were free to follow any religion they liked. 12 Another import¬ 
ant change made after 1580 was the permission given to those 
Hindus who had been forcibly converted to Islam to revert to the 
religion of their forefathers, if they so liked, and to Hindu women, 
who were forcibly married to Musalmans to be restored to their 
families. 13 A very important ordinance issued was that parents 
who were impelled by poverty or other compelling reasons to sell 


539 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


their children could buy them back from ‘servitude’ when they had 
means to do so. 14 A most revolutionary ordinance led to the re¬ 
peal of the law imposing punishment of death for criticising the 
religion of Islam or the conduct of Prophet Muhammad. 15 

Akbar amends personal laws of the Muslims 

Akbar did not stop with repealing discriminatory laws against 
non-Muslims. He went further and tried to amend the personal law 
of the Muslims. Despite the contrary view expressed by a modern 
writer, 16 Akbar did make some vital amendments in the personal 
laws of the Muslims, specially in those relating to marriage and di¬ 
vorce. For example, he ordered that a man should marry only one 
wife, and that if she were barren, he could marry another. But 
normally the rule was, ‘one man, one wife’. Secondly, a woman 
who had passed the age of hope and ceased to have menses was 
not allowed to marry'. 17 Thirdly, marriage between cousins and 
other near relations was forbidden. 18 Fourthly, it was ordered that 
boys were not to marry before the age of 16 and girls before the age 
of 14. 19 Another law enacted was that no one was to marry a woman 
who was 12 years older than himself. 20 Another law was promul¬ 
gated to the effect that boys below 12 years of age should not be 
circumcised. 21 These laws were meant to be obeyed and the kotwals 
in the cities were charged with the duty of enforcing them. 22 

Akbar amends personal laws of the Hindus 

Akbar interfered with the personal laws of the Hindus also. 
His regulations relating to the age of marriage for boys and girls and 
to monogamy were applicable to all, Hindus as well as Muslims, 
and so also other marriage laws. He issued an ordinance permit¬ 
ting widows to remarry, if they so liked, and this contemplated a 
basic change in Hindu law. He directed that Hindu widows were 
not to be compelled to become a Sati (i.e., burnt with the dead body 
of the husband). 23 

Akbar attempts to create common law for all 

Akbar made an attempt to create a common religio-social legal 
system. This he did by prohibiting Hindus, Muslims, Christians 
and Parsis from slaughtering animals on certain fixed days aggre¬ 
gating about six months in the year, 24 and manufacturing and drink¬ 
ing wine. 25 He introduced the practice of marrying his sons with 
the daughters of Hindu Rajas without converging these ladies to 
Islam and observed both Hindu and Muslim ceremonies at these 
marriages. 26 The laws relating to trade, barter, exchange, sale, con- 


540 


LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


tract, etc., were in the main the same for the Hindus and Muslims, 
and Akbar abolished all discriminatory regulations in the applica¬ 
tion of these laws. Likewise he prescribed uniform rates of land 
revenue and other taxes relating to minerals, quarries, manufactured 
articles, excise, octroi, merchandise, sea-borne trade, etc. The result 
of these measures was the extension of the scope of common law. 27 
This was deliberately done, because Akbar’s policy aimed at bring¬ 
ing the various communities in India under one common legal sys¬ 
tem as far as possible. Conversely, the scope of Muslim jurispru¬ 
dence shrank in the same proportion. Sometimes Akbar disregarded 
the Muslim law of evidence by refusing to rely exclusively on the 
evidence of witnesses. He often had recourse to other sources, such 
as observing the physiognomy and behaviour of the parties and 
sometimes even to ordeal, if necessary. 

Legal changes under Jahangir and Shah Jahdn 

It seems that Akbar’s reforms relating to the personal laws of 
Muslims, especially those about monogamy, marriage between cousins 
and other near relatives, and the minimum age of marriage were 
allowed to lapse after his death. Jahangir was inclined during the 
first few years of his reign to favour orthodox Islam and there was 
no complaint of any royal interference in the traditional personal 
laws of the Muslims. But he retained other reforms carried out by 
his father except one or two such as the marrying of Muslim girls 
by the Hindus, which he forbade. 28 But he recognised the practice of 
Muslims marrying Hindu women and forbade forcible conver¬ 
sion to Islam. 29 Shah Jahan made some important changes in the 
law. He reimposed the pilgrimage-tax on the Hindus, but remitted 
it on a representation made by Kavlndracharya, a Hindu scholar 
of Banaras. 30 He forbade the erection of new temples and the re¬ 
pairing of old ones. 31 But this policy was reversed some years later 
on account of the influence of his eldest son Dara. 32 Like his father, 
Jahangir, he declared marriages of Muslim girls with Hindus illegal. 33 
But some years later, he became indifferent and did not enforce this 
regulation. He, however, favoured the conversion of Hindus to 
Islam, and made apostasy from Islam a capital punishment. 34 Simi¬ 
larly he made blasphemy or use of disrespectful language towards 
Islam, a crime. 35 Shah Jahan’s religious zeal seems to have cooled 
down after about ten years’ reign and he gave up interfering with 
the legal reforms of his grandfather. 36 

Aurangzib restores the supremacy of Shar ( 

Aurangzib, however, was determined to make the Mughul 
empire an Islamic State. He repealed all the legal reforms of 


541 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Akbar. 37 The Muslim law relating to circumcision, marriage, 
divorce, and inheritance was restored. Marriage with Hindu women 
was permitted only after these women had been converted to Islam. 
Akbar’s orders regarding the grant of complete toleration to non- 
Muslims and the freedom given to them to propagate their religion 
were withdrawn. The jizya 3S was reimposed, and the Hindus were 
obliged to pay land revenue and other taxes at double the rate that 
the Muslims paid. 39 Ordinances were issued for the destruction of 
Hindu temples and schools. Thus gradually but steadily the Shar‘ 
became, in accordance with a set plan, the supreme authority in the 
matters of administration. The Islamic law remained in force for 
over twenty-seven years during Aurangzib’s reign and a few years 
after his death. It was, however, not possible to enforce it during 
the reigns of his weaker successors, and therefore, its injunctions 
lapsed in the first quarter of the 18th century. 

Criminal Law and Punishment 

Islamic jurisprudence recognises three kinds of crimes. 40 These 
are: (1) offences against God; (2) offences agains! the State; and 
(3) offences against private individuals. Offences against God were 
those of apostasy, heresy, and criticising or insulting the religion of 
Islam or Prophet Muhammad. These offences were punishable with 
death. Akbar, however, repealed this law and accorded freedom to 
criticise the religion of Islam and the conduct of Muhammad. But 
when Shah Jahan thought of restoring Islam to its former position in 
the State, he, in many cases, inflicted the punishment of death for 
these offences. During the reign of Aurangzib apostasy became 
punishable with death. But with regard to women offenders the 
Hanafite school laid down that they should be punished with impri¬ 
sonment. The other three schools, however, insisted on capital 
punishment for women apostates also. Similarly heretics, too, were 
punished with death. 41 

The offences against the State and private individuals were com- 
poundable according to the law of Islam. A man guilty of murder 
was not to suffer capital or any other punishment, if the murdered 
man’s relatives did not ask for retaliation, and accepted compensa¬ 
tion in money. It was only when the next of kin of the murdered 
person refused to accept compensation that the case was sent to the 
qdzfs court for decision. 42 Then the punishment of death was usual¬ 
ly inflicted. It may, however, be noted that a Muslim was not to 
be put to death for murdering a non-Muslim unless the former had 
killed the latter treacherously. 43 


542 


LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


The punishment for crimes according to Muhammadan law was 
prescribed under four categories, 44 namely, (1) Hadd; (2) Tazir; 
(3) Qisas; and (4) Tashhir. Hadd means boundary or limit or bar¬ 
rier, and in legal sense it means the punishment which has been 
exactly prescribed in the Qur’an or the Hadis. This punishment 
could not be altered, as it is prescribed by the canon law and is 
considered the right of God. Hadd has laid down definite punish¬ 
ments for the crimes of adultery, fornication, false accusation of 
adultery, apostasy, drinking of wine, theft, and high-way robbery. 
For example, punishment for fornication, i.e., sexual relations be¬ 
tween unmarried persons, was 100 strokes of the whip. 45 The false 
accusation of a married person with adultery was punishable with 
80 strokes of the whip. 46 A thief was to lose his right hand and a 
robber both his hands and feet. 47 Blit if a robber was also guilty of 
murder, he was given the punishment of death 48 A man found 
guilty of drinking wine was to be punished, according to Hanafi law, 
with 80 strokes of the whip; but according to Asshafi he was to re¬ 
ceive forty strokes of the whip. 49 

Tazir means censuring and this punishment was given in order 
to reform the culprit, and inflicted for offences which were not covered 
by Hadd. The degree of punishment under Tazir varied with the 
social status of the accused. Men of high rank, who were guilty 
of proved offences, were to be let off with a warning. Merchants 
were sent to prison, and common people were punished with strokes 
of the whip. 50 Naturally the judge used his own discretion in the 
matter of awarding this punishment. 51 For example, a man found 
guilty of stealing an article worth less than ten dirhams was to be 
chastised. But if he repeated the offence, he was to be imprisoned. 
And if he committed theft again, he was to be imprisoned for life 
or put to death. The stolen property was to be restored to the owner 
or deposited in the public treasury. 52 

Qisas means retaliation. It was of two kinds. The first re¬ 
lated to murder and the second to cases which did not prove fatal. 
If a person committed a wilful murder, he was liable to qisas or 
retaliation. The next of the kin of the murdered had the right to 
kill the offender, but this was to be done under the supervision of 
the judge. It should be noted that qisas was admissible only if the 
next of kin or murdered person demanded it. If there were more 
than one claimant for the blood of the offender, the unanimous de¬ 
mand of all was essential in the application of qisas. 53 In those cases 
where one had received a grievous injury short of death the law of 
retaliation meant that a hand should be cut off for a hand, a foot 
for a foot, a nose for a nose, a tooth for a tooth, and so forth. 54 ' 

543 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Tashhir was an ancient and un-Islamic form of punishment which 
was inflicted in pre-Muslim days and was retained during the me¬ 
dieval age. It is mentioned in the Institutes of Manu. This punish¬ 
ment, inflicted on guilty women, meant that they were mounted on 
asses and paraded through the public streets. Caliph Umar inflict¬ 
ed Tashhir on a man who acted as a false witness. The punish¬ 
ment took the form of shaving the head of the culprit and parading 
him on an ass with his face turned towards its tail. Sometimes the 
culprit’s face was blackened and he was paraded through the streets. 
Akbar retained this form of punishment, and inflicted it on men 
of status. In 1606 Jahangir punished his rebellious son Khusrav’s 
two associates by getting them sewn in skins of an ox and an ass, 
respectively, with horns obtruding. They were seated on asses with 
their faces turned towards the tail and in this condition paraded 
through the streets of Lahore. 55 Once Jahangir inflicted this punish¬ 
ment on imperial officers for dereliction of duty. The heads and 
beards of the officers were shaved off, and they were paraded on 
asses dressed in female attire. 56 

Offences against the State, such as misappropriation, default in 
the payment of revenue, and rebellions were punished according to 
the emperor’s pleasure. Sometimes the offender was trampled to 
death under an elephant’s feet or bitten to death by a cobra. Tor¬ 
tures of various kinds were also applied. 

Islamic criminal law and punishment remained in force through¬ 
out the Mughul age. Even Akbar did not make any fundamental 
change in the criminal law. The punishments under this law were 
more severe in the times of Jahangir and Shah Jahan than in that 
of Akbar. Aurangzib was very particular in enforcing Islamic law 
in all branches of administration and making the law available for 
ready reference to his officers and judges. Besides getting a com¬ 
prehensive legal digest, entitled Fatdwd-i- Alamgiri , prepared by a 
syndicate of learned theologians under his auspices, he issued far - 
mans on criminal law and on offences and punishments for the gui¬ 
dance of his officers. One such farmdn issued to the Diwdn of Gu¬ 
jarat on 16 June, 1672, is available in the Mirdt-i-Ahmadi , Persian 
Text, Volume I (Baroda), pages 277-283. It supplements the theore¬ 
tical Muslim criminal law and is a summary of Aurangzib’s penal 
law that was enforced during his reign. It is not possible, for lack 
of space, to notice it here. The curious reader may read it in Sir 
Jadunath Sarkar’s Mughal Administration, 4th edition, pp. 109-115 
where it is given in its English garb. 


544 


LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


Judicial Organisation 

The judicial system of the Mughuls was modelled after that of 
the Caliphate of Baghdad and of Egypt with such modifications as 
were necessary on account of the age and conditions in India. The 
emperor was the head of the judicial organisation and according to 
immemorial custom he administered justice in person in open court. 
In fact, he was regarded as the fountain of justice, and people look¬ 
ed to him for redressing their grievances and doing them justice. 
Naturally, therefore, his was the highest court of justice in the coun¬ 
try. Next to him was the chief qdzi, entitled Qdzi-ul-Quzat who 
held the office of Chief Sadr also. Under the chief qdzfr were pro¬ 
vincial qdzis and qdzis posted at the headquarters of the districts and 
the parganas. There were also qdzis in important towns and in 
big villages having considerable Muslim population and large enough 
to be called qasbas. 57 These were appointed on the recommenda¬ 
tion of the chief qdzi. The qdzis decided religious cases mostly deal¬ 
ing with the personal law of the Muslims, such as cases of marriage, 
divorce, inheritance, and the like. They were also in charge of 
pious endowments ( auqdf ) of land, property or cash for religious 
and charitable purposes. The qdzis were also required to officiate 
at the marriages of the Musalmans, to appoint guardians of the pro¬ 
perty of orphans, disabled and other handicapped Muslims, and to 
arrange for the marriage of Muslim widows or Muslim orphan girls. 
There was a second category of courts which administered secular 
and common law. These courts were presided over by governors 
and diivdns 58 of provinces, amils (collectors) in the districts and 
pargands and kotwals in the towns. The courts of the third cate¬ 
gory dealt with offences against the State, and were presided over 
by the emperor and his agents, such as governors, faujdars, kotwals 
etc. Besides the courts of these three categories, there were vil¬ 
lage and caste panchdyats which decided all kinds of cases—religious, 
civil and criminal, filed by the Hindus of the village in their juris¬ 
diction, according to customary Hindu law and usage. These courts 
were not under the control of any qdzi, governor or district or par- 
gand officer, but their decisions were recognised by the Mughuls. 

The Royal Corurt 

There is little evidence as to how and at what hour and day 
did Babur and Humayun administer justice in person. It is, how¬ 
ever, certain that in conformity with the ancient ideal, which both 
the Hindus and Musalmans regarded as obligatory, they held open 
court once a week. We know that Babur and Humayun were keen 
on discharging this duty, and Humayun introduced what has been 

545 

M.E.—35 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


described by his biographer as ‘the drum of justice’. It is said 
that a drum was placed near the audience hall and complainants 
were required to strike it so as to make their complaints reach the 
emperor. If a complainant gave the drum one stroke, it indicated 
a petty dispute; if two, it meant non-payment of wages or salary; 
if three, it meant a dispute about property, and if four, it indicated 
the shedding of blood. 59 

Akbar made it a regular practice to listen to complaints and 
administer justice personally in open court every morning at the 
Jharokha Darshan. Here he spent about two hours in transacting 
judicial business. In addition to doing justice daily, Akbar set 
apart Thursday exclusively for holding open court for the adminis¬ 
tration of justice. This was a formal court and was attended by 
high judicial officials, such as the chief qazi, muftis and other im¬ 
portant law dignitaries. The kotwal of the town had also to be 
present. Acting as the highest court in the land the emperor as¬ 
certained facts about every case personally, took the law from the 
law officers and pronounced judgment. Abu’-1-Fazl writes: “He 
(Akbar) opens the gates of justice and holds an open court. In the 
investigation into the cases of the oppressed, he places no reliance 
on testimony or on oaths, which are the resources of the crafty, but 
draws his conclusions from the contradictions in the narratives, 
the physiognomy, and sublime researches and noble conjectures. 
Truth takes her place in this centre. In this work he spends not 
less than one and a half pahars (i.e. four and a half hours)”. 60 

Jahangllr followed in the foot-steps of his father, and besides 
deciding cases every morning, he, too, set apart every Tuesday for 
administering justice in the open court. In parading his love of 
justice he outdid his grandfather Humayun and hung a chain of 
gold from the balcony of his Jharokha Darshan to a pole fixed out¬ 
side the Agra fort 'to which suitors for justice could tie their peti¬ 
tions which were drawn up and placed before Jahangir. 61 Shah 
Jahan, too, besides listening to complaints every morning, held court 
for deciding cases on Wednesday. For some years Aurangzlb followed 
his ancestral practice of administering justice every morning, and 
holding a formal court one day in the week. But in the eleventh 
year of his reign he gave up the practice of appearing at the Jharokha 
Darshan . He, however, retained that of holding a formal court for 
one day in the week, and this day was Wednesday. 62 He was “desir¬ 
ous of appearing a great lover of justice.” 63 It was impossible for the 
emperor to investigate into all the cases personally, and some of 
these could be inquired into only locally. So he ordered the gover¬ 
nors of provinces to find out the truth and do justice or send the 


546 


LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


parties to the capital with their reports. The allegation 64 of Euro¬ 
pean travellers that there was no written law and that the emperor’s 
will was supreme in all affairs is erroneous. 

This arrangement of transacting judicial business personally by 
the sovereign was not disturbed even when the emperor happened 
to be on tours or when he was engaged in a military expedition. 
The emperor decided both civil and criminal cases and his court 
was not only the highest court of appeal, but also sometimes a court 
of first instance as well. Sometimes the emperor would appoint a 
commission of inquiry and issue instructions to decide cases on the 
basis of facts revealed in the investigation on the spot. Usually the 
cases deserving capital punishment were decided by the King him¬ 
self. Such cases, even if tried by governors or other authorities, 
were forwarded to the capital for the king’s final orders. The stand¬ 
ing instructions were that no one was to be executed until the em¬ 
peror had given his orders for the third time. 65 

The chief qazi 

Apart from the emperor who was the fountain of justice, the 
chief qazi was the head of the judicial organisation, but in actual 
practice he was the second judicial agency in the empire. Besides 
being the chief qazti, he was also the chief sadr or head of the 
ecclesiastical and charity departments. He was appointed by the 
emperor and could be dismissed by him. But it was expected that 
there would be no interference with his work as long as he dis¬ 
charged his duties honestly and satisfactorily. The chief qazi was 
supposed to be learned in Islamic theology and law and a man 
of sobriety, integrity and honesty. He was required to hold his 
court in a mosque or in his house; but all suitors for justice must 
have free access to his court. During the reign of Akbar and that 
of his successors, State buildings were provided for the court of the 
qazi, and he was not allowed to hold court at his residence. The qa 2 :i 
was not authorised to give his own interpretation of the law and 
had to accept the authoritative rulings of the earlier reputed jurists 
which were placed before him by the mufti. It is for this reason 
that a deeply learned mufti was always attached to the court of a 
qazi who was not qualified to give fatwa or authoritative ruling 66 

The duties 67 of the qazi were: 

(1) to try and decide religious cases and those relating to 
Muslim personal law; 

(2) to execute judgments; 


547 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


(3) to visit jails and review the condition of prisoners and dis¬ 
charge those of them that deserved freedom; 

(4) to recommend deserving candidates for appointment as 
provincial, district, pargand and other subordinate qazis. 

The qazi had some other duties also, e.g., administering the 
pious foundations ( auqaf ), appointing guardians of Muslim imbe¬ 
ciles and such other people as were incapable of managing their 
property, drawing of contracts for the remarriage of widows, etc. 68 
The court of the chief qd£i was primarily an appellate court, but it 
also decided cases of the first instance, as it was open to anyone in 
the empire to approach the chief qazi for justice without first having 
filed his plaint at a local court. 

The chief qazi’s jurisdiction comprised the whole of the empire. 
He was competent to decide all kinds of civil and criminal cases. 
Islamic law did not draw a distinction between civil, criminal, and 
personal divisions of law, and, therefore, the qazi was considered 
competent to administer every branch of law except that relating 
to political and administrative offences. On account of such a wide 
jurisdiction and his position as the head of the judiciary, the chief 
qazis of the Mughul age, though learned, were, generally speaking, 
corrupt, and often amassed considerable fortunes for themselves. 
Akbar took drastic action against his celebrated chief qazi Shaikh 
‘Abdun-N'abi and exiled him to Mecca, as the emperor had become 
dissatisfied with his grasping conduct, religious bias, and corrupt ad¬ 
ministration both as chief qazi and chief sadr. ‘Abdul-Wahhab Bohra, 
the first chief qazi of Aurangzib, “was so corrupt that during sixteen 
years of office he amassed a fortune of thirty-three lakhs of rupees 
in cash, besides jewellery and other valuables.” 69 Similarly, other 
chief qazis of the various reigns were corrupt and unworthy. There 
were, however, a few notable examples of honest qazis. For exam-* 
pie, ‘Abdul-Wahhab’s son who, too, became chief qdzd and chief sadr, 
was so honest that “he did not touch a penny of his father’s ill-gotten 
riches, but gave away his share of them in charity. Not only did he 
decide all cases without the faintest suspicion of corrupt influence 
or bribery, but he even declined the customary presents and gifts 
from his closest friends and kinsmen.” 70 

The provincial, district and pargand qazis as also the qazis posted 
in towns and qasbas discharged the same duties and had much the 
same powers in their respective jurisdictions as the chief qazi in 
the empire. There was also a qazi attached to the army and he 
was called qdzi-i-askar. He did not have exclusive jurisdiction over 
the army, for it was open to any man in the army to file his corn- 


548 


LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


plaint in the court of a city qazi. Moreover, if one of the parties 
to a suit was a civilian, the qdzl-i-askar had no power to entertain 
the plaint. 71 


Secular Courts 

The courts of secular and common law and those trying poli¬ 
tical cases were presided over by one and the same set of officers. 
That is to say, there were no separate judges (a) to administer the 
secular and common law, and (b) to try those who were charged 
with the political offences. In fact, there was no demarcation be¬ 
tween these two types of courts, because Muslim jurists did not 
recognise the distinction between the civil, penal and political divi¬ 
sions of law. The judges for all the types of courts were the em¬ 
peror, the governors and dlwdns of provinces, the faujddrs of dis¬ 
tricts, the amils (collectors) and shiqddrs of pargands , and the fcot- 
wals of the towns. We have already seen that the emperor decided 
all sorts of cases and it was open to anyone to approach him for 
justice. The governors, dlwdns, faujddrs, collectors, shiqddrs and 
kotwals administered justice on the basis of the common or custo¬ 
mary law and equity. All these officers, except perhaps the dlwdns , 
also administered criminal law and decided political cases and cases 
against robbers and rebels. But the religious and personal laws 
of the Muslims and the Hindus were outside their purview, which, 
as we have seen, concerned the qazls . Like the emperor, the gov¬ 
ernors set apart a day in the week for holding the court of justice 
which was attended by the provincial qazi, mufti and other law 
officers to assist him in the discharge of this duty. 72 

While acting as a judge the governor was instructed to do his 
best to find out the truth, not only by cross-examining the witnesses 
bu ! t also by a study of the psychology and physiognomy of the parties 
concerned. He was required to “reclaim the criminals by good 
counsels, failing which he was asked to punish by reprimands, 
threats and imprisonment”; but he was to resort to mutilation in 
very serious cases and to inflict the capital punishment with “utmost 
deliberation.” 73 In March, 1582, Akbar took away the power of in¬ 
flicting the sentence of death from the governors of provinces. 74 His 
successors, too, were equally careful in the matter of awarding the 
capital punishment. 

Panchdyats 

The Mughul administration of justice did not concern nearly 
three-fourths of the total population, because the people of the rural 
areas had their own courts. Every village had its panchdyat which 


549 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


decided civil and criminal cases. There were also as many caste- 
panchayats in each village as there were castes inhabiting it. The 
members of the panchdyat were elected by the people and the 
punchas or judges were those who had rendered some conspicuous 
service to their caste, or the entire village community. The deci¬ 
sions of the panchdyats were almost invariably unanimous and the 
punishments inflicted were fines, public degradation or reprimand or 
ex-communication. No sentence of imprisonment or death was 
awarded, because there was no proper authority to execute these 
sentences, and also because there were no jails in the villages. 
The “prestige enjoyed by the Panchayats was great and their autho¬ 
rity was moral rather than political or administrative. The fear of 
public opinion was one of the most potent factors responsible for 
the prevention of crimes and hardly did any case go out of the 
boundaries of a village. Normally, cases involving even murder 
were settled locally. The law administered by the panchdyats was 
usually caste and tribal usage and the customary law of the land.” 75 

The administration of justice by the panchdyats was appre¬ 
ciated by early British administrators in India. Sir Henry Elliot, 
for example, describing the administration of justice by the pan¬ 
chdyats as had existed in the Punjab before the introduction of the 
Indian Penal Code in 1861, writes: “The particular value of this 
mode of trial was that in intricate points of native customs, often 
depending upon a state of feeling, which it was difficult for the 
English officer, as being a foreigner, to enter into, the members of 
the panch were thoroughly at home in their subject and were able 
to give due weight to a variety of minor considerations which none 
but a native could perfectly understand. Even in the older pro¬ 
vinces, where the regulations are in force, it is found at times con¬ 
venient to have recourse to this time-honoured method of decision, 
and the result is so satisfactory, that one is tempted to wish it were 
more largely resorted to.” 76 

Defects in the organisation 

There were a few defects in the organisation of the Mughul 
judicial system. In the first place, there were three separate judi¬ 
cial agencies working at the same time and independent of one an¬ 
other with no unifying bond between them. The chief qazi had no 
authority to exercise any kind of control over the courts of the 
governors and other subordinate officers. Secondly, all the courts 
were courts of first instance and some of them, like those of the 
emperor, the provincial qdzls and governors, entertained appeals, 
but they, too, acted very often as the courts of first instance. 


550 


LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


Thirdly, the courts were not graded or qualified as lower courts or 
higher courts. Nor were their relationship and jurisdictions clearly 
defined. A suitor for justice might file a complaint either in the 
court of the pargand qdzl ^r in that of the district or provincial 
qdzl, or in the court of the chief qdzl • If he liked he could ap¬ 
proach the emperor without first applying for justice to any of the 
lower courts. Fourthly, the powers of the courts, too, were not de¬ 
fined, i.e., it was not laid down that a particular court was com¬ 
petent to entertain and decide cases of certain nature or of a fixed 
maximum value and not beyond that. These defects remained even 
in the time of Akbar who had overhauled and reformed every 
branch of administration, but did not touch the judicial organisa¬ 
tion. All that he did was to amend and reform the law, including 
that of evidence, to replace the incompetent and corrupt qdzls and 
other law-officers by honest, enlightened and competent ones, and 
to appoint Hindu judges to decide cases involving Hindu religious 
and personal laws. 77 At the same time he posted able officers in 
all important places to report the cases of the oppressed people and 
of the suitors for justice. 78 But the above-mentioned organisational 
defects, side by side with some of the reforms introduced by Akbar, 
including the appointment of Hindu judges, continued throughout 
the Mughul period. 

Mode of conducting investigation 

Despite serious defects in the organisation, the system work¬ 
ed remarkably well. All the Mughul emperors except Aurangzib, 
who occasionally introduced religious bias in the working of the 
judicial administration, were inspired by the high ideal of doing 
even-handed justice, and the people felt that they were receiving 
justice at their hands. Akbar’s standing instructions were that the 
judges must try to find out the facts of the cases under dispute by 
every possible device and that they ‘‘should not be satisfied with 
witnesses and oaths, but pursue them by manifold enquiries, by the 
study of physiognomy and the exercise of foresight, nor, laying the 
burden of it on others, live absolved from solicitude.” 79 The Mir-z- 
Adal and the qazls were instructed to begin “with a thorough in¬ 
terrogation and learn the circumstances of the case; and should 
keep in view what is fitting in each particular, and take the ques¬ 
tion in detail, and in this manner set down separately the evidence 
of each witness”. The judges were also required to give a little 
gap between the hearings of a case so as to have time to deliberate 
over it and then take it up and “reinvestigate and enquire into it 
anew, and with discrimination and singleness of view, search it to 


551 


THE MUGHTJL EMPIRE 


its core.” 80 The law of evidence thus prescribed by Akbar remain¬ 
ed in force throughout the period. Witnesses were also summoned 
and their evidence was given due weight. During Aurangzib’s 
reign the evidence of Hindus was not admissible in certain cases. 

Spirit underlying the administration of justice 

There is little evidence to form a concrete picture of the spirit 
underlying the administration of justice during 'the reigns of Babur 
and Humayun. Sher Shah was no doubt an impartial judge but 
his administration of justice was marred by the fact that in up¬ 
holding the supremacy of Islam, he could not but show a special 
regard for Muslims. Akbar’s ideal as an impartial dispenser of 
justice is expressed in his happy saying. “If I were guilty of un¬ 
just act,’’ he said, “I would rise in judgment against myself. What 
shall I say then of my sons, my kindred and others.” 81 The above 
was not a copy book maxim to be repeated conveniently at times. 
The spirit underlying it expressed itself in action during the major 
part of Akbar’s reign. Contemporary foreign observers were highly 
impressed with his policy of administering justice with humanity. 
Father Monserrate, who knew the emperor intimately, writes that 
“the king has the most precise regard for right and justice in the 
affairs of government.... By nature, moreover, he is kind and bene¬ 
volent and is seriously anxious that guilt should be punished with¬ 
out malice indeed, but at the same time without undue leniency. 
Hence, in the case in which he himself acts as judge, the guilty 
are, by his own direction, not punished until he has given orders for 
the third time that this shall be done.” 82 

In order to see that justice is done impartially he ordered that 
the trying magistrates should not tie themselves down to the letter 
of the law, but should be guided by its spirit. Moreover, expedi¬ 
tious justice was done, and prolonged litigation was discouraged as 
far as possible. The emperor’s aim was to reform and not to re¬ 
taliate. That was why he issued instructions to his officials “to 
connive at men’s faults (take a lenient view) as they sometimes be¬ 
came more hardened by punishment.” 83 Akbar’s successors followed 
the tradition handed to them by their great and reforming ancestor. 
Jahangir’s justice was proverbial. He used to pride himself for 
being the dispenser of impartial justice, and the memory of him as 
a just ruler is kept green in Indian tradition even now. “Shah 
Jahan,” writes Manucci, “upheld the maxim of his father that true 
justice must be enforced.” 84 Aurangzib, too, was keen to administer 
justice even-handedly in cases in which the prestige and interest of 
Islam were not involved. He maintained that equal justice should 
be dispensed to everybody. 


552 


LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


1. Srivastava, A.L., Akbar the Great, Vol. II, 263. 

2. Joseph Schacht, Origins of Islamic Jurisprudence, p. 384. 

3. Srivastava, A.L., op. cit., p. 264. 

4. Sarkar, Mughal Administration, 4th ed., p. 100. 

5. Sarkar, Aurangzib, Vol. Ill, 3rd ed., pp. 351-355. 

6. Futuhat-i-Firoz Shahi, p. 9; Sarkar, op. cit., 265-267. 

7. Sarkar, op. cit., pp. 268-270. 

8. Srivastava, Akbar the Great, Vol. II, pp. 266-267. 

9. Srivastava, op. cit., pp. 267-268. 

10. Srivastava, A.L., Akbar the Great, Vol. I, p. 386; Vol. II, p. 267. 

11. BadaunI, Muntakhab-ut-Tawdrikh, Vol. II, p. 392. 

12. Ibid, p. 391. 

13. Ibid, pp. 391-392. 

14. Ibid, p. 391. 

15. Ibid., pp. 308, 316, 317. 

16. Ibn Hasan, Central Structure of the Mughal Empire, p. 308. 

17. BadaunI, M.T., Vol. II, p. 356; Ain., Vol. I, 2nd ed., p. 288. 

18. Ibid. 

19. Ibid, pp. 306, 338;. Ibid, pp. 207-218. 

20. Ibid, p. 291. 

21. Ibid, p. 376. 

22. Ain., Vol. I, pp. 287-288; Vol. II, pp. 44-45. 

23. BadaunI, M.T., Vol. II, pp. 356, 376. 

24. Ibid, pp. 321-322. 

25. Ibid. 

26. Ibid, p. 341; A.N., Vol. Ill, p. 415; Nizam-ud-din Ahmad, T.A., Vol. II, 
pp. 392-393. 

27. Srivastava, A.L., Akbar the Great, Vol. II, p. 270. 

28. Tuzuk-i-Jahangxri, R.B., Vol. II, p. 181. 

29. Tuzuk, op cit., Vol. I, p. 205. 

30. Sri Ram Sharma, Religious Policy of the Mughal Emperors, 2nd end., p. 86. 

31. ‘Abdul-Hamld Lahaurl, Badshah-Ndma, Vol. I, p. 452; Amlnal Qazvlnl 
p. 405; Burn, C.H.I., IV, p. 217. 

32. Sri Ram Sharma, op. cit., p. 87. 

33. Lahaurl, op. cit., I, II, p. 58; Qazvlnl, op. cit., pp. 444-445. 

34. Lahaurl, op. cit., I, II, 58; Burn, op. cit., p. 217. 

35. Qazvlnl, op. cit., p. 445; Sri Ram Sharma, op. cit., p. 92. 

36. Sri Ram Sharma, op. cit., pp. 89, 93-95. 

37. Sarkar, C.H.I., IV, pp. 240-241. 

38. Sarkar, op. cit., 242. 

39. Mirat-i-Ahmadi, Vol. I, pp. 259, 265, 286; Sarkar, op. cit., 242-243; Sri Ram 
Sharma, op. cit., pp. 143-144. 

40. Sarkar, Mughal Administration, 4th ed., p. 104. 

41. Mirdt-i-Ahmadi, Vol. I, pp. 220-21; Sri Ram Sharma, op. cit., 113-15. 

42. Encyclopaedia of Islam, Vol. II, p. 1038; Dictionary of Islam, p. 477. 

43. Encyclopaedia of Islam, Vol. I, 980. 

44. Ibid, Vol. II, pp. 187, 1038. 

45. Ibid., Vol. II, p. 187. 

46. Muslim Institutions, p. 156. 

47. Encyclopaedia of Islam, Vol. II, p. 287; Dictionary of Islam, pp. 476-477. 

48. Ibid. 

49. Muslim Institutions, p. 156. 

50. Dictionary of Islam, p. 632. 

51. Encyclopaedia of Islam, Vol. IV, p. 710. 

52. Mirdt-i-Ahmadi , Vol. I, p. 278. 

53. Encyclopaedia of Islam, Vol. II, p. 1038; Muslim Institutions, p. 151. 

54. Dictionary of Islam, p. 477. 

55. Tuzuk, Vol. I, pp. 84-85. 

56. Ibid, I, pp. 84-85. 

57. Mirat, Per. T., Vol. Ill (Suppl.), p. 174. 

58. Mirat, Vol. I (Per. T.), p. 238. 

59. Banerji, S.K., Humayun Badshah, Vol. II, pp. 338-339. 

60. A.N., Vol. Ill, p. 257; Srivastava, Akbar the Great, Vol. II, pp. 274-275. 

61. Tuzuk, R.B., Vol. I, p. 7; Hawkins, Early Travels in India, p. 113. 

62. Sarkar, Mughal Administration, 4th ed., p. 94. 

63. Manucci, Storia do Mogor, Vol. I, p. 167. 

553 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


64. De Laet, Empire of the Great Mogol, p. 93; Terry, Early Travels in India, 
326; Thomas Roe, The Embassy, pp. 89, 104, 435; Careri, Indian Travels, p. 240. 

65. Commentarius, p. 209; Du Jarric, p. 12. 

66. Encyclopaedia of Islam, Vol. II, p. 605; Hedaya, II, ed., pp. 334-335. 

67. Encyclopaedia of Islam, Vol. II pp. 606-607. 

68. Ibid. 

69. Sarkar, Mughal Administration, 4th ed., p. 98. 

70. Sarkar, Aurangzib, Vol. Ill, p. 10. 

71. Srivastava, A.L., Akbar the Great, Vol. II, pp. 277-278. 

72. Mirat, Vol. I, p. 275. 

73. Ain, Vol. II, p. 38. 

74. A.N., Vol. Ill, p. 380. 

75. Srivastava, Akbar the Great, Vol. II, p. 279. 

76. Memoirs on the History, Folk-lore and Distribution of the Races of N.W.F.P., 
pp. 279-280. 

77. Badauni, M.T. Vol. II, p. 356, Badaum describes the appointment of Hindu 
judges as the innovation introduced by Akbar implying that no Hindu judge 
was appointed by any Muslim ruler before Akbar’s time. 

78. Srivastava, A.L., Akbar the Great, Vol. I, p. 297. 

79. Ain., Vol. II (2nd ed.), pp. 38-39. 

80. Ibid. 

81. Ain., Vol. Ill (2nd ed), p. 434. 

82. Commentarius, p. 209; Mirat, Vol. I, pp. 164-166. 

83. Mirat, Vol. I, p. 166. 

84. Manucci, Storia do Mogor, Vol. I, p. 167. 


554 


CHAPTER XIX 


LITERATURE 

I. BENGALI 

The Bengali literature, during the period under review, was pro¬ 
foundly influenced by the Neo-Vaishnava Movement initiated by 
Chaitanya (1486-1533) whose life and doctrine have been discussed 
in the previous Volume (pp. 566-69). Indeed it may be said with¬ 
out hesitation that the numerous poetical compositions, including 
lyrics and songs, inspired by the life and teachings of Chaitanya, con¬ 
stitute the richest treasure in the whole domain of Bengali literature 
before the middle of the nineteenth century A.D. This vast litera¬ 
ture may be briefly discussed under a few broad heads. 

1. Vaishnava Literature 

9 

(a) Biography 

The earliest biography of Chaitanya, by one of his oldest fol¬ 
lowers, Muriari Gupta, was written in Sanskrit. The oldest biogra¬ 
phy in Bengali is Chaitanya bhdgavata or Chaitanya-mangala by 
Brindavandas, a classmate of Chaitanya. It was composed probably 
within a decade of Chaitanya’s passing away, and in any case not 
later than 1540 A.D. It is certainly the most authentic and perhaps 
the most popular biography of the great religious leader. It posses¬ 
ses two special characteristics which are of great historical import¬ 
ance. In the first place, 'though the author regarded Chaitanya as an 
incarnation of God, he presents Chaitanya as a human, rather than 
divine, being. Secondly, the book gives interesting details of the social 
life in Bengal at the time of Chaitanya. According to a modern critic 
there are “lyrical touches” in the narrative of Brindavandas and “his 
sincere devotion and enthusiastic admiration have often imparted a 
glow to his diction which rescues his expression of sectarian dogma 
from triviality.” 1 

The next important biography is the Chaitanya-charitdmrita of 
Krishnadas Kaviraj. The date of composition of this book is a matter 
of dispute. According to some its probable date is some time be¬ 
tween 1575 and 1595, while others hold that the work was com¬ 
pleted between 1612 and 1615 A.D. Krishnadas looked upon Chai¬ 
tanya not as an incarnation of Krishna alone, but of Krishna and 


555 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Kadha in the same person, and “his treatment of the life of the 
master was from this viewpoint.” 2 There are some distinctive cha¬ 
racteristics of the Chaitanya-charitdmrita: 

1. It is not only a good biography but also deals in detail and 
in a masterly manner with the mystic and philosophical aspects of 
Vaishnavism propounded by Chaitanya. 

2. He quotes authority for his statements—a rare virtue dis¬ 
played by the authors in the medieval age. 

3. The book shows a unique combination of ripe scholarship 
and a wonderful literary style much in advance of his age. 

4. The author gives due credit to the previous writers on the 
same subject. A classical example is furnished by his account of 
the quarrel between Chaitanya and the Muslim Qdzi of Navadvlp 
who forbade the singing of Kirtan in public. The account given 
by him is somewhat different even in material points from that 
given by Brindavandas, but yet he refers the reader to the latter’s 
book for a fuller and more accurate account. 

5. He gives a mere outline of the early life of Chaitanya which 
Brindavandas had already described in detail, but gives a more de¬ 
tailed account of the last eighteen years of the life of Chaitanya, 
specially his extensive travels such as we do not find in any other 
biography of Chaitanya. 

Krishnadas Kaviraj was a great Sanskrit scholar and wrote an 
epic poem on the story of Radha'and Krishna in Sanskrit. But he is 
best known for the Chaitanya-charitdmrita which is regarded by many 
as the most important work in Vaishnava literature. An eminent 
critic has expressed the view that “as a biography and as a work 
of thought it is a landmark in New Indian Literature.” 3 

Among other biographies of Chaitanya, mention may be made 
of the Chaitanya-maiigal of Jayananda, another work with the same 
title by Lochandas, and the Gaurdnga-vijaya of Chudamanidas. The 
first was composed in the fifth decade and the other two in the se¬ 
cond half of the 16th century. Lochandas was one of fhe best lyric 
poets of the time and introduced a new style of folk songs, known 
as Dhdmdli, dealing almost exclusively with the love affairs of Kri¬ 
shna and the cowherd maidens. The other two books enjoyed great 
popularity and contain some new information about Chaitanya. There 
were other minor biographies of Chaitanya written in the 16th and 
17th centuries. There were also biographical works describing the 
activities of the top-ranking Vaishnava leaders. 


556 


LITERATURE 


(b) Padavali 

Next to biographical works, the lyrical poems and songs known 
as Padavali constitute the most important branch of the Vaishnava 
literature in Bengal. These dealt almost exclusively with the para- 
kiyd prem (love outside wedlock) of Radha and Krishna. Some of 
the early lyrics reached a very high standard of literary excellence, 
expressing the intense, all-consuming, selfless love and highly pas¬ 
sionate emotion of Radha in sweet, almost musical language. Gradu¬ 
ally, these lyrics became somewhat stereotyped by the end of the 
16th century and degenerated into mechanical repetitions in later 
age. In the hands of the Vaishnava poets the love episode of Krishna 
and Radha was classified, almost in a scientific spirit, into various 
distinct moods of mind according as Krishna was looked upon by 
the devotees as a child, a friend, a lord or a lover. The love episodes 
also deal with distinct phases characterised by love at sight, secret 
meetings, separation, union, enjoyment or ill-feeling caused by jea¬ 
lousy, etc. In addition to Lochandas mentioned above, some of the 
most distinguished lyric poets were Basudev Ghosh, Marahari Sar- 
kar, Yasoraj Khan, Kavisekhara, NarOttamdas, Balaramdas, and Jna- 
nadas, all of whom flourished in the 16th century. Another poet, 
Govindadas Kaviraj, also achieved great renown, though most of his 
lyrics were written in Brajabuli, an artificial language, akin to both 
Bengali and Maithili, but whose real origin is obscure (Vol. VI, p. 
515). Many of the other poets, including Jnanadas and a few others 
mentioned above, also wrote in Brajabuli. Among the later poets 
mention may be made of Gopaldas of the 17th century, some of 
whose lyrics have been wrongly attributed to Chandidas, Narahari 
Chakravarti and Jagadananda of the 18th century, which saw the 
decline of Padavali literature. When the number of these lyrics 
grew very large, several collections of them were made towards the 
end of the 17th and the beginning of the 18th century. 

Large number of narrative poems on the legends of Krishna and 
Radha were written with or without lyrical poems interspersed in 
them. Many of them were very popular and were regularly re¬ 
cited before large gatherings by professional kathaks (story-tellers), 
a religious entertainment current even today. 

It may be mentioned that many composers of Vaishnava lyrics 
were patronised by the Hindu rulers of Tripura and Cooch Behar as 
well as some Muslim rulers. 

Less well-known, but no less important, were the serious writ¬ 
ings on Vaishnava doctrine and philosohpy by the Gosains of Brin- 
davan and others, biographies of Vaishnava leaders and the histo- 


557 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


rical works. More important among these are the Premavilasa of 
Nityananda Das, the Bhaktiratndkara and NarottamvUasa of Nara- 
hari Chakravartl, Rasakadamva of Kaviballabh, Rasakalpavalli of 
Ramgopal Das and Rasamanjari and Ashtarasavyakhyd of Pitambar 
Das. 

A series of books dealing with the legends of Krishna, and 
known as Krishnou-mangala were written, some of which, like those 
of Madhavacharya, probably a contemporary of Chaitanya, Kavi- 
sekhara and many others became popular. 

Particular reference should be made to the literature of a Vai- 
shnava sect, known in later days as the Sahajiya, which had much 
in common with the Tantrics. They carried to an excess, in prac¬ 
tice , the theory that love with a woman, not one’s wife ( parakiya 
prem) , was the easiest road to salvation, and the philosophy under¬ 
lying it was discussed, sometimes with great skill and learning, in 
a number of treatises, which belong to the Sahajiya literature. 

2. Mangala-kdvya 

Next to the Vaishnava literature, the Mangala-kdvyas form the 
most important branch of the Bengali literature during the period 
under review. It consists of a series of poetical works describing 
the glories of many popular gods and goddesses, such as Manasa 
(Snake-Goddess), Chandl (a form of Durga), Dharma-Thakur, Siva, 
and others. 

The central theme of Manasd-mangala is the conversion of a 
rich merchant Chand Sadagar who was at first unwilling to worship 
Manasa but was ultimately forced to do so after his seven sons were 
killed one after another by snake-bite. The most interesting epi¬ 
sode in these Kavyas is that of Behula, the widow of the seventh son, 
who carried the dead body of her husband in a raft to the abode of 
gods and had him restored to life through their graces after pleasing 
them by the exhibition of her skill in dance and music. The earliest 
extant text on this interesting theme, which has not lost its popula¬ 
rity even today, is Manasd-mangala of Bijayagupta (1484-5 A.D.). 
Among the numerous later authors of Manasd-mangala Kavyas men¬ 
tion may be made of Bipradas Pipilai (1495-6), Niarfayanadeva, and 
Ketakadas Kshemananda, probably the best of all, who flourished in 
the middle of the 17th century. 

The Chandi-mangala Kdvya is based on two themes which des¬ 
cribe how, through the favour of the Goddess Chandl, (1) the hun¬ 
ter Kalaketu becomes a king and (2) the merchant Dhanapati, after 
suffering various miseries in the hands of the king of Ceylon, ulti- 


558 


LITERATURE 


mately is restored to his favour, and his son Srimanta is married 
to the daughter of the King. 

The composition of the Chandi-mahgcila Kdvyas may be traced 
to Manik Datta who flourished before Chaitanya, but the oldest 
available texts are those of Dvija Madhava (1579-80), and 
Mukundaram Chakravarti, better known by his title Kavikankana, 
whose poem, composed towards the end of the 16th century, is re¬ 
garded as the best of this class of works. It exhibits poetic talents 
of a very high order and many of its characters, specially P'hullara 
and Khullanla, the heroines, Durbala, the maid-servant, and, above 
all, Bhamdudatta, the cheat, are wonderful creations. An eminent 
critic regards the la^t-named a personification of cunning and wicked¬ 
ness, incomparable in the whole range of medieval Bengali literature. 
This Kavya has enjoyed immense popularity and high appreciation 
of the literary world which has not diminished in the course of time. 
It depicts a picture of the social condition of medieval Bengal, parti¬ 
cularly the life of the common people, which is of great historical 
value. 

Dharma-Thakur, the subject-matter of the Dharma-mahgala 
Kdvyas was a local God of Radha (West Bengal) worshipped mostly 
by the lowest classes of socidty such as the Dom, Bagdi, Hadj, etc. 
The hero of the Kavya is Lausen, victorious in many battles and 
always protected by the favour of Dharma-Thakur. It depicts a 
large number of characters of all ranks of society with great success, 
but is full of miraculous events. The author of the oldest extant 
Kavya, Manikram, flourished about the middle of the 16th century, 
and he was followed by Ramdas (1662), Sltaram (1698), Ghanariam 
(1711) and many others in the 18th century. Ghanaram’s Dharma- 
mangala is generally regarded as the best. 

The Siva-mangala or Sivdyana has a long history, but no texts 
older than the 17th century have been discovered so far. The best 
known work is that of Ramesvar Bhattacharya who belonged to the 
first half of the 18th century A.D. 

Several texts of the Kdlikd-mahgal glorifying the Goddess 
Kali, were written during the period under review. The main theme 
is the secret love of princess Vidya and Sundara, and the Goddess 
Kali appears in these texts at the very end when the life of Sun¬ 
dara, condemned to death, is saved by her intercession. The best 
work of this class is popularly known as Vidyd-Sundara Kavya or 
Annadamangal of poet Bharata-chandra, who flourished about the mid¬ 
dle of the 18th century A.D. There are other Mangala-kdvyas glori¬ 
fying minor gods and goddesses such as Sitala, Shashthi, Lakshml, 
Kapila, etc. 


559 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Lastly, mention should be made of Rdya-mangala which glorifies 
Dakshina-raya, the Tiger-god, i.e. one by worshipping whom men 
can be saved from the tigers. With Dakshina-raya is associated the 
Kalu-raya, the god who can save men from the clutches of crocodiles, 
and a Muslim divinity Bada Khan Ghazi (presumably the saviour 
from the tyranny of the Muslims no less dreaded than tiger or croco¬ 
dile in the region of the Sundarbans where all the three were wor¬ 
shipped). An interesting episode is the fight between Dakshina- 
raya and the Ghazi which is ultimately stopped by the personal in¬ 
tervention of a god who appears on the scene in a body half of which 
is that of Krishna and half that of the Paygambara (Muslim Divi¬ 
nity ). 

3. Translations 

Reference has been made in the preceding Volume (p. 511) to 
the Bengali translation of the Rdmdyana by Kri'ttivasa. He was 
followed by many others during the period under review. Among 
them may be mentioned two Assamese authors, Madhava Kandali 
and Sankaradeva who flourished in the 16th century and translated, 
respectively, the first six and the last handas (cantos). The Assamese 
language of these translations hardly varied from the Bengali 
in those days. Among the various Bengali translators, the best known 
is Nityananda, better known as Adbhuta Acharya, whose work was 
at one time more popular than even the translation by Krittivasa, 
at least in North Bengal. 

The other great epic, the Mahdbhdrata, was translated by 
Kavindra Paramesvara, the court-poet of Paragal Khan, the Governor 
of Chittagong during the reign of Hussain Shah (1493-1519). 
Similarly Nusrat Khan, alias Chhuti Khan, son of Paragal Khan, 
had the Asvamedha-parva of Jaimini’s Mahdbhdrata translated by 
his court-poet Srikara Nandi. But the best and the most well-known 
translation of the Mahdbhdrata is the one attributed to Kasiram Das 
(Dev) which is still the most popular Bengali version—practically 
the only version known today to the generality of people, the other 
translations before and after him being practically forgotten. Yet 
it should be remembered that there are good grounds to believe 
that actually Kasiram Das translated only the first three parvas 
and about half of the fourth, the remaining fourteen and a half 
parvas being translated after his death by more than one person. 
Kasiram completed the translation of the Virat (or third) Parva 
in 1604-5 A.D. Though Kasiram was the author of only a part, 
the whole of the translation is today ascribed to him even in the 
colophons of the known manuscripts. Kasiram Das was a great poet 


560 


LITERATURE 


and so were many of his collaborators who completed the work. 
No other Bengali work, with perhaps the single exception of the 
Bengali RarndyaVa of Krittivasa, is so popular among all classes of 
people even today. These two translations which, particularly the 
Ramayana, show sometimes wide divergences from the original San¬ 
skrit texts, have enjoyed the position of national epics in Bengal for 
well nigh four hundred years. 

Like the two great epics, the Bhagavata Purdna was also trans¬ 
lated into Bengali. Raghunath Pandit, a contemporary of Chaitanya, 
wrote the Premataranginl which is really a general summary of the 
first nine skandhas (cantos) and the, literal translation of the remain¬ 
ing three skandhas of the Bhagavata. The great Sankaradeva of 
Assam mentioned above, and two other poets translated parts of 
the Bhagavata , respectively, in the 16th and 17th centuries. 

Reference may also be made to the translations of the Vaish- 
nava works of the Gosains of Brindavan, the Purdnas, Chandi and 
Bhagavad Gita. 


4. Muslim Writers 

Reference has been made above to the close political associa¬ 
tion between Bengal under the Muslim Sultans and the Mag rulers 
of Arakan. It was with the help of the ruler of Bengal that the 
king of Arakan, driven away from his kingdom by the king of 
Burma and after an exile’s life in Bengal for 26 years, regained his 
throne. Arakan was under the political domination of Bengal for 
many years, and established its authority over Chittagong for some 
years. All these evidently established a close contact between 
Bengal and Arakan, and Bengali became virtually the cultural lan¬ 
guage of Arakan. This explains how Bengali literature flourished 
in that region. The earliest Bengali poet in the court of Arakan 
was Daulat Qazi. At the command of his patron, Ashraf Khan, a 
high official in Arakan Court, he rendered into Bengali some popular 
romantic stories current in various languages—Rajasthani, Hindi, 
Gujarati, etc—in Western India in the second quarter of the 17th 
century. His poem, known as Satl May and or Lor Chandmnl was 
completed after his death by a still greater poet, Alaol, another Sufi 
in the court of Arakan, in 1659. 

Alaol, the son of a Muslim Governor of Lower Bengal, was cap¬ 
tured by the Portuguese pirates and sold as an army recruit in Ara¬ 
kan. His reputation as a poet, scholar and musician endeared him 
to Sulaiman, a minister of the king of Arakan, Srlchandra Sudharma, 
and he became a friend of Magan Thakur, the foster-son of the 
sister of the king. The Padmdvatl, the best work of Alaol, was 

561 

M.E.—36 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


written at the instance of Magan Thakur who wanted to have a ren¬ 
dering of Jayasi’s Padumdvat il 4 into Bengali verse. Alaol’s book, 
composed c. 1650 A.D., is, however, not a translation, but an ab¬ 
ridged version, embellished by additions of new episodes to make 
it more suitable to Bengali readers. Alaol’s Padmavafi is a distant 
echo of the well-known episode of the conquest of Chitor by Ala- 
ud-din Khiljl, who was infatuated by the beauty of Padmini, but 
a number of new episodes of romantic love have been freely in¬ 
troduced. Alaol also rendered into Bengali verse the Persian ro¬ 
mance SaifuLmulk badiuj-jamdl and two works of Nizami, and was 
the first to translate Persian poetry into Bengali. His poetic genius 
was revealed even in these translations. 

Though less famous than the two mentioned above, some other 
Muslim poets flourished in Bengal. One of the oldest was Sabirid 
Khan, the author of a Vidyd-Sundara Kdvya of the 16th century A.D. 
The distinctive characteristics of the Muslim poets mentioned above 
as well as several others were their adoption of pure romantic love, 
not associated with any religious episode, as the theme of their 
writings, which is almost absent in those of the Hindu poets. But 
the Muslims also wrote on religious themes such as the life of the 
Prophet, the tragedy of Hasan and Husain at Karbala, the lives of 
the Ghazis, Nabis, etc. Some Muslim poets also wrote on such subjects 
as the Sadhan and Yoga systems of the Hindus and Vaishnava songs. 
One of them, Saiyad Sultan, who hailed from Chittagong, in his 
Rasulvijaya included some Hindu gods and Avatars (incarnations) 
among the prophets. His disciple, Muhammad Khan, gave evidence 
of his knowledge of Sanskrit language and Hindu scriptures not 
only in his poem Maktul Husam (1645 A.D.) dealing with the Kar¬ 
bala tragedy, but in his Kdvya Yuga-sambdd or Satya^Kali-vivdd - 
sambdd (imaginary quarrels between the Satya and Kali yugas). A 
few Muslim writers translated some romantic Hindi or Persian 
Kdvyas or rendered a free version of them in verse. 

In conclusion, reference may be made to the only historical 
work written in Bengali during the period under review. This is 
the Rdjamald or the chronicle of the kings of Tripura (Tipperah) 
of which the first three parts, out of four, were written in the 15th, 
16th, and 17th centuries bringing the history from the very begin¬ 
ning down to the reign, respectively, of Dharmamanikya, Amara- 
manikya, and Govindamanikya. There was also another work 
dealing with historical events, named Champakavijaya . 

II. ASSAMESE 

Reference has been made to ;§ankaradeva (? 1449-1568) who 
ushered in the Bhakti movement and a new era in Assamese 


562 


LITERATURE 


literature (Vol. VI, pp. 517-18). The next great poet was his disci¬ 
ple Madhavadiasa (? 1489-1596) whose principal works followed 
more or less the lines laid down by his Guru. These include: 

(1) Bhakti-ratnavali, a study of the different aspects of bhakti 
based on a Sanskrit work, 

(2) Ndma-ghosha, or Hdzdn-ghosha, a devotional handbook or 
prayer-book of the Eka^sarana sect, consisting of a large 
number of hymns reflecting different moods of a devotee, 

(3) Bara-gitas, depicting the life of Krishna in Vrindavana 
among the gopis and containing some poems of prayer, 

(4) Nine Anikiyd Nats dealing with the life of child Krishna. 

One peculiarity of the Assamese literature of this age deserves 
notice. Like the Vaishjiava movement, of which it was a product, 
it ignored the entire episode of the love of Radha and Krishna which 
formed such an important feature in the Vaishnava movement and 
Vaishnava literature of the neighbouring States of Bengal and Mi- 
thila, and of the Braj area (Western U.P.), Rajasthan and Gujarat. 

One of the most important writers of the movement was Rama 
Sarasvatl who translated four parvas of the Mahdbhdrata under the 
patronage of king Nara-narayana of Cooch-Behar in the 16th century. 
He also rendered into Assamese some stories from the Puranas depict¬ 
ing the slaying of a demon or a hero. These are known as Vadha- 
kdvyas . Similarly Gopala-Chandra Dvija wrote in Assamese verses 
the story of Krishna as told in the Bhagavata Purdna, Vishnu Purdna 
and Harivamsa, while Bhaftadeva translated the Bhagavata Purdna 
and Bhagavad Gitd in prose. 

Assamese prose was influenced by the Sino-Tibetan speech of 

the Ahoms—who overran Assam and founded a “national” King¬ 
dom in Assam (Vol. V, pp. 44-5, Vol. VI, pp. 391-396) which en¬ 
dured throughout the Mughul period. The Ahoms used to write 
prose historical chronicles called Buranjis, in their own Sino-Tibetan 
language which went out of use by the beginning of the 18th 
century. Later, when the Ahoms adopted Assamese as their spoken 
language, the Buranjis were written in Assamese. A number of 
these Buranjis have come to light, and have been ably edited and 
published by Assamese scholars. They date from the 17th century 
onwards. They have not only enriched Assamese language and lite¬ 
rature (and extended the horizon of Indian literature as a whole) 
but throw valuable light on the political, social and economic con¬ 
dition of the country, particularly North-eastern India, during the 
17th-19th centuries. 


563 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


III. ORIYA 

The beginnings of the Jagannatha Dasa period of Oriyia litera¬ 
ture have been described in the preceding Volume (pp. 520-21). 
Many writers flourished during the period under review. They dis¬ 
tinguished themselves by translations, adaptations and imitations of 
Sanskrit books, and Oriya literature was saturated with the spirit of 
Sanskrit literature. Sanskrit religious works and classics were thus 
made available in Oriya, and there were both romances as well as a 
good deal of technical literature. Among works of outstanding 
merit may be mentioned Kdvyas based on Purianic legends by poets 
Madhusudana, Bhima, Dhivara, Sadasiva and Sisu Isvaradasa, as well 
as love-romances on non-Puranic themes by the prolific writer Dha- 
naiijaya Bhahja. The Oriya adaptation of Gltagovinda by Brinda- 
vana Dasa has preserved the music of the original, and Kahanu D;asa 
wrote a Kavya on the story of the RdmayaV^a in 108 cantos of 108 
verses each. The Rasa-kallola, dealing with the love of Radha and 
Krishna, is a curious work in which every line begins jwith the letter 
( k\ Its author, Dinakrishna Diasa, who wrote many other works, was 
not only one of the greatest Oriya poets, but also a great scholar and 
a polymath in all Sanskrit sciences. Mention should also be made of 
some other distinguished works, e.g. “the Ushabhilasa of &Isu Sankara 
Dasa, the Rahasyamanjari of Deva-durlabha Dasa, and the Rukmini - 
bibhd of Karttika Dasa. A new type, which may be called novels in 
verse, was Started from the beginning of the 17th century, when 
Ramachandra Pattanayaka wrote his HdravaU in which the hero is 
an ordinary householder’s son and the heroine is the daughter of a 
farmer. Bhupati Pandita and Lokanatha Vidyadhara were other dis¬ 
tinguished poets, of whom the former wrote a great work, the 
Prema-panchdrririta on the story of Krishna and the Vaishnava doc¬ 
trine of faith-cum-knowledge, and the latter was marked for the mel¬ 
lifluousness of his languajge, comparable in this to Jayadeva himself.” 

The poets mentioned above, generally speaking, wrote in sim¬ 
ple straightforward language, but some of them already showed 
signs of that artificial style which came to be established in the 
18th century, and was marked by “verbal jugglery, unabashed ero¬ 
ticism and even covert or open obscenity.” The greatest exponent 
of this new style was the great poet Upendra Bhanja (1670-1720) 
who ushered in a new era in Oriya literature which continued till 
the middle of the 19th century. It will be convenient, therefore, to 
deal with this phase of Oriyia literature in the next volume. 

IV. HINDI 

The greatest Hindi writer during the period under review was 
Gosvami Tulasl-dasa, born in Gonda District in Eastern U.P. some 


564 


LITERATURE 


time about A.D. 1523. He left his family, became a mendicant, 
and began to write his masterpiece Rdma-charita-manasa in A.D. 1574 
in his native AwadhI dialect (which in some respects is rather dif¬ 
ferent from the standard or Western Hindi, and hence is also 
called Eastern Hindi). It is widely read even to-day and unques¬ 
tionably, often with a modern Western Hindi bhdshcb-tiha, or trans¬ 
lation, is “the Bible of the Hindu masses of North India”. It nar¬ 
rates the story of Rama and through it propounds the philosophy of 
the Bhakti cult. It is distinguished alike by its poetic charm and 
devotional spirit and its exquisite language, popular and purely 
Indian, with its native Hindi and borrowed Sanskrit words. Apart 
from the religious and literary importance of this great work, its 
author rendered a great service to the Indians submerged under 
the flood of the Islamic conquest. A modern author has paid the 
following tribute to Tulasi-dasa which he fully deserves: 

“Tulasi was a follower and supporter of orthodox Brahmanical 
ways, and his advent with this and other books did the greatest 
service in strengthening the Hindus of Northern India in their reli¬ 
gion, their old ways, and their culture, which seemed to be over¬ 
whelmed in the flood-tide of an aggressive Islam and by the side- 
attacks on Hindu cultural life through covert preaching against or¬ 
thodoxy, which inculcated the study of Sanskrit books, going to 
places of pilgrimage and performing the various religious rites. He 
brought before the Hindus the ideal of Rama, the hero, steadfast 
and kind-hearted, truthful and beneficent, and standing up and fight¬ 
ing evil and defending the weak against the tyrannical demons and 
ogres. In the days of Turki and Pa than and Mogul rule, this 
bracing and manly ideal was a necessity for the Hindus, and it cer¬ 
tainly saved them from being cast adrift from the bases of their cul¬ 
ture. If a writer’s popularity is to be gauged by the number of 
quotations from him known to the masses, then there is none else 
in the range of Hindi to stand before Tulasi-dasa.” 5 

Tulasi-dasa wrote many other devotional works of which the 
Vinaya-Patrika (Letters of Prayer) is the most well-known and per¬ 
haps the best. He preached pure devotion to God, but believed in 
a personal God, endowed with attributes, as was represented by 
Rama, an incarnation of the supreme spirit as Vishnu. Though 
mainly devotional in spirit, the works of Tulasi-dasa also display a 
purely humanistic approach based upon a knowledge of men 
and things around him. He showed a keen sense of human duty 
and dignity, and urged upon all the pursuit of highest virtues in 
life. His works have thus a universal appeal to mankind. He 


565 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


wrote in a high-flown Sanskritized Awadhi which strengthened the 
Sanskrit tradition in North India. Tulasi-dasa died in 1623. 

The spirit of Tulasi-dasa animated a number of other writers. 
Two of his younger contemporaries, Agra-dasa and Nabhaji-dasa, 
wrote in Braj-bhasha the famous Bhakta-mala (the Garland of 
Saints), which gives brief accounts of the Vaishnava Saints from 
early period down to the time of Tulasi-dasa. An extensive com¬ 
mentary to it was written in the same language by Priya-dasa in 
1704. Hindi, or, more properly, its Braj-bkashia dialect, was also 
enriched by a number of devotional poems by another school of 
writers who regarded Krishna, rather than Rama, as the highest 
incarnation of Supreme God, and drew their inspiration from the 
Bhagavata Puvaiia, instead of the Rdmayana. The intense love of 
Radha for Krishna, and the dalliance of the latter with the gopis or 
cowherd girls of Vrindavana formed the theme of many beautiful 
lyrics, as we find in the Bengali literature of about the same time. 
The greatest poet of this school was Sura-dasa who lived probably 
from A.D. 1503 to 1563 and wrote several thousands of lovely lyrics 
on different stages of Krishna’s life. He and seven other disciples 
of Vallabhacharya formed a group of devotees and poets of the 
Kriskna-bhakti cult, known as the Ashta-chdpa or ‘the Eight Stamp- 
seals’. 

Another poet of this school who achieved great renown was 
Mira Bai (A.D. 1498 or 1503 to 1546), a Rajput princess married 
to a prince of Mewar. She became a widow at an early age and 
spent the rest of her life as a yogirii (female mendicant) or ardent 
worshipper of Krishna. Many romantic stories have gathered round 
her, and it is difficult to separate the chaff from the grain in these 
folk 'tales. The sweet melody of her devotional songs echoin|g her ab¬ 
solute self-surrender to Krishna and reflecting the throbbing yearn¬ 
ing of her heart for union with her ‘Beloved’—the Supreme God in 
the form of Krishna—captivate millions of hearts even today from 
one end of India to the other. These songs were originally com¬ 
posed in the Marwari form of Rajasthani, but their language has 
been largely altered to the Braj-bhashla dialect of Hindi in order to 
make them popular in Northern India outside Rajasthan and Gujarat. 

The Awadhi dialect of Hindi was enriched by a number of Sufi 
writers who wove some popular romantic tales of the folklore type 
into beautiful allegorical poems by way of elucidating the character¬ 
istic Sufi doctrines. Maulania Daud, the author of the oldest work 
of this type, Chanddyan (Romance of Prince Lor and his wife 
Chanda), and Kutban who composed the Mrigdvati (in A.D. 1501) 
have been mentioned above (Vol. VI, p. 505). Another poet of this 


566 


LITERATURE 


school, Manjhan, wrote the Madhu-malati (before A.D. 1532) which, 
though found in an incomplete form, displays ‘more imagination and 
glory of love’ than in Kutban’s work. But the greatest writer of this 
school was Malik Muhammad Jay as! whose famous poem Paiduma- 
vati was composed between A.D. 1520 and 1540. It is a “detailed 
Sufi allegorical treatment of the famous story of Padminl of Chitor” 
(see above, Vol. VI, pp. 26-7, and p. 50 fn. 21). The work is gene¬ 
rally regarded as ‘one of the greatest books of medieval Indian 
literature’, and its author, ‘a worthy precursor of Tulasl-dasa in writ¬ 
ing a chaste and properly Sanskrit Awadhi—perhaps the best form 
of Early Awadhi.’ The high poetic qualities of the work are widely 
appreciated. It was translated into Bengali by a Muslim Bengali 
poet of Arakan in the 17th century, 6 and recently it has been render¬ 
ed into English. The tradition of this school was continued by a 
number of other Muslim podts, belonging to the 17th and 18th cen¬ 
turies, viz. Usman, Shaikh Nabl, Kasim and Nur Muhammad. The 
latest writer in this line was Nazir Ahmad of Pratap-garh, who 
composed his romance of Nur-Jahan in 1905. 

The tradition of Kabir was continued by the mystic poet Dadu 
Dayal (1544-1603), who is regarded as a great poet and a later coun¬ 
terpart of Kabir. His works show an admixture of Braj-bhasha and 
old Kharl-boli as in the case of Kabir. 

Literature in Braj-bhasha flourished under the patronage of 
Akbar and was enriched by the poets and musicians of his court, 
including Tansen who wrote ‘highly poetic and sometimes profound 
songs on various topics, devotional, panegyrical and descriptive’. 
Special reference may be made to Abdur Rahim Khan-Khanan (1533- 
1626) the son of Bair am Khan (see pp. 104-10). He imbibed the 
Hindu spirit and wrote in Braj-bhasha poems on Krishna and other 
topics. Many well-known figures in Akbar’s court, like Todar Mall, 
his finance minister, and BIrbal, his boon companion and court jester, 
were also literary men. One of these, Kesava-dasa (1565-1617) in¬ 
troduced a deliberately and artificially rhetorical and artistic type 
of literature. 

“The poets of this Rhetorical School busied themselves with 
charming lyrical verses describing the beauty of fair women, nakha- 
sikha , ‘from the nails of the toes to the topknot of hair’, cap-a-pie, 
so to say, and the different types of ladies in love, whether married 
or unmarried ( Ndyika-bheda ); the moods of lovers and sweethearts 
or married lovers; the various Rdgas and Rdgiriis or Musical Modes, 
conceived as heroes and heroines or as divinities male or female; 
descriptions of the Seasons (particularly revelling in the accounts 
of the rainy season and the spring); women in their occupations, 


567 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


avocations and amusements, and social unions; of the various months 
narrating the occupations and distractions of lovers in union or in 
separation (milana and biraha) —the Baraha-imasi poems; and ela¬ 
borate classifications of figures of speech, of the various sentiments 
(rasas), etc. It was a most complicated Ars Poetica and Ars Amato- 
ria of late Medieval India, and all this finds its own proper or fitting 
illustration in different schools of Medieval Indian painting—Rajput 
and other Hindu (including Orissan and Dakhni, and the schools 
of the Panjab Hills), and Moghul. It became the most engrossing 
subject-matter for ‘Hindi’ and Rajasthani poets—and poets by the 
score in every decade—for three centuries, Hindus and Muslims, 
Brahmans and low caste people, men and women, composed on the 
above themes.” 7 

Hindi literature in the 17th century is not marked by any ori¬ 
ginality, and it merely followed the old types and traditions. So far 
as the subject-matter is concerned, the noteworthy poets were 
“writers on rhetoric and erotics, with an undercurrent of Krsna- 
bhakti or Rama-bhakti or Sufism. Their names are respected in 
annals of Hindi literature, but they hardly have an appeal for any¬ 
body except the specialist scholar.” 8 

Mention may be made of Biharllal, the court-poet of Jay Singh 
Raja of Amber, and the famous author of the Satasal or Collection of 
Seven Hundred Verses. Another notable poet was Bhushana (1613- 
1712) who distinguished himself by writing laudatory verses in Braj- 
bhasha in honour of ShivajI for his heroic fight against Aurangzlb with 
a view to setting up independent Hindu rule in India. These poems 
are specially valuable not merely for their forceful and elegant lan¬ 
guage, poetic imagery and musical melody, but also for the patriotic 
spirit, so rarely displayed by a Hindu writer in the Medieval Age. 

Many other poets flourished in the 17th century, following 
either the Kablr or the Jay as! tradition. It is worthy of note that 
even after the emergence of Urdu literature in North India, many 
Muslim writers still adhered to the old Hindi tradition. The last 
great Hindi poet during the period under review was Lai Kavi or 
Gorelal Purohit, who wrote in 1707 the Chhatra-prakdsa, a beauti¬ 
ful epic biography of Chhatrasal, Raja of Bundelkhand. 

Guru Govind Singh, the last of the Sikh Gurus (1666-1709), is 
included among the illustrious writers of Hindi, for he composed 
some important works in an old almost Apabhramsa style of Hindi, 
including the autobiographical poem, the Bichitra Ndtak (the won¬ 
derful Drama). 9 


568 


LITERATURE 


The Hindi literature described above was wholly in verse. The 
beginnings of Hindi prose writings, both Khari Boll i.e. Delhi-Hindi, 
and Braj-bhasha go back to the 16th century, and the style is illus¬ 
trated by Sufi works and by biographies of some Vaishnavai devotees 
of the Krishria-bhakti school. But good modern Hindi prose did not 
make its appearance before the 18th century. 

V. GUJARATI 

Even in the 15th century Rarmananda’s influence in Gujarat 
was wide-spread and claimed writers like Bhalan (1494-1554 A.D.) 
who successfully translated Bana’s great classic KddambarT. 
Bhalan had studied the epics and the Pur anas in the original. He 
borrowed the episodes from these sources and moulded them in 
contemporary sentiments thus giving a distinct literary form 
through dkhydnas. Jayadeva’s Gitagovinda and Bopadeva’s Harilild- 
mritci, dealing with the amours of Sri Krishna had by now lent a 
new dimension to the folk-songs relating to Radha-Krishna. Bhalan 
wrote several works depicting episodes from Sri Krishna’s life, mak¬ 
ing a free use of garabis . 10 He also composed poems in Braj-bhasha. 11 
Poets from different parts of Gujarat, Kesav Hrideram (C. 1536) and 
Nlakar (C. 1550) composed similar dkhydnas, using the Bhagavata, the 
Ramdyana and Bhalan’s Saptasati. A professional class of Bhah- 
mins called the gdgariabhats, the popular counterparts of the Pura- 
niks, sprang up in whose hands the dkhydna literature became a 
living tradition. 113 

The Bhakti cult, particularly the school founded by Chaitanya 
in Vrindavan, strongly influenced Gujarati literature. Miranbai 
and Narasiihha Mehta, the two greatest poets of Gujarat were in¬ 
fluenced by the Vrindavan school. A pattern of poetic rhapsody 
developed, imbibing its inspiration from the legacy of Sri Krishna’s 
pastoral romance in the woodlands of Vrindavan and combining 
lyrical verse, musical symphony and a responsive dance movement 
(rasa). The sweet strains of iSrl Krishna’s magic flute were heard 
time and again and the glimpses of His eternal rdsallla recreated in 
the poetic compositions of these two great bhaktas of i§rl Krishna. 

To Mirah, the divine singer of Lord Krishna, whom she con¬ 
sidered as a living Bridegroom, the feet of Sri Krishna were her 
be-all and end-all of life. She regarded herself as a gopi of Vrin¬ 
davan. 12 Her earlier songs addressed to Girdhar Gopal were written 
in pure homely Rajasthan!!, the parent of modern Gujarati, Mevadi 
and Marwadi, whereas her later songs have the impress of Braj-bhasha, 
the sweet language of love and devotion. In company of devotees 
of Lord Krishna at Dwaraka, she blossomed forth into Gujarati with 


569 



THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


the same ease with which she wrote her earlier songs. She has thus 
been claimed by three regions and three languages. 13 Her songs 
breathe a rare intensity of feeling and sensitiveness of emotions. In 
sairitliness and poetic fervour, Mlran is peerless in Vaislniava lite¬ 
rature. 

Narasimha Mehta, who also lived in the sixteenth century, 14 
ushered in philosophical poetry and gave a new impetus to Bhakti. 
About his well-known Bhajan “ Vaishnava Jana to tone Kahiye,” 
Mahatma Gandhi wrote: “That one song is enough to sustain me, 
even if I were to forget the Bhagavad Gita”. The poet-saint not 
only composed this favourite hymn of Gandhiji and sang it but also 
lived it. And living it was a heroic struggle to this Krishna- 
Bhakta, who was deserted by his own relatives, spurned and thrown 
out by his own Nagar Brahmin community and left desolate by 
many a domestic calamity. But not once was the saint forsaken 
by Lord Krishna, for the humble devotee placed his whole life at 
the lotus feet of the Lord as a little flower of devotion. 15 

The bulk of Narasimha’s works which consists of padas , about 
seven hundred and forty in number, are collected in SringarrruLla. 
His Rasasahasrapadi is a free and elaborate rendering of rasa as de¬ 
picted in the Bhagavata which also became a source of his large 
volume of poems relating to the episodes in Sri Krishna’s life. His 
poems and songs with their rich vocabulary and charm of language 
have exercised a great influence on literature and sentiments of 
many generations. He was the finest representative of Bhakti in 
Gujarat. 

Popular fiction continued to be cultivated in Gujarat along 
with adaptations of Puranic episodes. Many authors diverted their 
attention from religious to secular literature. The stories which 
were imitations of Gunadhya, the author of Brihatkatha in Prakrit, 
depicted men and women making love, going through intriguing 
adventures, propounding and solving riddles in each other’s com¬ 
pany. As such literature fired the imagination of the people, 
Bhakti, whose intensity by its very nature could be the privilege of 
a few, lost its vitality, giving way to contemplation of the futility 
of life and a sense of world-weariness. To be alive was to die to 
the joys of life: it was a precursor of a happy existence after death. 
This gospel, a result of the stagnant and political conditions of the 
time, found expression in the works of Akho or Akha Bhagat 
(C. 1615-1674). 

Akho, the philosopher-poet, is hardly known outside Gujarat. 
Even in Gujarat not much that is authentic about his life is known 


570 


LITERATURE 


except some legendary accounts mostly garnered through his 
poetry. 16 A goldsmith by caste, Akho lost his parents early in life. 
His only sister and young wife also passed away. A lady whom he 
cherished as a sister suspected his honesty. While working in a 
royal mint, he was imprisoned on a charge of committing defalca¬ 
tion. Disgusted with a world so full of distrust and suspicion, he 
sought refuge in prayer and performed many rituals, but found no 
peace. His wanderings took him to Kasi where he found solace in 
the Vedantic philosophy. But he had seen social iniquities and all 
that was sham in the garb of religion; these served as a fine fabric 
which he fashioned into poetry. 

Popularly known as the Vedantakavisiromani, 17 Akho was a 
seeker of ancient wisdom. His several works expounding the Ad- 
vaita philosophy include Akhegltd, his best work wherein his crea¬ 
tive faculties and philosophic thought find a full scope. He also 
has composed seven hundred Chhappais, epigrammatic stanzas and 
many poems in Hindi. He has given to the people the essence of 
the Vedanta philosophy in a language that can easily be under¬ 
stood. In literary humour in which he blended biting wit with 
words of wisdom, Akho has few equals. 

The credit of plumbing the hearts of the people and gratifying 
their literary thirst goes to Premanand (1636-1724 A.D.), a born 
poet whose talent would have shone in any age and in any language. 18 
He was the greatest medieval poet and has to his credit as many as 
fifty-seven works which were very popular. His works can be 
broadly divided into the Akhydnas from the Epics and the Puranas. 
He also composed original poems depicting the incidents in the life 
of the great poet-saint Narasimha Mehta. A supreme master in the 
art of narrative poetry, Premanand kept alive the Puranic traditions 
and gave the people episodes, fully interwoven with vivid and 
colourful pictures of contemporary life. 

Samalbhatt, born about the year 1700, was, after Premanand, the 
most notable poet of the period. Many Puranic works and those of 
fiction are attributed to him. Gifted with a matchless style and 
wonderful power of story-telling, he presented stories of worldly 
wisdom, preserved the romantic atmosphere of early fiction, and pro¬ 
vided a valuable literature of escape from the morbid influences of 
his times. 

Mention must be made of the literary activity of the Jaina 
sddhus during the period under review. They continued to compose 
charitas of their tirthankaras, chakravartins and saints as their pre¬ 
decessors had done in tedious, monotonous rhyme. For variation 
sometimes they chose Kumarpal and Vastupal as their themes. Their 


571 


THE MTJGHUL EMPIRE 


language was archaic, and the religious and moral precepts in their 
compositions made them hardly attractive. However, a few Jaina 
scholars deserve recognition. The most notable writer of the 16th 
century was Lavanyasamay who composed over twenty-nine works. 
Four of these are rasas of tirthankaras and saints. One is Rdvanaman - 
dodarisamvdd, a work based on the Rdmdyana. He also wrote the 
well-known Vimalaprabandh and other religious and ethical poems. 
His successor, Nayasundar, who was a student of the Sanskrit, Prakrit, 
Hindi and Urdu literatures wrote three social rasas, one Puranic rasa 
and two religious works. He embellished old rasa stories with a 
wealth of literary and emotional shades from Sanskrit works. His 
Naladamayantirds is considered to be a rendering of a lost Sanskrit 
work called Naldyana. Another sddhu of considerable literary 
powers was Samayasundar, who composed about twenty long works, 
besides a large number of small poems. Rishabhadas was yet another 
Jaina author with an untiring energy who is credited with thirty- 
two works which include sixteen rasas on tirthankaras and saints. 

VI. PUNJABI 

The Beginnings of Punjabi Literature: 

There is no written record of any Punjabi literary work prior 
to the time of Guru Nanak (1469-1538), founder of the Sikh faith. 
The Punjabi language, of course, is much older, having developed 
out of a Saurasem apabhramsa along more or less the same gram¬ 
matical lines as Braj-bhasha, Rajasthani and Pahari, by about A.D. 
1300 (Cf. Vol. VI, pp. 493-4). 

The earliest authentic record of writing in Punjabi, where we 
may see the fixed forms of words and other traditions in language 
and literature, is the Sikh scripture, an anthology known as the Adi 
Granth, compiled finally in 1604 by Guru Arjun Dev, fifth in the 
line of the Gurus of the Sikh faith. Since by the Guru’s ordinance 
it would be sacrilegious for anyone to introduce any alteration, how¬ 
ever minor, into the recorded text, this vast store of writing is now 
before us precisely in its original form and harks back at least to 
the 15th century, if not to earlier period. As has been pointed out 
by scholars, the Adi Granth is an unparalleled treasure-house of nor¬ 
thern Indian medieval literature and verbal forms, and of literary 
traditions which can be studied in their authentic shape in it. 

The Adi Granth: 

The greatest work in Punjabi is the Adi Granth (lit. The Primal 
Scripture), sacred book of the Sikh people. Its nature and im¬ 
portance have been discussed in Chapter XX, Section II. As far 


572 


LITERATURE 


as the character of its language goes, it is only in part pure or 
nearly pure Punjabi. For the rest it is either some variety of 
Hindi, or combined Hindi-Marathi. 

The arrangement of the hymns in the Adi Granth is, as was 
customary in medieval India, in accordance with the rdgas or 
musical measures in which these are to be sung. 

The themes which form the basis of the devotional composi¬ 
tions of the Gurus are the nature and attributes of the Creator; the 
spiritual quest which consists on the one side in freeing the mind 
of the great illusion, Mdyd, and on the other in fervent devotion to 
God conceived of as the Beloved-Lord; the supreme importance of 
relating the spiritual life to the realisation of moral responsibility; 
the objective of the religious life as the attainment of Mukti, 
Nirvana, which in essence means the attainment of the state of 
spiritual-moral enlightenment; and untiring emphasis on the essence 
of the religious life as devotion, enlightenment ( Jndna ) and acts of 
disinterested good (Seva). The entire message is expressed in 
poetry, which through powerful image and symbol impresses the 
movement of the soul on the listener’s mind and thus acts so as to 
‘convert’ him. 

Significant words from Muslim tradition are also employed, parti¬ 
cularly those made familiar to the people in general by the pro¬ 
pagation of Islam and the mingling of Hindus and Muslims in the 
population for three centuries or more. A fairly large collection 
of words of Persian or Arabic origin can be made from the pages 
of the Adi Granth. 

A considerable part of the terminology employed by the Gurus 
comes from the practice of medieval Yoga, particularly in its adum¬ 
bration of the spiritual ideal to be attained. 

The style in which Guru Nanak has poured forth his soul is 
generally highly compact and aphoristic, as indicating a mind 
given to expressing itself in formulae or Sutras as in the Indian 
spiritual tradition in general. Deep, reflective and intuitive pro¬ 
cesses of the soul, blossoming forth into these aphoristic utterances 
—such is the impression which Guru Nanak’s compositions leave 
on the mind. Guru Nanak’s successors, in general, re-express his 
themes and purport, and his very phrases, expressive of deep spiri¬ 
tual vision, are met with again and again in their compositions. 

One prevalent characteristic of the hymns of the Adi Granth, 
poetically of greater relevance from the literary point of view than 
the philosophy, teaching or message, is the adoption by the Gurus 
of that Indian tradition of devotional-lyrical poetry in which the 


573 



THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


entire symbolism of erotic poetry, applied to men and women is 
transferred to the spiritual quest and passion. In other words, this 
poetry is devotional-mystical as well as highly metaphysical 
adopting the style and tradition of medieval Indian eroticism, made 
current by the devotees of the Krishna cult. The Gurus, of course, 
adopt as the object of their devotion not the divine cowherd 
Krishna, but the Transcendent Creator, Par-Brahm. 

Other Sikh Writers: 

Besides the compositions of the Gurus, highly influential and 
poetically significant work in the exposition of the principles of the 
Sikh faith was done by Bhai Gurdas (1559-1637). Bhai Gurdas 
truly transferred to his own language the thought, tradition and 
philosophy of India which till then had been confined in northern 
India to various forms of Hindi and Bengali. He displays mastery 
of a variety of metres and in each stanza, built on a continuing 
rhyme-scheme, a wealth of resource in that direction which makes 
reading him a sheer intellectual treat. Some of the passages, such 
as those on Guru Nanak’s Advent in Canto one and that on Guru 
Arjun, the Martyr, in Canto twenty-four, are examples of the 
supreme poetry of vision. Bhai Gurdas is a great poet whose work 
should be better known outside the limited circle of those who can 
read Punjabi in Gurmukhi. 

A good deal of devotional poetry relating to the Sikh faith 
was also produced during this period. More significant outside the 
main stream, is the prose literature which grew in this period. 
This literature too relates mainly to the exposition of various as¬ 
pects of the Sikh faith. This may be divided into two broad cate¬ 
gories: (a) The Biographies called Janam-Sakhis (lit. ‘testament 
of birth’) of Guru Nanak, of which there are several; (b) exposition 
and exegesis of the principles and texts of the Sikh faith. Among 
the Janam-Sdkhis the oldest and the one from which stems the en¬ 
tire basis of the life-story of Guru Nanak is that of unknown 
authorship, known as the Purdtan (ancient, old) Janam-Sdkhi, 
whose only extant copy is now available in manuscript form in the 
British Museum. The Punjab Government in 1885 got it printed 
in zinco-photography and it can be seen now in the published copies 
in exact form and feature. The date of its composition from in¬ 
ternal evidence works out to be about 1633. 

Among other writers of religious prose, falling slightly outside 
the strict limits of the period under treatment here, though belong¬ 
ing completely to its tradition, is the great martyr, Bhai Mani Singh, 
a direct disciple and school-mate of Guru Govind Singh. In his 


574 


LITERATURE 


Gian Ratnavali he has composed the life-story of Guru Nanak as 
well as treated various issues concerning faith and the spiritual 
life. In his language he is closer rather to the idiom of central 
Punjabi with an admixture of Hindi. 

The Romancers: 

In the secular field, there was a good deal of literary produc¬ 
tion in Punjabi during this period of the consolidation of Mughul 
rule over India. Most of those who composed romantic and other 
tales were Muslims. Their works in Punjabi have popularly been 
known as Kissas (more puristically Qissas) which means ‘tales’. 
One of the earliest of the writers of Kissas was a Hindu, Damodar 
Ghulati, who flourished during the reign of Akbar to whom he 
makes a number of encomiastic references in the course of his narra¬ 
tive. The tale he composed is the most famous in the romantic 
lore of the Punjab—that of the lovers Hlr and Ranjha. Because 
of the orientation and finish given to this tale later by Waris 
Shiah, as also the tragic finale of his version, it has become the 
romance par excellence of the Punjab, and every Punjabi youth 
fancies himself in his romantic years the prototype of Ranjha and 
his sweet-heart the beauteous, faithful Hlr. Damodar’s version 
of the tale, whose incidents must have been older than his own time, 
despite his avowal that he was an eye-witness of all that he narrates, 
is plain and unvarnished, in a halting form of the popular metre 
called Dwaiya. 

Waris Shah, whose version of the Hlr Ranjha story, as said 
earlier, is the most popular, was a gifted poet, with flow, command 
of good dialogue, deeply reflective and tragic tones, and an under¬ 
standing of the human heart with which only the more imaginative 
poets are gifted. His version of the story is tragic, in the way 
somewhat of the story of Romeo and Juliet. On a false report that 
Hlr has died, Ranjha takes his own life. Later, Hlr dies on hear¬ 
ing of the sacrifice of Ranjha. The limping villain, Kaido, who plays 
something like an Iago in ruining these lovers, is a very well-known 
character in Punjab folk-lore and his name has become a by-word 
for perfidy and intrigue. Waris himself, and his creations Hlr and 
Ranjha are the national figures of the Punjab, both in the Indian 
and Pakistani countryside. The very popularity of Waris Shah’s 
version brought in continuing interpolations, which very often look 
like the genuine original passages. 

Another famous romance of the Punjab countryside is the story 
of the Muslim lovers, Mlrza and Sahiban. The most famous ver¬ 
sion of the Mlrza Sahiban story is that by Peelu. This is a tale 




575 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


of chivalry and honour and the betrayal of love for family piety. 
Sahiban’s entreaty to Mlrzia to save his life by escaping the wrath 
of her brothers, despite her loyalty to her father’s house, is one of 
the finest treatments of a theme involving psychological conflict. 
Mlrzia, too, like Ranjha, is a hero of thq Punjabi youth, and his story 
evokes admiration, rather than compassion, unlike the story of Hlr 
and Ranjha. 

A Hindu poet, Aggra, composed the Saga or Var of Haqiqat 
Rai, a Sikh-Hindu youth martyred during the reign of Shah Jahan 
for his faith at Lahore. 

The Sufi Poets: 

The folk Sufi poets of the Punjab, while basing their experi¬ 
ences within the four walls of the Muslim Sufi doctrine, and em¬ 
ploying in their compositions occasionally terms drawn from the 
long tradition of Sufi lore, have employed mainly the symbols and 
images drawn from the Punjab countryside. Spiritual urges are 
expressed in terms of the simple objects familiar to the common 
country-folk, such, for example, as the spinning-wheel, the Persian- 
wheel, the dancing dervishes, characters drawn from popular 
romances and mythology, Hindu as well as Muslim. The language 
employed by these Sufi poets is generally pure Punjabi of the wes¬ 
tern variety, with the rarest touch, here and there, of Hindi, drawn 
from( the lore of the parallel Hindu orders of Yogis. Through their 
language and its musical tones these poets are able to transmit pas¬ 
sion and ecstasy. Sufi poetry, because of its appeal to the heart, 
is highly popular among people of all communities in the Punjab. 

Among the Sufis of this period there are Hafiz t Barkhudar Vajid, 
‘All Haidar, Sultan Bahu, Shah Hussain, and Bulhe Shah. The last 
three deserve a somewhat detailed notice for the power and popu¬ 
larity of their work. Sultan Bahu (1631-1691), a mystic dervish, 
belonged to the Jhang region (now in Pakistan) and expressed him¬ 
self in passionate poetry of devotion and renunciation. His effective 
use of dialect and his rhythm echoing the movement of the soul have 
imparted to his verse the power to move and to transport. 

Shah Hussain (1539-1593) was a fakir , given to a somewhat 
free way of life, and while perhaps reproved by orthodoxy, was 
loved by the people for the sincerity of his passion and devotion. 
His lyrics are passionate and respond immediately to music. They 
are suffused with ecstasy and are some of the best and purest ex¬ 
amples of lyrical poetry in Punjabi. The variety of poetry prac¬ 
tised by Hussain, as indeed by other Sufi poets,' is the Kafi, which is 


576 


LITERATURE 


the song-lyric of western Punjabi, and connotes as much a musical 
measure as the lyrical content. 

Bulhe Shah (1680-1758) is the prince of Punjabi Sufi poets. 
His lyrics or Kalis have, like the romantic stanzas of Waris Shah, 
passed into the tradition of the Punjab. Bulhe Shah has expressed 
the religion of the spirit, which transcends the creeds, and trans¬ 
mits ecstasy, resignation and the sheer passion and mood of love. 
His symbols are of the Punjab countryside, and his verse has passed 
into folk-lore. His rhythms are like the tuning of the flute and the 
gyrations of dance. Through his verse the fine feelings of the 
Punjab people found expression and self-awareness, in a manner 
which is more truly aesthetic than doctrinal or spiritual. 

VII. KASMlRI 

Not much is definitely known about Kasmlrl literature before 
the 15th century. Apart from some doubtful specimens furnished by 
a few stray verses, the poetic compositions of Lalla Didi (Lai Ded), 
in a modern Kdsmiri form , represent the oldest specimens of Kas- 
mirl, which have been preserved down to our own times by oral 
tradition. Lalla was born in A.D. 1335 and died between 1383 and 
1386. She had an unhappy domestic life, became a Sanydsirii (as¬ 
cetic) called Lalla Yoglsvarl, and wandered about singing her little 
poems of mystic perception of Siva, of which more than a hundred 
have been edited and translated by Sir George Abraham Grierson. 
Next in point of time is another mystics poet, a Muslim Saint named 
Shah Nur-ud-dln (called by the Hindus Nanda Rishi), whose ‘‘verses 
and sayings known as sruks give expression to his profound faith 
in and love for God, and his catholicity of outlook”. These verses 
have been collected in a book known as Rishimamah or Nur-ndmah, 
a good portion of which is, however, considered as probably spu¬ 
rious by competent authorities. During the rule of the enlightened 
Sultan Zain-ul-‘AbidIn (1420-70) flourished a number of writers in 
both Persian and Sanskrit, as well as in Kasmlrl. But their works, 
mostly biographical and panegyrical, are now unknown. 

During the 16th century the Kasmlrl literature was enriched 
by the exquisite lyrics of love and life composed by a lady, popu¬ 
larly known as Habba Khotun, who passed through strange vicis¬ 
situdes in life. Born as a village girl and named Zun (Moonlight— 
Sanskrit Jyotsnd ), she had an unhappy married life like Lalla, but 
the king of Kasmlr, Yusuf Shah Chak (1580-86), got her divorced 
and married her. But she enjoyed only a few years of happy life 
of a queen beloved by her husband. For Akbar, after conquering 
Kasmlr, carried off the king who was never allowed to return. 

577 

M.E.—37 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Habba Khotun lived for 20 years more, virtually as a hermitess. 
She is one of the most popular poetesses and occupies a place in 
the forefront of Kaismlrl literature. Among other poets who wrote 
in Kasmlrl during the period under review, mention may be made 
of Khwajah Hablbullah Naushahri who wrote a series of lyric 
poems, the Hindu poet Sahib Kaul, the author of Krishna-avatara 
and the Janccm-charita, both based on the Puranas, and the poetess 
Rupa-bhavanI (1624-1720) who wrote a number of religious poems 
in a highly Sanskritized language. 

VIII. MARATHI 

Marathi literature of this period was given a vigorous start by 
three eminent saints: Santa Ekanatha, Santa Tukarama and 
SvamI Ramadasa. Their contribution is both voluminous and 
varied. They revolutionised the tone of religious writing, provid¬ 
ed forms for artistic writing and set high standards of aesthetic 
expression. Their works inspired several able writers who further 
enriched the Marathi literature, so much so that this period can be 
justly termed as the most glorious period. 

While the saints and writers of this age were faithful followers 
of the Bhakti mcLrga initiated in Maharashtra by Jhanesvara and 
Namadeva, the literature of this period reveals a keen awareness on 
the part of the writers of the radically changed political, social and 
religious environment. 

Santa Jhanesvara flourished in the period of the Yadavas who 
were able to ensure their people peace and prosperity. With the 
fall of this dynasty and the advent of the Muslims, the people of 
Maharashtra were put to untold miseries. There was no security 
of life and property. People naturally lost their faith and neglected 
their social obligations. There was thus an urgent need of a move¬ 
ment that could restore the faith of the people in their ancient reli¬ 
gion and culture as well as give them fresh hope and confidence. 
This work of national rejuvenation was accomplished by the saints 
and writers of the age under review. We find in the annals of this 
age the unique reconciliation of worldly and spiritual life, an active 
implementation of the altruistic faith and a vigorous plea for, and 
practice of, the philosophy of activism. 

It is significant that this new cultural and literary movement 
can be traced to the very age in which we witness the advent of 
the Muslims into the Deccan. Janardana SvamI (1504-1575), the 
teacher of Santa Ekanatha, was initiated into this spiritual tradi¬ 
tion by the famous saint Nrisimha Sarasvatl, popularly known as 
Sri Guru Dattatreya. Janardana SvamI was advised to lead the 


578 


LITERATURE 


worldly life and the spiritual life simultaneously. He was later ap¬ 
pointed the governor of a fort under a Muslim ruler and attained 
fame as an able statesman, too. Thus, he demonstrated in that diffi¬ 
cult age how the worldly life and the spiritual life can be recon¬ 
ciled to the advantage of both the individual and the society. 
Dr. R. D. Ranade rightly points out that the Svami’s life and the 
abhangas (laudatory verses) reveal such a unique reconciliation of 
worldly and spiritual life as was never attained either before or 
after. No wonder that the Svami was able to give Maharashtra an 
outstanding saint and writer of the eminence of Santa Ekanatha. 

The works of Santa Ekanatha (1533-1599) 19 reveal his mastery 
of the Bhagavata, the Bhagavad Gita, the Jndnesvarl and the epics. 
They also reflect his great spiritual achievements. His commentary 
on the 11th chapter of the Bhdgavata, known as the Ekanathi Bhd¬ 
gavata, runs into 18,800 ovi verses and is undoubtedly his master¬ 
piece. Next comes his Bhdvdrtha Rdmayana. (40,000 ovi verses), 
followed by Rukminl Svayamvara (1,711 ovi verses). In addition 
to these he has composed hundreds of abhangas, gaulans, bharudas 
as well as commentaries on the Chatuhsloki Bhdgavata, Svatma- 
sukha and Chiranjivapada. His is the unique distinction of having 
prepared the scholarly edition of the JnanesvarT. 

Ekanatha’s Bha\gavata is a spiritual treatise while his abhangas 
narrate his own spiritual experiences. He made the ideas of the 
Vedanta popular through his works. His Rukmini-Svayamvara is 
a fine poetical work with the theme of the union of Jiva and Siva. 
The epic fight of Rama and Ravana is depicted by him as the eternal 
struggle between the soul and the ego. He propagated the path of 
bhakti which led to the service of one’s fellow-beings. Thus he 
combined successfully religion with social service. Indeed, his 
sympathy and affection for all was really the source of his effective 
delineation of all the rasas in his narratives and the abhangas. 
His passionate love of Manathi is expressed thus: 

If Sanskrit was made by God, was Prakrit born of thieves 
and knaves? Let these errings of vanity alone. Whether it is 
Sanskrit or Prakrit, wherever the story of God is told it is 
essentially holy and must be respected. God is no partisan of 
tongues. To Him Prakrit and Sanskrit are alike. My language, 
Marathi, is worthy of expressing the highest sentiments, and is 
rich-laden with the fruits of divine knowledge. 

No wonder that Ekanatha occupies a high place among the 
saints of Maharashtra as well as among the great poets. 


579 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


According to tradition, a group of five writers form the Eka¬ 
natha Panchaka; they are: Ekanatha, Rama Janardana, Jani 
Janardana, Vitha Renukanandana and Dasopanta. Dasopanta 
(1559-1615) has left behind him a rich legacy of 45 works running 
into more than 200 thousand 5vi verses. His Gitdrnava, Gitartha- 
bodha-chandrikd , Granthamja, Panchikarana and numerous col¬ 
lections of songs and poems, are still popular and held in high re¬ 
gard. He composed songs in Kannada and Telugu, too. His com¬ 
mentaries on the Bhagavad Gita reflect his original and dynamic 
thinking on many philosophic and religious problems while his pro¬ 
found scholarship, high poetic ability and deep faith in religious 
and cultural traditions are revealed in his other works. 

The first Marathi version of the Mahdbharata was composed by 
Vishnudasanama, a senior contemporary of Ekanatha. The Budha- 
bavani and Sukdkhyana are his other works. His prayer addressed 
to KamakshidevI has given rise to the speculation that he hailed 
from Goa. 

Of the several other poets of this period, mention may be made 
of Sivakalyana, Mrityunjaya, Ranganatha Mogarekar, Tryam- 
bakaraj, Ramavallabhadasa, Mahalihgadasa and Lolimbaraja who 
have contributed much to the narrative poetry in Marathi. Of 
special interest is the Gurucharitra, a biography of Sri Nrisimha 
Sarasvati by Saras vati Gahgadhara of the Kannada region. This 
work is the first to use the phrase ‘Maharashtra Dharma ’ and is a 
useful source for the study of contemporary cultural traditions. 

Santalingappa, a Lingayata poet, was the author of Karana- 
hastaki —a poetical exposition of the principles of the Lingayata sect. 

Shaikh Muhammad was the author of the Yogasarvgrdma , Pavana- 
vijaya , Nishkalanka-prabodha and Jnanasdgara, in addition to many 
songs and abhangas . Mutoji Vazir-ul-mulk, a princely scholar, 
composed in Marathi a commentary on Sangita Makaranda, a San¬ 
skrit treatise on music. Hussain Ambar wrote his Amhar Huseni — 
a Marathi commentary on the Bhagavad Gitd in 816 ovi verses. 

This forceful literary movement spread far and wide and 
brought under its influence people of all castes and creeds. Father 
Thomas Stephens, an English priest, found the Purdnic form quite 
useful for propagating Christian religion among the natives. His 
'• • y m 11 j 0 0 0 ovi verses of chaste Marathi, is 

still regarded as one of the fascinating works in that language. As 
the title suggests, it is a collection of stories and anecdotes from 
the life of Jesus Christ cited in the Bible. His praise of Marathi 
language is noteworthy: “Greenest among the herbs, sapphire 


580 


LITERATURE 


among jewels, that is my language, Marathi.” Another Christian 
preacher, Father Croix, composed his Peter Pumna which is a poor 
imitation of the Khrishta Pumna. Moreover, his uncalled for ridi- 
cule of the Hindu gods and goddesses, customs and manners, has 
vitiated the value of the work. 

Santa Tukarama (1598-1650) gave a fresh and a more vigorous 
momentum to the Marathi literary movement. Born in a Kunabi 
(Sudra?) family of the Vitthala tradition, Tukarama was a small- 
scale merchant. Rakhumabai and Jijabai were his wives. In 1619, 
when he was only 21 years old, his family life was ruined by the 
death of his firss wife and first son, both victims of the severe famine. 
His trade was ruined too. Thus deprived of his family and occu¬ 
pation, he turned to the spiritual life. He was initiated by Guru 
Babaji in a dream, with the mantra of Rama Krishna Hari. In an¬ 
other dream, Tukarama had the vision of God Vitthala with Nama- 
deva who advised him to compose the abhangas. Tukarama then 
studied the works of Jnanadeva, Namadeva, Kabir and Ekanatha. 

Tukarama composed numerous abhangas and sang them in the 
assemblies of the devotees. Scholars have accepted at least 4500 
abhangas as his, and they reveal his many-sided splendid persona¬ 
lity: his deep study of the Bhdgavata, the Bhagavad Gita , as also the 
works of Jnanadeva, Namadeva and Ekanatha; his firm belief in 
God; his faith in religion; his universal love; his great spiritual 
attainments. His accepted mission was to propagate religion; “to 
advance religion and to destroy atheism is my business”, says he. 
His contribution to the religious literature of Maharashtra is thus 
really great. His abhangas are sung with delight even to-day, and 
they are still the source of inspiration for social progress. 

SantajI Teli, Ramesvarabhatta, Sivaba Kasara, Mahadajipanta 
Kulkarni, Niloba and Bahinabal were the more distinguished dis¬ 
ciples of Tukarama who have enriched the devotional literature in 
Marathi. 

Tukarama was forced into the spiritual world by his adversities. 
His teachings, therefore, came to be characterised by a measure 
of pessimism. His emphasis on the need of a detached life was 
often misunderstood for a total renunciation of worldly life and 
social obligations. In the context of the political and social condi¬ 
tions of the period such a world-negating attitude could have been 
undesirable. But this was averted by an effective propagation of 
an activist philosophy by SvamI Ramadasa for whom Tukarama had 
great reverence. 


581 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Samartha Ramadasa SvamI (1608-1682) was a born saint. Leav¬ 
ing his home at the age of 12, he performed severe penance for 12 
years. It is believed that he was blessed with the vision of Sri 
Rama. Then he travelled for another 12 years visiting holy places 
all over India. The miserable conditions of the people moved him 
greatly and he decided to dedicate himself to the service of the peo¬ 
ple. He began to preach the cult of Dhanurdhdn Rama (Rama hold¬ 
ing the bow) and of Balabhima (the incarnation of strength). He 
established Mathas at several places that served as centres of reli¬ 
gion, education and culture. He popularised physical culture and 
training of the youth for military purposes. 

The Ddsabodha is undoubtedly the most important of his works. 
“It is the outcome of the fullest experience of the world by a person 
who has attained the highest spiritual experience. It is prose both 
in style and sentiment but it is most highly trenchant in its estimate 
of worldly affairs”. It is a veritable guide for all time and for all 
classes of individuals who desire happiness as well as spiritual joy. 
He upheld the philosophy of adtivism and maintained that the ideal 
man is an active man. In his Anandavana Bhuvana, he gives an in¬ 
spiring vision of an ideal State where all the wicked are destroyed 
and all the good are protected. He sees India once again strong and 
prosperous. He was, nevertheless, a practical leader. He exposes 
ruthlessly the evil character of the pseudo-saints in his Janasvabhdva 
Gosavi. He analyses rationally the conditions of the people and the 
causes thereof in his Asmani Sultani and Parachakra-nirupana. His 
Karundshtake and Manache Sloka along with the Rdmayana and 
Rdmavaraddyini are still regarded as the best in Marathi literature 
for properly moulding the minds of the young. Ramadasa compos¬ 
ed, in addition, hundreds of ovi verses in the form of brief narra¬ 
tives and prayers, as well as hundreds of abhangas. The works of 
Ramadasa, thus, reveal his deep scholarship, keen awareness of the 
social and political conditions of the people, his profound love for 
them, his dream of an ideal State and finally his unsurpassed spiri¬ 
tual attainments. He was able to found a distinct school of thought 
by his dynamic and forceful personality as well as by his devoted 
life and skill of organization. Of his numerous disciples mention 
may be made of Jayaramasvami, Ranganathasvami, Anandamurti, 
Dinakara Gosavi, Venubai, Giridhara, Kalyanasvamii, Jagannatha- 
buva, BhimasvamI, MerusvamI Hariharabuva, Uddhavasuta, Atma- 
rama and Bahinabai (Tukarama’s disciple)—all of whom have pro¬ 
fusely written on religious and social topics and particularly on the 
life and teachings of Ramadasa, with an emphasis on the significance 
of the Ramadasa tradition. 


582 


LITERATURE 


While the disciples of Tukarama and Sviaml Ramadasa were busy 
with the religious and ethical teaching, there were others during 
this period who paid more attention to the aesthetic aspects of lite¬ 
rature, following the tradition of Ekanatha. 

The first of such poets was Muktesvara (1609-1690) a grandson 
of Ekanatha. His Samkshepa Rdmdyana (1725 6vl verses) and the 
five parvas of the Mahabharata (14,687 5vi verses) are counted 
among the outstanding works of Mariathi classical poetry. In ad¬ 
dition, he wrote Suka-Rambha-samvdda, Satamukha Ravanavadha, 
Ekanatha Charitra, Gajendramoksha and Hanumantdkhydna. These 
works are still considered models of artistic compositions combined 
with scholarly treatment of the rasas. 

Vamana Pandita (1608-1695) was the author of several works, 
the more important of which are: Yathartha-dipika, Samaslokl 
Gita , Nigamasdra, Karmatatva , Bhdminlvildsa, Rddhavilasa, Rasakri- 
dd, Sita-svayamvara . Their captivating style and religious instruc¬ 
tion have made them popular with all classes of readers. Vamana 
Pandita has employed very successfully metres, figures of speech 
and other techniques of Sanskrit poetry. Samaraja (1613-1700) 
wrote Mudgalakhyana and Rukminl-harana, the only Marathi epic 
poem according to the tenets of Sanskrit poetics. 

Raghunatha Pandita, a contemporary of Shivajl, composed Nala- 
Damayanti-svayamvara and Gajendramoksha. The Nala-Damayanti- 
svayamvara has earned its author undying fame by its epic grandeur, 
skilful and lively portrayal of characters, figures of speech and in¬ 
teresting dialogues. The poet states that he was inspired to write 
this work by the Naishadhlya Kdvya of Srlharsha. Anandatanaya, 
another scholar-poet of this age, composed 20 narrative hdvyas for 
the use of devotees. The Sita-svayamvara, a composition of 83 
slokas is his longest and the most popular work. Niaigesa, another 
contemporary of Shivaji, was the author of Sitd-svayamvara and 
ChandrdvaVi-varnand. These are full of witty and humorous obser¬ 
vations on the contemporary social life. Vithal Bidkar (1628- 
1690) composed Rukmini-svayamvara, Sita-svayamvara and some 
biographies and prayers. 

These writers of long narrative poems chose their themes from 
the epics and the Puranas, wrote in the traditional metres and style, 
and freely made use of the techniques of Sanskrit classical poetry. 
Gradually new themes and styles came to be introduced. !§ridhara 
(1658-1729) and Krishnadayarnava initiated the new movement. 
Krishnadayarnava wrote Harivarada, a commentary on the 10th 
chapter of the Bhdgavata. Srldhara composed narratives on the 
heroes and heroines of the Epics and the Puranas. The more im- 


583 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


portant of his works are: Harivijaya , Ramavijaya, Pdndavapratdpa, 
Sivalilamrita, Panduranga-mahatmya, Venkatesa-mdhatmya, Vedanta- 
surya. Though he has borrowed freely from the earlier writers 
like Muktesvara, he has made his compositions more interesting 
than any of the earlier ones. His works are read even today by 
thousands of devotees and lovers of good poetry all over Maha¬ 
rashtra. 

The scholar-poets of this age, thus, greatly popularised the nar¬ 
rative form of poetry and have furnished excellent compositions 
that can be read for personal gratification as well as for religious 
merit. They have, in their works, set patterns of highly artistic 
writings. They have also contributed greatly to the development 
of the Marathi language by incorporating Sanskrit, Pfiakrit and Per¬ 
sian words in their compositions. 

Finally, mention must be made of the Rdja-vyavahdra-kosha 
prepared under the direction of Shivaji. It is a mine of useful in¬ 
formation and is still regarded as an authoritative source for coining 
new administrative and political terms. 

This period also saw the development of an indigenous form 
of literature known as povddas or ballads. The pdvadas are songs 
written in exciting style and narrate historical events in an in¬ 
spiring manner. Of the numerous povtidas of this period only a 
few are now available. One of such ballads by Agindas records 
Shivajfs encounter with Afzal Khan and another by Tulsidas gives 
an account of the heroic capture of Simhagad by Tanajl. 

IX. TAMIL 

The sixteenth and seventeenth centuries were a period of de¬ 
cadence in the Tamil country. Petty kings and chieftains exercised 
a restricted or uneasy sovereignty over their peoples, while in the 
north the Mughul Empire was extending its sway and sprawling 
over the greater part of the Peninsula. Scores of poets and poet¬ 
asters sedulously aped Sanskrit and classical Tamil models and 
somehow kept up a show of vigorous literary activity. The courts 
of the Tamil kings and the ;§aiva mutts (mathas) were the princi¬ 
pal centres of such literary activity, and it is gratifying to note 
that the flame, however it swayed or burned dim, was not allowed 
to be put out altogether. 

Varathunga Pandyan and Athivirarama Pandyan were cousin 
brothers, and both of them accomplished poets. The Pandyan king¬ 
dom had then shrunk very much in size, and Athiviraraman had 
as his capital Korkai and Tenkasi in the Tinnevelly district. Vara- 
thungan was blessed in an angelic wife, and they led a life of piety 


584 


LITERATURE 


at a place called Tirukkaruvainallur. Varathungan’s principal 
work is Pramottarakandam , an eulogy of the mystic efficacies of 
panchakshara, vibhuti, somvara , etc. Varathungan’s devotion to Siva 
is revealed in every verse of this work. One typical stanza may 
be rendered as follows: 

Eyes that gaze at diva’s temple are alone the eyes, 

Legs that enter His temple are alone the legs, 

Heads that bow before Parvati’s Lord are alone the heads, 
Hands that make offerings to Siva are alone the hands, 
Tongues that sing His glories are alone the tongues, 

Ears that hearken to His praises are alone the ears, 

Hearts that meditate on Him are alone the hearts, 

And allegiance to His feet is the only allegiance. 

Varathungan’s other works include Ambikaimalai, Ilingapuranam , 
Tirukkaruvai Paditruppattanthati, etc. Pandit Somasundara Desi- 
kar attributes, I think rightly, the ‘ Tirukkaruvai’ poems to Vara- 
thungan, while others attribute the poems to his brother, Athivira- 
raman. These ‘Tirukkaruvai’ poems are all inspired by the Deity 
of Tirukkaruvainallur, and several verses from them have gone into 
popular currency. It is not surprising therefore that the title of 
Kutti-Tiruvachakam (Miniature Tiruvachakam) is bestowed upon 
the Paditruppattanthati. 

Athiviraraman, the royal poet, is known to fame as the author 
of the Tamil Naidatham , which has gained the sobriquet of “poets’ 
elixir”. He was doubtless indebted to his predecessors, Vyasa, Sri 
Harsha, and Pugalendi, for the story, and to these as also to Kam- 
ban and other great Tamil writers for his ideas and poetic imagery. 
But the finished work is none the less a meritorious poem. Athi¬ 
viraraman is particularly successful in his delineation of Dama- 
yantl’s deathless love for Nala, a love that transcends misery, sepa¬ 
ration and seeming cruelty: 

Even should I, O King, fail to see and win you in this life, 
In another birth at least shall I not, I poor woman, 

Undergo austerities all alone. 

And melt your golden heart to gain you at last? 

Athiviraraman’s Kdsikandam is a long poem devoted to the 
praise of KasI (Benares), based mainly on Skanda Purcina. School 
children are familiar with another of Athiviraraman’s works, viz. 
Vetriverkai or Narunthokai. The verses and aphorisms of Vetri- 
verkai are now a part of our popular culture and we are quoting 
or echoing them without being conscious of the fact. Here are a 
few samples: 


585 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


The accomplished speaker, though a liar, 

Gives the lie the varnish of truth; 

The untrained speaker, however truthful, 

Makes truth itself ring false. 

Better the forest where the fierce tigers roam, 

Than the city under the rule of a tyrannical king. 

From the big seed of the Palmyrah 
Grows the sky-labouring tree 
Whose shade not one protects. 

From the diminutive banyan seed, 

Smaller than the egg of a little fish in the river, 

Grows the tree whose spreading branches cast a shade 
Over a royal army of elephants, chariots, horses and men. 
The big are not thus always big, 

Nor the small are always small. 

The ISaiva mutts were at this time a bee-hive of literary acti¬ 
vity. While such literary work as was produced was no doubt 
mainly religious, ethical or theological, several of the productions 
of these mutts have value as poetry as well. Kumar a Guruparar, 
born of Saiva parents at Srivaikuntam in the Tinnevelly district, 
grew to be an austere ascetic and became an ornament of the Dhar- 
mapuram mutt • It is said he toured the north and gave an exhibi¬ 
tion of his powers, seated on a fierce lion, before the Mughul Em¬ 
peror himself. The bibliography of his writings is a long one, of 
which the most popular are Needi Neri Vilakkam and Madurakka - 
lambakam. From the former two verses are here extracted: 

Youth is like a bubble on the water; 

Riches are the sprawling waves on its surface; 

This physical frame is as durable as the writing on the water; 
Why then, O' Lord, do we not seek on the water; 

People engrossed in work 

Will be sleepless, careless of pain, 

Unconscious of hunger, 

Impervious to the evil around, 

Unresponsive to beauty and love, 

And even regardless of honour. 

He wrote also many poems in praise of the deities of the various 
places covered during his pilgrimages in the north and the south. 

Sivaprakasar, another well-known figure in Tamil Saivism, be¬ 
longed to the Tirumangalam mutt. He put into flowing Tamil 
verse Chamarasa’s Kannada classic, Prabhulinga-lile, dealing with 
the life of the Virasaiva saint, Allama Prabhu. Although a Vira- 

586 


LITERATURE 


saiva, Sivaprakasar had his affiliations to Saivism and remained as 
sugar in milk in Saiva surroundings. Pandit Somasundara Desikar 
mentions thirty titles as constituting Sivaprakasar’s work, but only 
Prabhulinga-lile and Nanneri are widely read today. A verse from 
the latter may be translated as follows: 

Control over self that restrains the raging ire 
Is alone proof of good breeding; 

Say, is it better to block up the flood, 

Or let it break the banks and ravage the main? 

Sivaprakasar composed Prabhulinga-lile in the year 1652 A.D. and 
died two years after, at the age of only thirty-two. 

Paranjoti belonged to a mutt in Madura, and composed the Tiru- 
vilayadal Puranam, a voluminous work of over three thousand 
stanzas commemorating the lilcis of Siva. Inspired by the Sanskrit 
Skandam, the Tiruvilayadal is one of the most entertaining of Tamil 
Puranas and is popular especially with the children. History and 
legend, mythology and hagiology, philosophy and ethics, all are 
thrown together to make an extraordinary poem. Paranjoti’s other 
works are Potrikkalivenba and Paditruppattanthati. 

Vlraraghava Mudaliar of Chingleput was a poet about whom 
innumerable stories are told. He was born blind, and hence he is 
called ‘Anthakakkavi’. He travelled widely, was appreciated every¬ 
where, and went as far as Jaffna in North Ceylon. He is credited 
with the composition of countless extempore verses as also such 
formal works as Tirukkalurkunra Puranam and Seyur Kalam- 
bakam. 

Besides the Saiva poets mentioned above, there was during this 
period one notable Vaishnava poet by name Pillaipperumal Iyengar, 
also called ‘Diyya Kavi\ It is said that he was in the service of 
Tirumalai Nayaka of Madura. Pillaipperumal was not only a 
staunch Vaishnava, but was fanatically devoted to Rahganatha of 
Srlrangam. Other manifestations of Vishnu were of little signifi¬ 
cance to him. Pillaipperumal was indeed an embodiment of bhakti 
and was literally intoxicated by his welling love for Rahganatha. 
The collection of his devotional lyrics is known as Ashtaprabandham. 
It has been argued by Pandit Somasundara Desikar that Ashtapra¬ 
bandham is a composite work, and that only two of the eight poems 
included in the collection were composed by Pillaipperumal. But 
the spirit of the whole collection and the strength of tradition would 
rather support Pillaipperumal’s sole authorship of Ashtapraban¬ 
dham. 


587 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Padikkasuppulavar is another of those Tamil poets about whom 
endless stories have been handed down to us. Tradition has it that 
he kept every day five gold pieces on the Panchiakshara steps of 
Sivakami Ammai—a circumstance that gave him the name ‘Padik- 
kasu’ or ‘a coin for each step’. Padikkasu lived for many years at 
Ramnad as court-poet of the local king. Of his works the most im¬ 
portant are Thondaimandala satakam, Pullirukku Velur Kalamba- 
karri and Tandalayar satakam. A verse from the last is here freely 
rendered: 

Blessed with but one grateful son, 

The benefits the whole family shares; 

What’s the use of a hundred sons, 

When all of them are bereft of sense? 

The pig gives birth to a useless many 
Year after year; 

But a baby elephant,— 

Its birth most will beneficial be. 

Altogether, these two centuries were a period of decadence in 
Tamil letters. Verbal dexterity is supposed to do duty for poetic 
fire and transcendent imagery. A fatal facility and fluency hide 
the general poverty of thought and inspiration. But the poets men¬ 
tioned above, these among others, saved the period from utter bar¬ 
renness and kept the spark alive. 

X. TELUGU 

The reign of Krishnadevaraya, Emperor of Vijayanagara (1509- 
1529 A.D.), ushered in a new era in the Telugu literature. Hitherto 
that literature consisted primarily of translation, adaptation and imi¬ 
tation of the Classical Sanskritic literary models and traditions, 
particularly of epic nature. The age of Krishnadevaraya opened, 
with new elements, neo-classical vistas and romantic panoramas in 
the realm of Telugu literature. The Prabandha, essentially of the 
Kdvya type, now occupies the place of eminence in the galaxy of 
literary types in Telugu. Even if the themes of several Prabandhas 
were borrowed from the treasure house of Sanskrit literature, they 
have an original flavour in treatment, a dignity in diction and an ele¬ 
ment of their own in sentiment, description, ornamentation and 
other aspects of poetry. According to the great Sanskrit literary 
critics of the past, novelty in treatment but not in theme! is the hall¬ 
mark of the creative genius of the poet and the sentimental appeal 
of the poem which gives aesthetic delight of a high degree, and 
kindles an experience in a kindred reader is the be-all and end-all 
of all poetry, and not merely the elements of instruction or of the 


588 


LITERATURE 


social life. Most of the Prabandhas of the age satisfy these norms 
and almost all of the composers of the major Prabandhas were poets 
of high intellectual calibre and acumen and were good at original 
composition. Yet they made use of the background of their Sans¬ 
krit lore and followed the traits of tradition to a certain extent not 
because of their inability to innovate things but because of a cer¬ 
tain attitude prevalent amongst the scholarly world and the people 
at large as well. It was thought even by very able poets like Rama- 
rajabhushana that fictitious themes are artificial diamonds, themes of 
traditional eminence are diamonds fresh from the mine and they be¬ 
come polished ones only when studded in the ornaments of poetic 
imagery. That was the order of the day and the Prabandha had its 
heyday in the court of Krishnadevaraya. 

The court of Krishnadevaraya was named as Bhuvana Vi jay a 
(the victory of worlds). The name was given to his court after 
a series of his victories and after the fashion of the “Trailokya 
Vi jay a”, the court of the Reddy kings of Rajahmundry. Every year 
V asantotsavas, i.e., spring festivals, used to take place in Vijaya- 
nagara and poets were felicitated in the Bhuvana Vijaya. It 
was either adorned or visited by almost all the great and eminent 
poets and scholars of the time. Eight of his court-poets were spe¬ 
cially honoured by the royal patron and aptly styled as “Ashta Dig- 
gajdh” (i.e., the eight legendary elephants which are supposed to 
bear the burden of the mother earth). Allasani Peddana, the best 
of the lot and the author of Manu Charitra, was honoured with the 
title, “Andhra kavitd pitdmaha” (i.e., the creator of Poetry in 
Telugu). He gave a new orientation to poetry in Telugu with an 
alluring descriptive element, a vivacious portrayal of characters in 
various passing moods, moving passions and emotions culminating in 
erotic and other sentiments, a rich poetic imagery and rhetorical 
sublimity, and a majestic but mellifluous diction of his own. His 
masterpiece, the Manu Charitra, which has as its theme the story of 
Svarochisha Manu drawn from the Sanskrit Markandeya Purdna 
was enriched with the aforesaid qualities. Its characters, Pravara 
and Varudhini, assumed a new lively dimension, and almost became 
proverbial with the Telugu public. They are quoted as classical ex¬ 
amples for austere chastity and erotic fillip in contexts of social epi¬ 
sodes of love and romance, and became a handsome model for the 
following generation of Prabandhas. 

Nandi Timmana, another great poet of the Bhuvana Vijaya Court 
composed a beautiful poem, Pdrijdtdpaharana Prabandha , based on 
the romantic episode of the Farijata or the achievement of Satya- 
bhamia, in the Harivarhsa. For ages the love episode of the prota- 


589 


THE MTJGHUL EMPIRE 


gonists of this playful romance, Satyabhama and :SrI Krishna, has 
been green in the memory of the Indian people, and Timmana’s 
masterly delineation of the characters perpetuated their memory in 
the world of erotic poetry in Telugu. Scores of authors drew in¬ 
spiration from him and composed works in close imitation of the 
Pdrijdtdpaharana and the famous Bhamakaldpam of Siddhendra Yogi 
is its spiritual child. The melody of Timmana’s style, together with 
the texture of Peddana’is diction and the lavish display of phrase of 
Teniali Ramakrishna, has been often applauded by the lovers of 
Telugu literature. 

There were many other poets like Dhurjati and Madayagari 

Mallana in Krishnadevaraya’s Court, and many others, like Radha- 

madhava Kavi and Sankusala Nrisimha Kavi who visited him. He 

• 

was not only a great patron of letters, but himself a poet of the first 
magnitude too. Timmana says he was a great rasajna and praises 
him with an epithet, “KavitdprdviV'ya Phanlsa ”—an adept in poetic 
composition. He was also styled as “Sdhiti Samardnga^a Sdrva - 
bhauma ,” i.e., Sovereign in the fields of literature and battle as well. 
He is said to have written many poems and plays in Sanskrit and 
Telugu, but only a Sanskrit play called Jambavatiparinaya and a 
Telugu Mahakavya called Amuktamalyada have come down to us. 
The latter is a versified philosophy of Visishtadvaita. It deals 
mainly with the story of Andal and Vishnu Chitta, two of the Alvars, 
the eminent advocates of a true Vaishnava Bhakti Cult in South 
India. It is a storehouse of his personality, scholarship, worldly 
wisdom, knowledge of Political Science, religious understanding and 
Bhakti or sense of devotion to God, and richness of imagination. The 
Amuktamalyada on account of its grandiloquent style and complex 
nature in thought and imagination is a hard nut for any ordinary 
reader and is considered to be one of the “Pancha Maha-Kdvyas'’ 
(i.e., the Five Great Poems) in Telugu—the other four being Manu 
Charitra, Vasu Charitra , Rdghava-Pdndaviyamu and Pdnduranga- 
mdhdtmyamu, all belonging to this age. 

Dhurjati, though a staunch Saivite poet, was much respected 
by the Vaishnavite ruler, Krishnadevaraya. He composed a great 
shrine-epic poem, Kdlahastimdhdtmyamu and a Centum, Sri Kdla- 
hastisvara Sataka. He is famous for elegance of characterisation 
and unrivalled in sweetness of expression. He is a poet by tempera¬ 
ment and always speaks in poetry with heart and soul. The lyrical 
outbursts in his Sataka give us a pen picture of his bold persona¬ 
lity and kindred experience. 

Mallana tried to create a theme of his own in his Rajasekhara 
Charitra , but the construction of the plot is loose and rather unin- 


590 


LITERATURE 


teresting. Radhamadhava Kavi, originally Chintalapudi Ellanarya 
by name, was so named by Krishnadevaraya after his poem Rddhd- 
mddhavamu, in which the romance between Radha and Krishna 
came back to life. It is said that Sankusala Nrisimha Kavi, the au¬ 
thor of a beautiful poem called Kavikarna-ramyanamu, though not 
a court-poet, was much appreciated by Krishnadevaraya for his 
‘Kalpana \ The Rdmdyana was retold in the fashion of a Prabandha 
by Ayyalaraju Ramabhadra Kavi in his Ramabhyudaya which paved 
the way for certain acrobatics in expression. 

Tenali Ramalihga or Ramakrisna Kavi, a poet of those times, 
is a very popular figure in the Telugu country—popular more for 
many merry anecdotes about him than for his poetry. He com¬ 
posed three poems: U dbhatdrddkya Charitra, Ghatikdchala-mdhd- 
tmyamu and Pdnduranga-mdhdtmyamu. The last two are shrine- 
epics. Pdnduranga-mdhdtmyamu, animated with interesting legends 
and characters and a grandiose style, earned a good name for him. 

Pihgali Surana was another august figure of this age. He in 
his Rd\ghava-Pdndaviyamu evolved a poetic type in Telugu —“Dvy - 
arthi i.e., double entendre —in which the stories of the Rdmdyana 
and the Mahdbhdrata run parallel in a single expression. ‘ DvyarthV 
is an acrobatic feat in poetic form in which pun strikes the keynote. 
Surana made a remarkable achievement in exploring all the pos¬ 
sible means of pun in his work, which stood as a coveted model 
for other poets who composed not only double entendres but also 
works with threefold and fourfold meaning. Yet Rdghava-Pdnda- 
viyamu is the first and also the foremost of its kind in Telugu. His 
Kalapumddayamu is another great work of all time. The theme, 
the statement and everything about it is novel to the core. In fact 
it is a poetic novel. A threefold allegory and a comedy of errors 
are there in its theme. A complex texture and technical perfection 
are there in its treatment. The phrase ‘Kaldpurnodayamu’ means 
the birth of one Kalapurna by name. There is an important charac¬ 
ter of that unusual name in the work, but it is quite possible that the 
poet was of the opinion that this work, as the word literally 
means, depicts the full bloom of the art of poetry in Telugu for the 
first time. Yes, it was a brand new experiment in Telugu poetry in 
all its aspects. It seems that it was only during the sixteenth cen¬ 
tury that the Telugu poets became quite conversant with the theories 
of the various important aesthetic schools in Sanskrit—the Schools 
of Rasa, Rati, Dhvani, Auchitya, Vakrokti and Chamatkara. But none 
of them except Surana got the will and mettle to tread into the realms 
of all these il Sdhitya Prasthdnas ” in one stroll. He ventured and 
hence the propriety in selecting the unusual name. In its masterly 


591 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


delineation of female characters, in its variety entertainment of the 
Sringdra Rasa and in its eloquent descriptions which often elope with 
the relevant incident, Surana’s art is something akin to the Shake¬ 
spearian. Surana was, in the opinion of Dr. C.R. Reddy, an un¬ 
known rival to Shakespeare in the East at the time. His Prabhdvati- 
pradyumnamu is another unique poem in Telugu. He was in his 
element while composing this. He tried to move far away from the 
rut of the Prabandha in order to find a path of his own. He made 
an organic plot out of a commonplace mythological theme and infused 
a kind of dramatic element into the characters by means of powerful 
dialogues and events. He is a great exponent of the ‘Kdvya Silpa’ 
(i.e., the art and the craft of poesy) like his great predecessor, 
Tikkana Somayaji. 

Bhattu Murti, otherwise known as Ramaraja Bhushaaia, who 
lived in the middle of the 16th century, was honoured in many 
a royal court of the day. His poetic genius, craft and equipment 
were marvellous. He was well versed in music, too, and ai rhyth¬ 
mic being by nature. He is a great master of pun, a fountain of 
poetic fancy and an able exponent of the music of word and phrase 
and the magic of sense and meaning. His Kdvydlankdra Sangraha, 
also known as Narasabhupdliya, is a standard work on poetics in 
Telugu. He is a great architect of verse and the art of versification 
reached the zenith of its perfection in his Vasucharitra which led 
to a series of imitations. It had even the honour of being trans¬ 
lated into Sanskrit and Tamil. We witness a jugglery of pun in 
his Harischandra Naldpdkhydnamu, a first rate “Dvyarthi Kdvya”. 

The Qutb Shahis of Golconda, particularly Malik Ibrahim, and 
their feudatories extended patronage to Telugu letters for a time 
during the latter half of the 16th century. Sarahgu Tammayya, 
Kandukuru Rudra Kavi, Addanki Gangadhara Kavi and Ponne- 
kanti Telaganna (some of the poets patronised by them) composed 
works of merit— Vai jay anti Vildsamu, Nirankusopdkhydnarriu , Tapa- 
tisamvarandpdkhydnamu and Yaydti-charitra respectively. Yaydti- 
charitra , a poem composed in pure Telugu, devoid of Sanskrit voca¬ 
bulary, a feat by itself ably accomplished, was the first of its 
kind and was followed by a host of such works. Besides this pure 
Telugu, the pun and the double-entendre, several other intellectual 
gymnastics like the Chitra, the Bandha and the Garbha were in 
vogue at the time. 

Some of the writers of the period took to the composition of 
Yakshagdna, an indigenous type of popular play, set to music and 
dance, which was just evolving itself. The Sugriva Vijaya of 
Kandukuru Rudra Kavi is an eminent example of the type. 


592 


LITERATURE 


Amongst a host of the poetic works of the time, mention may 
be made of the following: Padas and Venkatesvara Vinnapdlu , 
devotional lyrics of a category and the Venkateisvara Sataka of 
Tallapakam Peda Tirumalayya; didactic story-poems like Pancha- 
tantra of Baicharaju Venkatanatha; Prabandhas like Sudakshina 
Parinayamu of Tenali Annaya, Indumati-parinayamu of Tenali Rama- 
bhadra Kavi, Sringdra Malhana Charitra of Edapati Errana, Chandra- 
bhdnu Charitra of Tarigoppula Mallana, Sdmbdpdkhydnamu of 
Ramaraju Rangapparaju and Pdnchdli-parinayamu and Rajavdhana- 
vijayamu of Kakamani Murti Kavi; the ‘ Dvipada’ works i.e. 
couplets like the Ushd-parinayamu, the Ashtamahishikalydnamu and 
the Parama Yogi Vildsamu of Tallapakam Chinnanna and the Bhd- 
ratamu of Battepati Tirumala Bhattu. 

Summing up the characteristics of the age, it may be said that 
the new spirit of the pompous imperial age led to neo-classical in¬ 
novations and romantic enterprises. The exuberance of scholarship 
and enthusiasm of the poets was channelled into various new types 
like the Prabandha , the Dvyatthi , the Yakshayana and the like, 
and new features like Slesha, Achcha Telugu, Chitra, Bandha, Gar- 
bha etc., and into various Puranic themes with a few exceptions 
blended with new aesthetic values and various major sentiments, 
the predominant being the Sringdra and into a variety of descrip¬ 
tions charged with flights of imagination and above all a grandi¬ 
loquent diction. The elements of love, devotion, philosophy and 
the didactic are blended with the content of many of the poetic 
works of the age which of course impart message of a lasting value, 
but do not mirror the life of the common man in the contemporary 
society. Aesthetic delight, more than anything else, was their aim 
and ambition. Yes, it was chiefly an age of aesthetic considera¬ 
tions in the history of Telugu literature. 

* * * 

After the fall of the Vijayanagara empire in 1565 (see p. 492) 
we witness an age of decadence in Telugu literature in the Telugu 
country from early 17th century onwards almost up to the dawn of 
the Modern Age. But a few poets worth the name flourished dur¬ 
ing the period. Four of the Nellore Friends’ Circle flourished in 
early 17 th century. Kankanti Paparaju composed Uttar a Rdmdya - 
namu with a classical dignity which excelled Tikkana’s work of 
the same name in quality and popularity, and Vishnumdyd Vildsamu , 
a Yakshagdna of note. Tekumalla Ranga Sayi composed Vdnivildsa 
Vanarwalikd, a miniature cyclopaedia, first of its kind in Telugu. 
Pushpagiri Timmakavi composed Samira Kumara Vijayamu and 

593 

M.E.—38 



THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Dharanidevula. Ramamantri composed Dasdvatdra Charitra. All 
these works are original compositions and not translations. 

Never before and never after in the history of Telugu litera¬ 
ture, were there so many royal poets as were in this age. Malli 
Ananta and Kumarananta of Sidhout composed Kakutstha Vijaya 
and Kumudvatl Parinaya } respectively, and Surabhi Madhavarayalu 
of Jataprolu composed Chandrikdparinaya as almost a rival to the 
famous Vasu charitra. Damera Ankabhupala of Vellore composed 
Ushd-parinaya. Bijjala Timmabhupala of Alampur translated the 
famous Sanskrit play of Murari, the Anargha Rdghava, in the form 
of a narrative poem, successfully maintaining the deftness of ex¬ 
pression of the original. Some of the aforesaid kings extended 
patronage to other poets at their courts. Kavi Chaudappa, a poet 
of the Sidhout court, composed a Sataka which became very popular 
on account of its amatory and didactic fun and frolic. Elakuchi 
Venkata Krishnayya, reputed by the title ‘Bdlasarasvati’, the court- 
poet of Jataprolu was a “ Mahdmahdpddhydya ”, i.e., a great scholar 
and teacher. He wrote many works of which mention may be made 
of his Rdghava Yddava Pdn^aviyamu, a triple entendre in which 
run concurrently the stories of all the three great epics, the Rdmds- 
yana, the Bhdgavata and the Mahdbhdrata and the translation of 
the three satakas of the Rubhdshita of Bhartrihari, done for the first 
time in Telugu. 

History for the first time formed the theme of two narrative 
poems during this period: 

1. Rdmardjiyamu, also known as Narapativijayamu of Andu- 
gula Venkayya deals with a dependable story of Aliya Ramarava, 
a great dictator, a king-maker and a king for some time of 
Vijayanagara (p. 488). 2. Krishnardya Vijayamu of Kumara Dhur- 
jati, deals with the story of Krishnadevaraya of Vijayanagara (1509- 
1529) told in the fashion of a Prabandha . Both the works are in 
lucid style. It is interesting to note that one Pihgali Ellana wrote 
a poem, Tobhya-charitra by name, dealing with a Christian theme. 
Muddaraju Ramana, commentator of the Rdghava Pandaviyamu, also 
belongs to this period. 

Appakavi, a great grammarian of the time, wrote in verse a 
prolific commentary, Appakaviyamu by name, on the Andhra- 
sabdachintamani, the first treatise on Telugu grammar written in 
Sanskrit. Pre-eminently it is an authority on the subject, not only 
of Telugu grammar, but also of Telugu prosody, and is the result 
of deep study. The Sarvalakshana Sirdmani of a junior contempo¬ 
rary of Appakavi does a cyclopaedic survey of Telugu grammar. 

594 


LITERATURE 


prosody, poetics, rhetoric and lexicography. The author, Ganapava- 
rapu Venkata Kavi, though good at writing poetry in a pleasing 
manner, perpetrated in his magnum opus, the Prabandhardja Ven- 
katesvara Vijaya Vilasamu all possible feats in the witchcraft of 
versification in a bewildering manner, sacrificing all aesthetic con¬ 
siderations. His erudition, equipment and ability are amazing and 
commendable but not the damages caused to the very purpose of 
poetry. His performance was the highlight of the age, but was a 
hall-mark of its decadence too. 

There is yet another phase in the history of Telugu literature 
during the 17th century. Literature in Telugu was produced out¬ 
side the Telugu country also. The Royal Courts of Tanjore and 
Madura (which are now in the Tamil Nadu State) where the 
Andhra suzerainty was established under the Nayaka kings in the 
heyday of the Vijayanagara empire (pp. 486 ff.) extended patronage 
to the Telugu poets and scholars pouring in from the Telugu coun¬ 
try with their kith and kin after the doom of Vijayanagara. The 
Telugu colonial literature of those times is noted for its variety in 
theme, freshness in treatment and for richness in type and senti¬ 
ment. It was, unlike its counterpart, an age of new life but not 
decadence. 

The Tanjore court could boast of a long line of royal patrons 
of poets and poetesses. The court of Raghunatha Nayaka, who 
ruled over Tanjore from 1600 to 1632, was described by Rama- 
bhadramba, his court poetess, in her Raghunathabhyudaya. Raghu¬ 
natha was himself a merited poet in Telugu and Sanskrit. His 
Telugu poems, the Ramdyana, the Vdlmtki-charitra and the Nala- 
charitra are resplendent with Jdti, Vdrta and Chamatkdra (three 
skilful means of literary expression). His court-poet, Chemakura 
Vepkata Kavi, composed two poems Sdrangadhara-Charitra and 
Vijaya-Vildsamu, in which we often find a bewitching adroit stroke 
of expression accomplished with a great ease and no effort. Kri- 
shnadhvari, another poet of the court, dedicated to the patron his 
Naishadha Pdriydtlyamu, a Dvyarthi Kavya. Generally speaking, 
the poets of this southern school are not lovers of pun, but curi¬ 
ously enough, one such poem as this was produced, of course as a 
matter of accident. 

Vijayaraghava Nayaka, son of Raghunatha, was very much in¬ 
terested and well versed in the arts of music, dance and drama. 
He, his son Mannarudeva, Kamarusu Venkatapati Somayaji, the 
poet-laureate, Rahgajamma, a poetess, and the other poets of his 
court composed and staged scores of Yakshaganas. The Yaksha - 
gdna assumed the full stature of a regular play, removed the dearth 


595 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


of dramatic literature in Telugu and had its heyday at Tanj ore 
during the rule of the Nlayaka kings and even afterwards, during 
the following hundred and fifty years of the Maratha rule over 
Tanjore. Some of the Maratha rulers and their court-poets pro¬ 
duced chiefly a great body of the Yakshagdna literature which by 
then became a popular pastime and a royal entertainment. The 
themes and characters of the Yakshagdnas were drawn from the 
contemporary society. The wit and wisdom of the people and the 
literary amusements of the royal court found expression in them. 
Quite unusually, the living language of the people was employed 
as their medium. The element of humour which was sporadically 
met with in Telugu literature till then, was amply displayed. In 
short, they held the mirror unto life and nature. A special men¬ 
tion of the Mannaruddsa Vildsamu of Rahgajamma, the Raghund - 
thandyakabhyudayamu of Vijayaraghava and the Tanjdpurdnnaddna 
mahdndtakam of Purushottama Dlkshita may be made in this con¬ 
text. It may be said to the credit of the Yakshagdna that it has been 
the most popular type of literature and while most of the literary 
types in Telugu were borrowed from one source or other, it was 
the only indigenous type peculiar to Telugu and was borrowed by 
others, i.e., the Tamilians and the Kannadigas. 

The Tanjore court under Vijayaraghava was also famous for 
Padas (musical compositions chiefly of lyrical nature). The king 
and almost all his court-poets composed a large number of beautiful 
padas with erotic as the predominant sentiment. 

The court of Madura, a rival to Tanjore, turned a new leaf in 
the annals of the history of Telugu literature by paving the way 
to the growth of prose literature and a new type of iSringara Pra- 
bandha. The Rdyavdchakamu written by a “S'thdndpati”, i.e., a 
court-correspondent, in the first decade of 17th century in a slang 
deals with the history and anecdotes of the Vijayanagara empire. 
Lihganamakhi Kamesvara Kavi who was in the courts of Tirumala 
Nayaka (1623-1659) and Chokkanatha Nayaka (1659-1682) wrote a 
prose work called Dhenumdhdtmyamu and two poems, Rukminl- 
parinayamu and Satyabhdmd-sdntvanamu. A poet, probably Vikata 
Kavi Gopalarayadu, for some reasons, became the target of wrath of 
the queen Mangamma (1682-1706), was banished from the State and 
wrote in his exile Madhura Manga Pumschalivilasamu (the amor¬ 
ous sport of the whore Mangamma of Madura), a prose work in¬ 
terspersed with couplets here and there. It is almost an inventory 
of her illicit contacts and erotic deeds with contemporary princes 
and generals, couched in vulgar and obscene pranks and prattle. 
Yet it has a poetic interest of its own and may be useful to the his- 


596 


LITERATURE 


torians to an extent. All that is best in the Madura literature was 
produced during the reign of Vijayaranga Chokkanatha Nay aka 
(1706-1732). 

A few pieces of literature were now and then produced in 
places like Gingee and Mysore in the south during the period under 
review, of which the Kuvalaydsva Charitra, a poem by Savaramu 
Chinanarayana Nay aka of Gingee and Chikadevaraya Vilasamu, a 
Yakshagdna of the Mysore court deserve mention. 

The 17th century literature in Telugu, colonial or regional as 
the case may be, though having an individuality of its own to an 
extent, is on the whole a huge foliage with few flowers when com¬ 
pared with its counterpart in the 16th century. 

XI. KANNADA 

From the sixteenth to the beginning of the eighteenth century 
Kannada literature passed through a transitional stage. Poets of 
great eminence were few, the prominent among them being Laksh- 
misa, Shadakshara, Ratnakara Varni and Sarvajna. The Virasaivas 
and Haridasas produced much didactic and polemical literature. The 
Jainas, patronised by a few chieftains of the west coast, took to 
popular metres like Sdngatya and Shatpadl for retelling the story 
of the Tirthankaras. Mangarasa wrote Nemijinesa Sangctti &anti- 
klrti wrote Sdntindtha-purdna i,n 1519 A.D., Padma Kavi, Vardha- 
mana-Charita, Doddayya, Chandraprabhd-Charita, Panchabana, 
BhujabalinCharite, Devarasa, Gurudatta-Charite, Dharanl-Pandita, 
Vardnga Charita and Bijjala-Rdya-Charite. Chandrama’s Karkala- 
Gommatesa-Charite deals with the establishment of the Gommata 
image at Karkala. Salva’s Bhdrata gives the Jaina version of the 
Mahdbhdrata story. The greatest of the Jaina podts of this age was 
Ratnakara Varni who wrote the Satakas—Apardjitesvara Sat aka, 
Triloka Sataka, RatndkaradJilsvara pataka and probably Somesvara 
Sataka. His greatest work was, however, Bharatesa Vaibhava 
(1557 A.D.). It contains about ten-thousand verses in the Sdngatya 
metre and is a valuable source for the study of contemporary life. 

The Virasaivas were mostly concerned with Puranic stories. 
Oduva Giriya (1525), Bombey Lakka and Halaga dealt with the 
story of Harischandra in the Sdngatya metre. 

Gubbi Mallanna (1513), Virupaksha Pandita (1584), and Shada¬ 
kshara (1655) are the three Virasaiva poets of eminence in this 
period. Gubbi Mallannarya (1513-1530) in his Bhavachintdratna, 
deals with the story of Satyendra Ch5la and the efficacy of the Pan- 
chaksharl mantras. His other work Vlrasaivdmritapurdna contains 


597 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


7100 verses dealing with the philosophy of VIrasaivism, the lllas of 
Siva and stories of numerous saints of the sect. Virupaksha Pandita 
(1584) resided at Vijayanagara and his Chenna-Basava-Purdna con¬ 
tains about 2900 verses in the Vardhaka Shatpadl metre. His des¬ 
criptions of nature have freshness and originality. Shadakshara, 
who wrote nearly three quarters of a century later, resided in 
Southern Mysore. His proficiency in Sanskrit and Kannada was re¬ 
markable and in popular legends he was considered equal to Laksh- 
mxsa and Nemichandra. In Sanskrit he composed Kavikarna Rasd- 
yana, &ivddhikya Bhaktadhikya and other stotras. Among his three 
Kannada works Rdjasekhara-Vilasa, BasavOrRdja-Vijaya and 
SabaranSankara-Vilasa, the first is the best. He has preserved all 
the rigour and terseness of the Champu style and the language is 
usually elegant and chaste (though occasionally he displays his 
knowledge of obscure metres and words). This work attained great 
popularity among all classes. 

“Sarvajna” is the pseudonym assumed by a remarkable per¬ 
sonality assigned to c. 1600 A.D. That he was a devotee of :Siva 
and a Sannyasin may be inferred from his vachanas. These vacha¬ 
nas are not in prose but in the popular tripadi metre which is melli¬ 
fluous, terse and pregnant with meaning in the hands of a master 
like Sarvajna. His vachanas are also remarkable for the element 
of satire and humour, comparatively rare in early Kannada litera¬ 
ture. Sarvajna preached a universal philosophy transcending caste, 
colour and creed. 

The Brahmana authors of the times were mostly concerned 
with the epics and the Puranas. Timmanna had completed the 
Mahabharata under the patronage of Krishnadevaraya. His contem¬ 
porary, Nityatma Suka Ydgi or Chatu Vithalanatha, undertook the 
task of rendering the Mahabharata and Bhdgavata into Kannada but 
the Bhdgavata seems to be the work of several authors. Chayana 
(c. 1550) wrote a Mahabharata in Vardhaka Shatpadl. Battatlsvara 
(who seems to be different from the Virasaiva author of that name) 
wrote a RdmdyaVa in the Bhamini Shatpadl metre, but it did not 
attain the popularity of Rdmdyana of Kumar a Valmiki or Narahari 
(c. 1650). Uttara RdmdyaV'a in Kannada was written by Yogindra 
and Tirumale Vaidya. The story of Prahlada furnished the theme 
for Narahari and Chenniga. Srinivasa Kavi rendered the Stfl Parva 
of the Mahabharata and Mallarasa (1680) wrote the Dasdvatdra- 
Charitre. 

Chikkadeva Raya (1672-1704) of the Wodeyar family of Mysore 
is said to have composed Bmnapa or “confession,” Gita Gopdla , Bhd- 


598 


LITERATURE 


gavaia in prose, Mahdbhdrata from Santiparva onwards and Sesha 
dharma. The Binnappa is addressed to his favourite deity Nlarayana 
of Yadugiri (Melkote) with the avowed object of popularising the 
philosophy and teachings of the Gita. The Gita Gdpdla in imita¬ 
tion of Jayadeva, consists of songs probably composed by his minis¬ 
ter Tirumalarya and other authors of his court. Tirumalarya (1645- 
1706) wrote about the exploits of his master in Chikka Deva-Rdja- 
Vijaya , Vamsdvall, Apratima Vira Charite, and his younger brother 
Singararya wrote the earliest extant drama in Kannada, Mitravindd 
Govinda, based on the Ratndvati of Harsha. Chikkupladhyaya is cre¬ 
dited with more than thirty works including eight Sthala Mahat- 
myas, songs, sttotras, commentaries on Tiruvaymoli etc. He wrote 
the Vishnu-Purdna in prose as well as a champu. He rendered 
Sattvika-Brahma-Vidyd-Vildsa, Artha Panchaka and Tattvatraya on 
Visishtadvaita philosophy into Kannada. His Sukasaptati is in prose 
and the Chitra Sataka Sdngatya points out some of the peculiarities 
of Kannada words. Timmakavi has written three Sthala-Mdhat- 
myas. Mallikarjuna also wrote Sriranga Mdhdtmya. 

Under the patronage of Chikkadeva two women authors flou¬ 
rished. i&rihgaramma (1685) wrote Padmini Kalydna in the Sah- 
gatya metre. Sanchi Honnamma is the author of Hadibadeya Dhar¬ 
ma or the Duties of a Pativrata. This work is remarkable for the 
vindication of women and pleads for a proper recognition of the 
status of women. “The woman is the mother who bore and protect¬ 
ed man, yet why do men treat women as inferior?” she asks. “The 
ideal wife devoted to her husband is a blessing to the world and a 
boon to man. The daughter-in-law is also a girl like one’s own 
child and should be treated with the same affection. The woman 
also has a corresponding duty towards her husband and children”. 
The Jaina author Chidananda was also patronised by Chikkadeva 
and wrote Munivamsdbhyudaya dealing with the history of the 
Jaina gurus of Mula Sahgha-Desi Gana. 

Among the semi-historical works apart from those written on 
Chikkadeva Raya may be mentioned the story of Kumara Rama by 
Nanjunda and Ganga, Sarja-Hanumendra-Charite of Krishna Sarma 
(1700), Kanthirava Narasaraja Vijaya of Bharati Nanja (1648), 
Raja Nripa-Charite (1610), Jagadeva Rayana Kdvya (1620), Songs 
on Kempa Raya of Yelahanka and Chikkadeva Raya Biligi Arasara 
Vamsdvali (c. 1700), Raja Sangita on Chikkadeva’s son Kanthirava 
(c. 1710). 

A large number of devotional songs were composed by the 
“Haridasas” of the period who belonged mostly to the Vaishnava 
and Madhva sects. 


599 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


The great poet Lakshmisa may be assigned to the last quarter 
of the sixteenth century. His Jaimini Bharata has been considered 
to be a work of high merit and is deservedly popular. It is written 
in the Vardhaka Shatpadi metre and contains about 1900 verses. 
Lakshmiisa’s style is elegant, mellifluous and charming and his work 
has found many imitators. Among the Puranas, Timmarasa wrote 
the Markandeya Purdna; the Brahmdttarakhanda and Ramayana 
were rendered into Kannada prose by Chamaraja of Mysore and 
Ramachandraguru Sishya translated the Aditya Purdna. Nagarasa 
has given a fairly good translation of the Bhagavad Gita in the 
Bhamini Shatpadi metre. 

Many poets wrote Satakas or centuries of verses containing 
didactic matter and addressed to their favourite deities. Among the 
purely secular works written for amusement and instruction may 
be mentioned Saundarya Kathdratna of Ramendra (c. 1550) based 
on the Sanskrit work of Kshemendra, Sringdra Kathe of Padmarasa 
(1579), and Narasimha’s Madana Mdhini Kathe (1650). 

Technical works dealing with arts and sciences are compara¬ 
tively few. An anthology of verses was issued by Abhinavavadi 
Vidyananda (c. 1540). On prosody and rhetoric we have Salva’s 
Rasa Ratnakara and Sdrada Vildsa dealing with Rasa and Dhvani 
(1550), Gunachandra’s Chhandassdra and Timma’s Navarasdlamkara 
(1600). Grammar is represented by Bhattakalanka’s Sabddnusasana 
(1604) consisting of 592 Sanskrit Sutras for Kannada with a vrtti 
and a vydkhydna • It is more exhaustive than the earlier grammars. 
There were many works on lexicography. On Asva &astra we have 
two works produced under the patronage of Chamaraja of Mysore— 
the Asva Sdstra of Ramachandra and Hayasdra Samuchchaya of 
Padmana Pandita. Astrology and prognostics are dealt with in Ma- 
dhava Deva’s (Arhad dasa) Nara PingaU and Gahgadhara’s Ratta 
Jdtaka • The art of cookery is finely described in Mangarasa’s Supa 
Sdstra (1510). Vlra Bhadra Raja wrote a Kannada commentary on 
the Hastydyurveda of Palakdpya (1600). On medicine Salva’s 
Vaidya Sdngatya, Chennaraja’s Vaidya Sara Samgraha, and Nanja- 
natha Bhupala’s Vaidya Sara Samgraha are notable. Mathematics 
is represented by Bhaskara’s Behdra Ganita, Timmarasa’s Kshetra 
Ganita, and Bala Vaidya Cheluva’s Kannada Lildvati (1715) and his 
Ratna Sdstra deals with precious stones. 

XII. MALAYALAM 

The Malayalam language, with the introduction of a new type 
of devotional literature, underwent a metamorphosis, both in form 


600 


LITERATURE 


and content, and it is generally held that modernity in Malayalam, 
both in language and literature, commenced at this period. 

This metamorphosis was brought by Thunchathu Ezhuthachan 
(16th century) who is known as the father of modern Malayalam. 20 
Till his time the language of Kerala with its literary attainments 
indicated two different courses of development depending mainly on 
its relationship with either Sanskrit or Tamil. The earliest literary 
work in Malayalam, now available, is a prose commentary on Kau- 
tilya’s Arthasastra, ascribed to the 13th century. A poetical work, 
Vaisikatantram, and a Champu Kdvya, Unnichairutevi-charitam, are 
also believed to be the works belonging to this century or, at the 
most, early 14th century. All these works come under a special 
category, known as Manipravdlam, literally the ‘pearl-coral com¬ 
bination’ of two languages, the language of Kerala and Sanskrit. 
A grammar and rhetoric on this hybrid literary style was written 
some time during the 14th century in Sanskrit, and the work, call¬ 
ed Lilatilakam, is the main source of information for a student of 
literary and linguistic history. 

Pdttu and Manipravdla: 

According to Lilatilakam, the Manipravdla and Pdttu style of 
literary compositions were in vogue during the period. Pdttu 
means literally ‘song’, and is, more or less, indigenous in its cha¬ 
racteristics, and therefore representative of pure Malayalam school 
of poetry. From the definition of the Pdttu style of poetry given 
in Lilatilakam it can be surmised that the language of Kerala dur¬ 
ing the period was, more or less, in line with Tamil, and this has 
misled many to think that Malayalam was Tamil itself during this 
period and before. A close scrutiny of the linguistic peculiarities 
of the then Tamil and Malayalam would certainly reveal that they 
had separate entities, but were closely allied in many respects. No 
other pair of Dravidian languages is so closely connected as Tamil 
and Malayalam, and the degree of affinity existing between the 
two languages was so high that a dispassionate analysis and evalua¬ 
tion of the linguistic subtleties of the two languages alone would 
help us to demarcate the essential differences between them. The 
latest researches made in this field have shown that Malayalam, as 
a separate language spoken in Kerala, began showing independent 
lines of development from its parental tongue, the proto-Dravidian, 
or the Tamil of the early Sangam age, preserving the idiosyncracies 
of the earliest Dravidian tongue, which only in due course, gave 
birth to the literary form of Tamil, namely Sen Tamil, and Mala¬ 
yalam, the spoken form of it prevalent in Kerala. However, till 
the 13th century we have no evidence at hand to show that the 


601 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


language of Kerala had a literary tradition excepting to infer that 
folk-songs, chiefly connected with rituals and religious perform¬ 
ances were there, the relics of which are now available and about 
the antiquity of which nothing definite can be ascertained. The 
indigenous school of Pdttu, referred to in Lilatilakam, is a contri¬ 
bution of the early compositions. Side by side with this school only 
developed the hybrid literary language of Manipravdlam. 

Pre-Ezhuthachan period: 

Thus the literary traditions prior to the age of Ezhuthachan 
give a rich heritage of interesting works belonging to these schools. 
The three early Manipravdlam Champus, a few Sandesa Kdvyas, 
like Unnunili Sandesam and Kaka-sandesam, and innumerable amo¬ 
rous compositions on courtesans of Kerala, which throb with lite¬ 
rary beauty and poetical fancies, combined with a relishing touch 
of realism about them with regard to the then social conditions— 
all these constitute the Manipravdlam school of poetry. Many prose 
works, in the form of commentaries and elucidations of Purdnik 
episodes used by traditional mono-actors, called Chakydrs, were 
written in this style and they form the bulk of classical works in 
Malay alam. 

The indigenous school also has major works, like Rdmachari- 
tam, Rdmayanam, Mahdbharatam and Bhagavad Gitd, by a set of 
poets belonging to one family, called Kannassas , and Krishnap- 
pdttu by Cherusseri N'amftudiri. Some of them, like Rdmacharitam, 
have a close resemblance to Tamil language of the period, and the 
reason for this is not to be attributed to the then characteristics of 
the language of Kerala, but to the influence of Tamil works on 
native poets belonging to the zones lying near the Tamil country. 
Otherwise the existence of works like Krishnappdttu written almost 
during the same century in pure Malayalam and the early champus 
composed still earlier, containing similar diction and usages formed 
in Krishnapattu cannot be explained. 

Contribution of Ezhuthachan: 

It is against this background that the contribution of Thun- 
chathu Ezhuthachan of the 16th century towards the language and 
literature is to be assessed. The Malayalam language was by his 
time developed to be the vehicle of ideas, of even thoughts on 
higher studies like metaphysics, economics and politics. But as 
the language had been developing in two different lines in its voca¬ 
bulary, it became the need of the day to bring in uniformity of 
style. The credit to effect this goes to Thunchathu Ezhuthachan 
whose writings became a confluence of the two channels of lin- 


602 


LITERATURE 


guistic currents. He profusely borrowed from Sanskrit its rich 
lexicography as the poets of Manipravalam school did, but with a 
difference that the mainstay of his style in writing verses rested on 
indigenous school. 

The first work of Ezhuthachan was a translation of Adhydtma 
Rdmdyanam from Sanskrit, a Vaishnavic version of the Rama saga 
which inspired many poets during the same period to adopt it in 
their own mother tongues. What Tulasi did for the then North 
Indian language of the people in generality, Ezhuthachan did for 
the Keralites. Although the story of Rama had already been re¬ 
told in Malayalam by many poets who lived before the days of 
Ezhuthachan, his adaptation of Adhydtma Rdmdyanam was hailed 
as the most enchanting work, being liked by the scholars and illi¬ 
terates alike. The devotional element blended with Vedantic 
thoughts most artistically linked with the story of Rama opened a 
new chapter in Malayalam literature and brought the readers to an 
elevated level of literary compositions. It gave the work an en¬ 
tirely fresh look and ultimately it became so popular that every 
Hindu house made it a religious rite to read Adhydtma Rdmdyanam 
daily. The diversified characteristics of the language of Kerala 
slowly disappeared and merged into this dynamic, new-born literary 
style, which even today continues as it is. 

Adhydtma Rdmdyanam was immediately followed by Maha- 
bhdratam, a work of superb literary excellence, probably written 
by the author in the maturity of his poetic faculty. The entire bulk 
of Vydsa Bhdrata was condensed by Ezhuthachan allowing no epi¬ 
sode to suffer due to this brevity of expression, but at the same time 
giving chance to the full display of his poetic genius wherever pos¬ 
sible. Bhagavad GUd, running to eighteen chapters in Vydsa Bhd¬ 
rata, finds a prominent place in Ezhuthachan’s work, giving in a 
very condensed form the gist of Gita. Another speciality with 
Ezhuthachan’s Bhdratam is that the description, figures of speech, 
and the portrayal of characters have something peculiar about the 
life of Kerala in them. Thus Mahdbhdratam stands out in Mala¬ 
yalam literature as a classic written in modern language, and is per¬ 
haps a unique work in that respect. 

Post-Ezhuthachan period: 

Many devotional works composed during and after 16th cen¬ 
tury are ascribed to Ezhuthachan but none of them stands on a 
pedestal with the literary excellence and beauty of expression that 
characterise the works of Ezhuthachan. Many Puranas were written 
during this period closely imitating his style. The period imme- 

603 



THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


diately following the age of Ezhuthachan is therefore known as the 
“Bhakti Yuga ”, the age of devotional literature in Malayalam. 
Melpattur Narayana Bhattatiri, the author of the immortal Sanskrit 
Bhakti-Kdvya, ‘Nardyaniyam ’ was a contemporary of Ezhuthachan. 
Bhattatiri stands as a living monument of the erudition in Sanskrit 
the then high caste Hindus of Kerala attained. Knowledge of 
Sanskrit alone was counted as a symbol of scholarship not only in 
that period but also to a great extent during the four centuries 
that followed. But, a few poets following in the footsteps of Ezhu¬ 
thachan made remarkable contributions to Malayalam, despite the 
contemptuous treatment tendered to the writers of native language. 
The most prominent among them is Poonthanam Nambudiri, the 
author of Jndnappana, a philosophical work in simple Malayalam. 
It was he who proved more than Ezhuthachan that high philo¬ 
sophical thoughts could be rendered in chaste Malayalam without 
the help of Sanskrit technical terms. 

Later Champu period: 

It was during the 16th and 17th centuries that later Champu 
Kdvyas, composed in Manipraviala style were written. Rdmdyanam 
Champu by Punam Nambudiri and Naishadham Champu by Mahi- 
shamahgalam Nambudiri are the most notable works under this 
category. One speciality of Champu Kdvyas was that they contained 
both the Sanskritic and indigenous elements of poetry in equal de¬ 
gree, and they finally paved the way for two types of literature uni¬ 
que in many respects, the like of which are not to be found in any 
Indian language either earlier or later than this age. 

Attakkathd Age: 

Attakkatha literature, closely following the champu style in 
the use of Sanskrit and Malayalam with a definite purpose and 
motive, is the first type. Attam in Malayalam means ‘dance or 
drama’ and Kathd, a Sanskrit term, means ‘story’. Attakkathias are 
therefore the stories written for a type of dance-drama, indigenous 
to Kerala, known as Kathakali. Kathakali, which at present en¬ 
joys international reputation, is representative of the fusion of 
x\ryan and Dravidian cultures in the art of histrionics. Bharata’s 
Ndtyasdstra had become by the time, a hand-book of the Chakyars, 
the traditional actors of Sanskrit dramas in Kerala temples. As 
early as the 9th century A.D., the institution of Chakydr Kuthu , with 
its colourful and interesting variation of Kutiyatto,m (staging of 
Sanskrit plays) was there, and the caste Hindus connected with tem¬ 
ples looked upon the same as the best means of educating them in 
Sanskrit and histrionics. As it was not open to the generality 
of the people living outside the precincts of temples, another form 

604 


LITERATURE 


of dance-drama emerged out of it, taking inspiration from the Gita- 
govinda of Jayadeva. The story of Lord Krishna was then adapted 
and a Sanskrit work called Krishnaglti was composed for the pur¬ 
pose. The dance-drama based on Krishnaglti was known as Krish- 
iiattam, which again was however confined to temple premises. 

The Raja of Kottarakkara, a princely poet, (16th century) 
wrote in Malayalam the story of Rdmayana in imitation of Krishna¬ 
glti and the same was styled as Rdmanattam as against Krishnattam. 
The entire Ramciyana story was divided into eight parts, and they 
form the basis for Rdmanattam which later paved the way for the 
art of Kathakali. 

When another prince, Raja of Kottayam, composed stories of 
Mahdbhdrata for the same purpose, he preferred to call it Katha¬ 
kali, and the literary composition was thereafter known as Attak- 
kathd, The two centuries which followed the days of Raja of 
Kottarakkara, the exponent of Rdmanattam, witnessed the heyday 
of Attakkatha literature, which continued to wield its charming in¬ 
fluence for all writers of the age, and it became a rule that a poet 
to be recognised should compose an Attakkatha. Thus nearly thou¬ 
sand Kathakali plays were written during the period, although only 
a few of them claim literary excellence. 

Unnayi Varyar, whose Nalacharitam Attakkatha is the most 
popular even today, was the most prominent poet (18th century) 
among not only the Kathakali writers, but also among the classical 
poets of Kerala. He is often styled as the Kalidasa of Kerala, and 
his Nalacharitam is the Abhijndna-Sdkuntalam of Malayalam lite¬ 
rature. Although Kathakali is a dance-drama and its literary form 
should more or less be on the model of drama, there is nothing com¬ 
mon between a typical Attakkatha and Sanskrit drama. On the 
other hand, the principles of dramaturgy to be observed in writing 
a particular type of Sanskrit drama are completely ignored or 
violated by an author of Attakkatha. Delineation of a particular 
Rasa is an inevitable feature with Sanskrit drama whereas in an 
Attakkatha all the predominant Rasas are given full treatment and 
consequently the theme of an Attakkatha often loses its integrity 
and artistic unity when viewed as a literary work. Any Attak- 
katha fulfils its objective if it affords a variety of scenes depict¬ 
ing different types of characters, and each scene would have its 
own hero with the Rasa associated with that character. When that 
hero is portrayed he is given utmost prominence to the utter neglect 
of the main sentiment (rasa) of the theme in general. This has 
its own justification as far as an Attakkatha is concerned. The pur¬ 
pose of an Attakkatha is not to present a theme with a well-knit 


605 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


emotional plot as its central point, but to present all approved 
types of characters already set to suit the technique of the art of 
Kathakali. It is worthwhile to point out that Unnayi Varyar’s 
Nalacharitam Attakkathd does not conform to the traditional mono¬ 
tonous setting of a Kathakali play. His composition is a happy 
diversion from the conservative line and therefore stands singled 
out as a perfect drama in all the significance and implication of the 
term. Drama being the most perfect poetic expression of a writer, 
Nalacharitam with all its artistic and literary qualities has the rare 
privilege of being a unique literary work of the period under 
review. 


XIII. SANSKRIT 

The Muslim occupation of large areas in North India adversely 
affected the growth of Sanskrit literature. Akbar attempted to 
create an atmosphere of tolerance and Shah Jahan and Dara gave 
some patronage to Sanskrit scholars. But, by and large, the atmos¬ 
phere of peace and security so necessary for the progress of culture, 
was lacking. Even a cursory glance at the condition of Sanskrit 
literature in different regions testifies to this. Kasmir, which was 
once reputed as an important centre of Sanskrit learning, hardly 
produced any work worth the name after the end of the Hindu rule. 
In Bengal, also, practically Jayadeva’s (12th century A.D.) is the 
last great name in its literary history. Gujarat was known for its 
historical kavyas during the days of the Chalukyas and their succes¬ 
sors, the Vaghela chiefs. But the subsequent period did not pro¬ 
duce many works of importance. Similar was the position in 
Bihar. If Sanskrit continued to prosper in these regions, it was 
mainly under the patronage of the smaller Hindu States. 

Different is the story in regard to the South. The vigorous 
renaissance movement so ably initiated by Madhavacharya and 
Sayanachiarya continued for centuries to inspire both rulers and 
scholars to strive to enrich their culture in all possible aspects. 
The Vijayanagara empire lost much of its glory in 1565 but the 
rulers of the Tuluva and Aravidu dynasties kept alive the tradi¬ 
tion of patronage to Sanskrit. It continued to be nourished by the 
chiefs of the smaller principalities that rose to prominence, like 
the Niayakas of Tanjore, the chiefs of Travancore and Cochin, and 
the Zamorins of Calicut, many of whom were erudite poets them¬ 
selves. 

A brief survey of the progress achieved in different branches 
of Sanskrit literature also confirms these observations. 


606 


LITERATURE 


THE KAVYA LITERATURE 

Mahdkdvya: 

In the field of Mahakavya notable contribution was made by 
Raghunatha Nayaka of Tanjore and his court-poets. A zealous patron 
of letters, Raghunatha was himself a well-known poet. Among his 
kavyas mention may be made of Achyutardydbhyudaya, Ramayana- 
sdra-sdngraha, Gajendramoksha, Nalabhyudaya, Parijdtaharana and 
Rukmini-krishna-vivdha. The first one is a biography of his father, 
Achyutaraya. 

Madhuravani, a talented lady in the court of Raghunatha, wrote 
a kdvya on Ramayana, in fourteen cantos, at the instance of the 
king. She tells us that the king was keen on getting a Sanskrit 
kavya written on the lines of his Andhra-Rdmdyana, and he was 
directed by God in his dream to entrust the work to Madhuravani. 

Srinivasa Dikshita, a minister of the N'ayakas of Gingee, was a 
prolific writer. He is credited with the authorship of eighteen 
dramas and sixty kavyas. Among his kavyas, Sitikanthavijaya 
deals with the story of Samudramanthana. His son, Rajachudamani 
Dikshita, a well-known scholar in Mlmarhsa, contributed to the 
poetic literature also. His Rukmimkalydna is a kavya in ten cantos, 
with the theme of the marriage of Krishna and Rukmini. 

Nilakantha Dikshita was a versatile writer who flourished in 
the first half of the seventeenth century. He was a disciple of 
Venkatamakhi, the son of Srinivasa Dikshita, and the grand-nephew 
of Appayya Dikshita, the famous Saiva scholar of the period. He 
was a minister of Tirumalanayaka of Madura. Among his numer¬ 
ous poetical works Sivallldrnava and Gangavatarana rank very 
high. The former is a mahakavya in twenty-two cantos detailing 
the sixty-four Vilas of god Siva Halasyanatha by which name he is 
worshipped at Madura. His Gangavatarana deals in eight cantos 
with the story of the penance of Bha^Iratha and the descent of the 
celestial Ganga on the earth. 

Another contemporary poet of repute was Chakrakavi, the 
author of Jdnaktparinaya. Based on the Balakdnda of Ramayana, 
the poet narrates in this kdvya, of eight cantos, the story of Rama 
culminating with his marriage with Sita, the daughter of Janaka. 
Another work based on the Ramayana is Rdmachandrodaya of Ven- 
katesa. It is a lengthy kdvya in thirty-two cantos, probably com¬ 
posed in 1637 A.D. at Banaras. 

Narayana or Narayanabhattatiri is considered ‘as one of the 
greatest scholar-poets Kerala has produced’. He was a contemporary 
and a friend of Manaveda Zamorin, king of Kozhikode (1637 to 


607 



THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


1648). His contribution to Sanskrit literature is profuse and varied, 
covering the fields of hdvya, Mimdmsd, grammar and the like. But 
his fame rests mainly on his metrical composition Ndvdyamyam. 
Though it is a lengthy poem of over a thousand verses in the hdvya 
style, it can be described as a devotional hdvya in praise of god 
Narayana of Guruvayur. To this category may be added Rukminisa- 
vijaya of Vadiraja. This Madhva pontiff wrote many works on 
Madhva philosophy and he was a gifted poet too. His Sarasabharati 
is another poetical work, dealing with Madhva theology. His Tir- 
thaprabandha is a rare type of work. It is a travelogue describing 
the holy places all over India. 

Slesha-kavya: 

With the growing artificiality in poetry which became the cha¬ 
racteristic feature of the later periods, a number of works came to 
be written which can be included in the class of Slesha-kavya, using 
the words with double, treble or even more meanings. The authors 
of such works endeavoured to narrate more than one story in one 
and the same composition. In the period under study, we notice 
quite a few experiments of this type. 

The Yddava-Rdghaviya of Venkatadhvarin (17th century) for in¬ 
stance, is a poem narrating the stories of both Krishna and Rama 
using the device of double entendre. Naishadha-pdrijata of Krishna- 
dhvarin is a similar work dealing at one and the same time with the 
stories of Krishna and Nala. This device is seen further extended 
with the use of treble punning by Rajachudamani Dikshita men¬ 
tioned above, in his kavya , Raghava-Yddava-Pandavlya. This work 
narrates the stories of Rdmdyana , Bhagavata and Mahabharata. 
Another work of the same name and the same theme is by Chidam- 
bara who was patronised by the Vijayanagara king Venkata II (1586- 
1614) of the Aravidu dynasty. In his Panchakalydna-champu the 
experiment has indeed reached its climax, where he claims to nar¬ 
rate simultaneously the story of five marriages of Rama, Krishna, 
Vishnu, Siva and Subrahmanya. He is also reported to have written 
a commentary on this work, as this was indeed necessary for the 
understanding of this almost impossible feat. 

Historical hdvya: 

Achyutavdydbhyudaya of Dindima, Rajanatha III, is an import¬ 
ant work in this respect. The author belonged to the famous Din- 
dima family which originally belonged to Mathura. It deals with 
the history of Achyutadevaraya (1530-1542), the successor of Kri- 
shnadevaraya. Varadambikd-Parinaya also pertains to the life of 
Achyutadevaraya. It is a champu-kdvya, its theme being the mar- 


608 


LITERATURE 

riage of the princess Varadambika, the daughter of Salaka Tirumala 
with Achyutadevaraya. Apart from the historical value which is 
not inconsiderable, the kavya is considered as one of the beautiful 
champus of the later period. The author of the work, Tirumalamba, 
was a versatile lady in the court of Achyutadevaraya. She is des¬ 
cribed in inscriptions as Oduva Tirumalamma or Tirumalamma “the 
reader”. She is also credited with the authorship of some verses 
recording the grants of land made by Achyutadevaraya. 

A work of the same period, Vydsayogicharita of Somanatha, 
throws much light on the scholastic and cultural achievements of 
Vyasaraya, who was the rdjaguru of Krishnadevaraya and was held 
in high esteem by Achyutadevaraya. 

Kavindra Paramananda, a contemporary of Shivaji, composed a 
narrative poem dealing with the life and achievements of Shivaji. 
The work is known as Anubhdrata or Sivabladrata. The story was 
further continued by his son, Devadatta, and grandson, Govinda, to 
cover the period of Shambhuji. All these three compositions are 
collectively known as Paramdnanda-kdvyam and are valuable 
sources of Maratha history. 

Jayarama Pande composed the Rddhamadhavcu-Vildsa champu 
which gives an account of poets assembled at the court of Shahji, 
the father of Shivaji. 

Another work of considerable importance for the history of the 
Marathas is Rambhurdja-charita of Harikavi or Bhanubhatta. It is 
a poetic biography of Shambhuji, the son of Shivaji. The work is 
preserved in fragments only. The author Harikavi was a Brah- 
mana from the Deccan who had settled in Surat. The work is stated 
to have been composed in 1685 at the instance of the king’s precep¬ 
tor, Krishnapandita. Harikavi also composed Haihayendra-charita 
which professes to be a mythical kavya dealing with the story of 
Kartikeya, but the story is spun around the life of his patron, Sham¬ 
bhuji himself. 

Raj drama-char ita of Kesava Pandita is an incomplete story of 
Rajaram. It, however, contains a reference to his journey to Gingee. 

Of the many works written on the life of Raghunatha Nayaka 
of Tanjore by his court-poets, two are noteworthy. Govinda Dik- 
shita, who was a minister of this family of rulers for three genera¬ 
tions, wrote Sdhityasudhd which describes the life and achievements 
of Raghunatha. Another work on the life of Raghunatha is Raghu- 
nathdbhyudaya of R&mabhadramba. The poem contains valuable 
references to many historical events. 

609 

ME.—39 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


The Maratha rulers of Tanjore, Ekoji (1674-1687) and ShahjI 
(1687-1711) were also great patrons of letters. Many poets of their 
courts wrote, among others, kdvyas of historical importance also. 

Gangadhara, a minister of Ekoji, wrote Bhosalavamsdvali, a 
kdvya dealing with the history of the Bhonsle family. In the court 
of king ShlahjI, son of Ekoji, flourished the poet Bhuminatha, also 
known as Nalla Dikshita. He wrote a Champu-kdvya called Dhar - 
mavijayachampu to glorify the life and achievements of his patron. 
Another work on the life of ShlahjI is from the pen of Sridhara 
Venkatesa. It is a poem in eight cantos, called Sdhendra-Vildsa. 

The Rdjatarangini of Kalhana, the famous work on the history of 
Kashmir, was continued by different authors in different periods; 
and the work pertaining to the period under study is the Rdjdvali - 
pataka of Prajyabhatta and his pupil Suka. The work narrates the 
history of Kashmir after its conquest by Akbar. 

Rudrakavi’s Rdshtraudha kdvya (1596) narrates the history of 
the Bagulas of Mayuragiri (Khandesh), throwing light on the poli¬ 
tical situation of the contemporary Deccan. 

Karnavatamsa , an eulogistic account of the rule of Karnasimha 
of Bikaner, mentions names of Muslim patrons of Sanskrit. Anupa- 
simhagundvatdra by Vitthala Krishna is a glorified account of the 
rule of Anupasirhha, son of Karnasimha. 

In this category may be included the eulogies by Pandit a Jagan- 
natha— Asaf Vilas addressed to Asaf Khan, Jagadabharana in praise 
of Dara Shukoh and Prdndbharana glorifying the rule of Pranana- 
rayana of Kamarupa, also Kavlndracharya’s Jagadvijayachandas , 
eulogising the achievements of Jahangir. Dara Shukoh, too, com- 
posed a prasasti in honour of Nrisimha Sarasvati of Banaras; it is 
in rhythmic prose full of alliterations. 

Champu Kdvya: 

Chidambara, mentioned earlier, is also the author of two cham- 
pus. Panchakalyana-champu, already noticed, and Bhagavatarchampu 
narrating the story of Krishna. Rajanatha III, Dindima, also men¬ 
tioned above, composed another Bhdgavata-champu. Nilakantha Dik¬ 
shita, too, wrote in 1637 his Nilakaixtha-Vijaya-champu > dealing with 
the legend of Samudramanthana. 

Tirumalamba’s Varadambikd-parinaya-champu has been noticed 
above. Mitramisra, the famous author of Viramitrddaya, was also 
the author of Anandakanda-champu, dealing with the storv of 

Krishna. 

• • 


610 


LITERATURE 


Venkatadhvarin was the author of at least four champu works: 
Hastigiri-champu or Varadabhyudaya in praise of Varadaraja of 
Kanchi, Uttara-champu, based on the Uttarakdnda of the Rdmayana, 
Srinivasa-champu, in praise of Venkatesvara of Tirupati and Visva - 
gunadarsa-champd, a work of rare imagination. It deals with the 
journey of two demi-gods through the sky in a vimdna. They see 
various places and peoples. One of them sees only the good side 
of everything and the other only the dark side. The work men¬ 
tions the Europeans and their ways. Therefore, it is ascribed by 
some scholars to a later period. 

Lyrics and smaller poems: 

Among the lyric poets of this period, Jagannatha Panditaraja 
was undoubtedly an outstanding scholar and poet. A native of the 
Andhra region, he flourished in the courts of the Rajputs, the Mu- 
ghuls and the ruler of Kamarupa. He was the author of several 
scholarly and poetical works. A large number of stray verses, too, 
are ascribed to him. Of his devotional lyrics, the most beautiful 
poems are: the Piyushalahan or Gangdlahatl in praise of the Gahga, 
Amritalaharl in praise of the Yamuna, the Karundlahand in praise of 
Vishnu, the Lakshmilahafl in praise of Lakshml and the Sudha - 
lahari in praise of Surya. 

Gitagdvinda of Jayadeva served as the model for many devo¬ 
tional compositions. Gitasankara is one such work written by Ananta- 
narayana, a grandson of Appayya Dikshita. Krishnagiti is another 
work of this type on the life of Krishna. It was composed by the 
Zamorin king, Manaveda, in 1652. Both of these provide excellent 
themes for dance-dramas. 

Mention may be made here of another variety of kavya, the 
sandesa or Data- kavya—written on the model of Meghaddta of Kali¬ 
dasa. Quite a few works of this type were written in Kerala. Nara- 
yana, for instance, who was in the court of Ramavarman, the ruler 
of Quilon (1541-1547), composed Suhhagasandesa. The author here 
endeavours to send a message of love to his wife at Trichur, through 
the messenger Subhaga, a Brahmana of the Lata country. In his 
kavya, Kdmasandesa, the poet Mitradatta employs Kama, the god 
of Love himself, as his messenger to convey his love to his wife 
Chandralakshmi at Tirunavaya. 

Bhringa or Bhramara-sandesa of Vasudeva utilises the bee for 
conveying the love of the hero to his wife, who was separated from 
him through the wiles of a Yakshini. 


611 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


NATAKA 

Mythological Plays 

Jagajyotimalla of Nepal wrote a drama with the popular theme 
of the marriage of Siva and Farvati, named Hara-Gaurl-vivdha. The 
story of the killing of Kamsa by Krishna is the subject-matter of the 
Kamsavadha of &esh-Krishna, who was a contemporary of Akbar. He 
is also credited with three other dramas, Murarivijaya 9 Muktacharita 
and Satyabhdmd-parinaya. Another play relating to the legend of 
Krishna is Pdrijdta-harana of Kumara Tatacharya. He was the 
rdjaguru of Raghunatha and his son, Vijayaraghava, of Tanjore. 

Among the dramas based on the Rdmdyana mention may be 
made of Adbhutadarpana of Mahadeva. The author here employs 
the device of a magic-mirror through which Rama sees the happen¬ 
ings in Lanka, where Sita was imprisoned. The Jdnaklparinaya of 
Ramabhadra Dlkshita also deals with the theme of Ramayana. The 
author here uses the device of some characters appearing in disguise, 
—Ravana, Sarana and Vidyujjihva appearing in the guise of Rama, 
Lakshmana and Visvamitra, and so on. Ramabhadra belonged to 
the family of famous scholars of Kumbakonam and received the 
patronage of the Tanjore king, Shahji (1684-1711). 

The story of Nala has also been dealt with by many authors. 
Srinivasa Dlkshita wrote Bhairmparinaya describing the marriage 
of Nala and Damayanti. The Nalacharita-Ndtaka of Nllakantha also 
deals with the same story in seven acts. 

Bhuminatha or Nalla Dlkshita, belonging to the court of Shahji, 
wrote a drama entitled Subhadrd-parinaya on the marriage of Su- 
bhadra with Arjuna. Shahji himself was a talented author and com¬ 
posed a play Chandrasekharavildsa. Another work depicting the 
marriage of Subhadra, was composed by the Madhva pontiff, Vija- 
yindratirtha, entitled Subhadrd-Dhananjaya. 

Rajachudamani Dlkshita has yet another play to his credit, 
Karnulirii-kaldhamsa by name. This work, in four acts, depicts in 
an artificial way the love affairs of the hero and heroine. 

Historical Plays 

The Kdntimati-Parinaya of Chokkanatha is a play which is semi- 
historical in character. The theme of this play is the marriage of 
Shahji, the author’s patron, with KantimatT. His other 1 work, Sevan- 
tikd-parinaya, deals with the marriage of Basavamja with Sevantika, 
the daughter of a prince of Malabar. The hero is identified with 
Basavappanayaka, the ruler of Keladi (1697-1714), to whose court the 
poet seems to have migrated. 


612 


LITERATURE 


Allegorical Plays 

Chaitanya-chandrodaya is a work of Kavikarnapura of Kan- 
chanapalll in Bengal. The drama deals with the life of Chaitanya, 
the famous saint of Bengal, through the allegorical figures Maitid, 
Bhakti , Virdga and the like. 

Dharmavijaya of Bhudeva Sukla is an allegorical play eulo¬ 
gizing the ‘advantages of the life of spiritual duty’ through the 
characters, Virtue and Vice, in personified form. Amritodaya of Go- 
kulanatha is also a play in five acts depicting the progress of Jiva 
from creation to annihilation. The author was patronised by Fateh 
Singh of Srinagar (1615). The famous Srinivasa DIkshita who has 
been referred to earlier, is also credited with the authorship of an 
allegorical play Bhdvana-purushottama which is stated to have been 
composed at the instance of Surappa Nayaka, the ruler of Gingee. 
Vijaylndratlrtha, mentioned above, has written an allegorical play 
Ubhayagrastamhudaya. He is stated to have written this work in 
reply to Prabodha-Chandrddaya of Krishnamisra and Sahkalpa- 
Suryddaya of Vehkatanatha Vedantadesika. 

Erotic Plays 

A number of Bhanas —a type of one-act play mainly dwelling 
on an erotic theme—were written during the period under review. 
Sringdra-Sarvasva of Rajachu<Jamani DIkshita, for instance, belongs 
to this category. Nalla DIkshita is also credited with the authorship 
of a similar play of the same name. Ramabhadra DIkshita is the 
author of a work of this type, viz., Sringdratilaka. Rasavildsa of Chok- 
kanatha also belongs to this category. 

TECHNICAL AND SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE: 

Alarhkdra 

Appayya DIkshita, the famous philosopher, and Jagannatha, the 
eminent poet, were perhaps the most outstanding scholars of this 
period who contributed a good deal to the study of Poetics. Ap¬ 
payya Dlkshita’s more important works in this field are: ChitramL 
mdmsd , Kuvalayananda , Vrittivdrtika and Lakshanaratnavali. Of 
the works of Jagannatha, the notable are: Rasagangadhara, Chitra - 
namdmsd-Khandana and Bhdmim-Vilasa. The views of Appayya 
DIkshita were subjected to a severe scrutiny by Jagannatha Pan- 
dita, and thus a number of intricate and finer aspects of Sanskrit 
rhetorics came to be well-defined in this age. 

Gangadhara Kavlndra and Ramananda are two authors of Mi- 
thila who wrote Kdvyaddkini and Rascttaranginl , respectively. 6rl- 


613 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


nivasa Dlkshita and his son Rajachudamani Dlkshita were also well- 
known writers on Alamkara. The former is credited with as many 
as seven works on the subject. Raghunathamanohara of Champa, 
identified with Choul in Kolaba district of Maharashtra, is the author 
of two works called Kavihaustubha and Chhundorotuamjdld. The 
latter is not yet found, but it is quoted in the former work. 

In the field of grammatical studies Bhattoji Dlkshita stands 
foremost. His Siddhdntakaumudi , an elucidation of the work of 
Panini, is perhaps more popular than Panini’s work itself. His Praw- 
dhamcinorama is a commentary on this work and Bdlamanorarrm is its 
abridgement. He is also the author of another commentary on 
Ashtddhydyi* named &abdaka,ustubha. Niagoji Dlkshita, the disciple 
of Bhanu Dikshita, the grandson of Bhattoji Dlkshita, was another 
reputed grammarian of this period, with about a dozen works on 
the subject to his credit. Narayana, the author of the Ndrayamyam, 
mentioned earlier, wrote a work on grammar, Prakriydsarvasva, 
which is a commentary on the Sutras of Panini. His Mdnameyddaya 
is an important contribution to the Mimamsa literature. 

Music: ' : -H 

Many scholars in the court of Vijanayagara wrote works on 
music, Rama Arnatya, for instance, who flourished in the court of 
Aliya Ramaraya (1552-65) wrote Svarameldkaldnidhi which deals 
with different rdgas of the Karnataka system of music. Pundaifika- 
vithhala, a native of Khandesh, moved to the court of Akbar and 
composed a number of works on music such as: Rdgamdld and 
Rdgamanjari. Chaturadamodara who flourished in the court of 
Jahangir wrote his SangUadarpana dealing with music and dance. 
Jagajyotimalla, referred to earlier, also wrote a work on music call¬ 
ed Sangitasdrasarvasva. 

Raghunatha, the Nay aka of Tanjore, was considered as an au¬ 
thority on music. His work on the subject is Sangitasudhd. 

Venkatamakhi was a student of Raghunatha and patronised by 
the latter’s son Vijayaraghava. Among others, his work Chatur - 
dandiprakdsikd is a treatise on music, with special reference to 
Vina. 

Philosophy: 

Appayya Dikshita, mentioned above, contributed more than 
hundred scholarly works to the fields of Advaita philosophy and 
Saiva siddhdnta. More important among his works are: Sivarka- 
manidtpikd which is a commentary on Srikantha’s commentary on 
Brahma-sutras, and Chaturmatasdra-sangraha which summarises the 
doctrines of Madhva, Ramanuja, Sankara and Srikantha. 


614 


LITERATURE 


Madhusudana Sarasvati was another great Advaita scholar of 
this period. Among his numerous works, Advaita-siddhi is con¬ 
sidered as the best contribution to Advaita literature. It is written 
in reply to Nydydmrita of Vyasaraya. It is said that Akbar was im¬ 
pressed by his scholarship and honoured him. 

Among; the scholars of the Madhva philosophy the foremost was 
Vyasaraya (1478-1539). He was the raja-guru of the Vijayanagara 
king Krishnadevaraya and continued to be honoured by Achyuta- 
devaraya. His important works on Dvaita philosophy are Nydyd¬ 
mrita, Tarkatdndava, and Chandrikd. They are collectively known as 
Vydsatrayl. Vyasaraya’s disciple, Vijayindratirtha (1514-1595), was 
a prolific writer with more than 18 works to his credit, in addition 
to the commentaries on the works of his teacher. Vadirajatirtha 
(1480-1600) was a great exponent of the Dvaita philosophy, to whom 
over 90 works are ascribed. Many other scholars like Satyanatha- 
yati (1648-74), Raghavendratirtha (1623-71) and others enriched the 
literature on Dvaita philosophy considerably, by their numerous con¬ 
tributions. 

Epigraphical Literature: 

Reference should be made here, at least in passing, to the epi¬ 
graphical literature. Numerous inscriptions on stone and copper¬ 
plates, written in ornate poetic style, have enriched the Sanskrit 
literature of the early part of this period. Outstanding among 
them is the Rdjaprasasti at Udaipur, composed in 1676. It is a 
Mahdkdvya, in twenty-two cantos, engraved on as many slabs. The 
author was a Telugu Brahman named Ranachhoda. 

XIV. ARABIC 

As in the pre-Mughul period, Arabic compositions in India 
under the Great Mughuls mainly touched religious subjects such as 
the Qur’an, Hadith (Apostolic Traditions), Fiqh (Jurisprudence), 
Sufism and Grammar. Arabic writings on purely literary topics, 
such as dealt with in Persian, were few and far between during 
the period under review. Almost the entire range of Arabic lite¬ 
rature then produced is represented by commentaries, super-com¬ 
mentaries, glosses and annotations on the Qur an. 

The study of theological sciences owes very much to the fre¬ 
quency of visits by Indian ulemas to centres of religious instruc¬ 
tions in the Hejaz. The establishment of the supremacy of Portu¬ 
guese navigation in the Indian ocean in the 16th century made 
voyages between India and Arabia safe. Apart from the casual 
visits, there were scholars who migrated to the holy cities of Mecca 


615 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


and Madina for receiving specialized knowledge in their fields of 
study. Among such scholar-migrants, the most conspicuous was 
Sayyid ‘All al-Muttaqi (d. 1568) 21 of Burhanpur. He commanded 
great reverence and popularity not only among the contemporary 
learned men but also among the ruling potentates such as Ottoman 
Emperor Sulaiman I and Sultan Mahmud III of Gujarat who granted 
stipends for the pupils of his madrasah at Mecca. He wrote a com¬ 
mentary on the Qur’an, named Shn c un al-Munazzalat, containing 
learned notes on grammatical and philological subtleties of Qur’anic 
words and phrases. But the work which gave him an everlasting 
fame is the Kanz al-'Ummdlj 22 an encyclopaedic collection of Apos¬ 
tolic Traditions, of which Abul Hasan al-Bakrl, the author’s pre¬ 
ceptor, says: ‘al-Suyuti obliged the world by composing the Jam‘al- 
Jawdmi e , while al-Muttaqi has obliged him by re-arranging the same.’ 
Among the numerous pupils of al-Muttaqi was the famous ‘Abdul 
Wahhab al-Muttaqi, who was the teacher of Shaikh ‘Abdul Haqq 
Muhaddith Dihlawi. Though Emperor Akbar was not the follower 
of orthodox religious views, there was no dearth of Ulemas and 
theological writings in Arabic during his period. Makhdum al-Mulk 
‘Abdullah SultanpuH and Shaikh ‘Abd al-Nabi Sadr Sudur were 
among the leading Ulemas of Akbar’s early period, while Shaikh 
Sa‘duT-lah Barii Isra’il (d. 1603) of Lahore was a noted author who 
translated the Bahr-i-Mawwdj of Qadi Shahab al-Din Daulatabadi 
into Arabic. Shah Fathullah ShirazI, Mir Sadr al-Din, Mir Ghyath 
al-Din Mansur and Mirza Jan Mir were the standard-bearers of 
Islamic learning, and logic and philosophy were the subjects dealt 
with by them. But the most outstanding figure was ‘Abdul Haqq Dih- 
lawJ (d. 1642), 23 who wrote mainly in Persian but has to his credit 
some significant works in Arabic which are as follows:— Lam'at al- 
Tanqih ‘ala Mishkdt al-Masdbih, a valuable and copious commentary 
on the canonical Hadith collections, along with an interesting intro¬ 
duction which by itself forms a separate treatise on classes of Apos¬ 
tolic traditions; Kitdb Asrna’ al-Rijal Mishkdt al-Masabih, an im¬ 
portant book on the science of biography in relation to the narrators 
of Hadith mentioned in the Mishkdt al-Mambih; Md thabata bi’l- 
Sunnah fi Ay yam al-Sanah, a peculiar work containing all tradi¬ 
tions which relate to the months of the year; and Fath al-Marmdn 
fl td’id ab-Nufmdn, a treatise on Hanafite Jurisprudence 24 

Akbar’s celebrated court-poet, Faizi, who held the pride of place 
among Persian poets of his age, used his hands in Arabic with amaz¬ 
ing success. That Faizi had a wonderful mastery of Arabic lang¬ 
uage is illustrated by his remarkable commentary sawdti e al- 
Ilhdm, 25 a big book in two volumes without a single dotted letter 


616 


LITERATURE 


right through. The work is of little worth as a book of comm¬ 
entary, as Shibli Nu'mani 26 rightly remarks, but it is a commendable 
piece of composition in Arabic, being written in the artificial figure of 
speech, called Sav/at-i-Mahmalah. Zubaid Ahmad says: “I know 
of no book outside India which has ever been written with such 
successful maintenance of this rhetorical device throughout.” Faizi’s 
other work, Mawdrid al-Kaldm Wa silk Durar al-Hikam, 21 written 
in similar vein as the preceding work, deals with moral aphorisms. 
In view of the fact that more than fifty per cent, of the Arabic alpha¬ 
bets are dotted, it is indeed a great intellectual exercise and lite¬ 
rary skill to write page after page in Arabic without using a 
single dotted letter. 28 Akbar’s court-poet, Hakim ‘Alawi Khan 
Jilani (d. 1605) wrote an Arabic commentary on Avicenna’s 

al-Qanun 29 Qazi Nurullah Shustari, an eminent Shiah scholar of 
Persia, was appointed Qazi of Lahore by Akbar. Though he 
wrote mainly in Persian, he composed several treatises in Arabic 
on theological topics. The sufistic mission of the Naqshbandis, 30 
which spearheaded Islamic reaction against Akbar’s heresy and 
scepticism, produced great theologian-scholars such as Khwaja 
Baqibillah, Shaikh Ahmad Sirhindl and Shaikh Farid. Shaikh Taj 
al-Din Sambhall (d. 1640 ), 31 who flourished during Jahangir’s reign, 
wrote several works in Arabic, namely al-Risdla fi Muluk Khuldsat 
al-Sadat Naqshbandtah, Jdmi‘-al-Fawd‘id and Addb al-Muridin. 
Besides, he rendered Jami’s Nafahat al-Uns and Wa’iz Kashifi’s 
Rashahdt into Arabic. As the Mughul patronage of culture reached 
its culminating point under Shah Jahan, literary pursuits in Arabic 
naturally received general encouragement. Of the numerous scho¬ 
lars and theologians for whom the Emperor reserved his special re¬ 
gard and favour, the most outstanding was Mulla ‘Abdul Hakim 
Sialkuti (d. 1656) 32 who wrote commentaries on the exegetical work 
of al-Baidawi and on the ‘Aqa’id of ‘Allama Taftazanl. His reputa¬ 
tion as theological commentator had spread far beyond the borders 
of India even during his lifetime. 33 Mulla Mahmud Jaunpuri 
(d. 1651) wrote a large number of glosses on various classical works. 
His treatise on a discussion of ‘Form’ and ‘Matter’, entitled 
al-Dawhat al-Mayyddah fi Hccdiqat al-Surah wal Ma’adda and another 
on philosophy, called al-Hikmat al-Bdligha } are popularly studied in 
Indian schools. 

Shaikh Nur al-Haqq (d. 1662), 34 son of Shaikh ‘Abdul Haqq 
Muhaddith Dihlawi, was an accomplished traditionist, jurist and 
historian, and worked all through his life for the cause of Hadith 
literature. In recognition of his scholarship Shah Jahan appointed 
him Qazi of Akbarabad. ‘Abdul Baqi (d. 1673) and ‘Abdur Rashid 


617 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


(d. 1672) were two contemporary philosophical writers of Shah 
Jahan’s age. Both wrote commentaries on the Adab al-Sharifiyyah, 
a popular treatise on dialectics by Sayyid al-Sharlf ‘All bin Muham¬ 
mad Jurjanl. Muhibbullah Illahiabadi (d, 1648), 35 renowned Sufi 
and author, wrote his Mardtib al-Arba‘ah, a commentary on the 
Qur’an from the sufistic view-point. He expounded the ideas of 
Ibn al-‘ArabI, on the lines of whose work Fusus al-Hikctm, he com- 
piled his Anfds al-Khawas which is full of mystical and theosophical 
discussions, advocating the doctrine of Wahdat al-Wujud (Pan¬ 
theism). 

Emperor Aurangzib was the most enthusiastic among the royal 
patrons of Islamic studies and one of the best books produced on 
the HanafI Law is the Fatdwd-i-Alamgm, a compendious six-volume 
work composed by a team of Indian theological doctors headed by 
Shaikh Nizam. The very fact that the book was compiled by a 
group of eminent jurists, and not by a single author, directly under 
royal supervision, eloquently speaks of the significance of India’s 
contribution to Arabic literature on the subject of Fiqh (Jurispru¬ 
dence). Aurangzib’s teacher, better known as Mulla Jlwan, wrote 
a commentary, entitled al-Tafsir al-Ahmadiyyah fl baydn al-Aydt al- 
Shara'vyydh, containing explanations on those of Qur’anic verses 
which deal with commandments and prohibitions. Mulla Jlwan’s 
other work, Nur al-Anwdr, is a well-praised commentary on Nasaffs 
famous text, called Mandr al-Anwar. 

Mir Muhammad Zahid (d. 1689), son of Qazi Muhammad Aslam, 
rose into prominence for his highly philosophical writings. At first 
attached to the court of Shah Jahan and then of Aurangzib, Mir Zahid 
is mainly known for his collection of three glosses which he com¬ 
piled under the title, Hcniidshi Thaldthat al-Zqhidtyyah. Another 
writer of philosophical treatises who attracted Aurangzib’s atten¬ 
tion was Muhibbullah Bihar! (d. 17 0 7 ) 36 who was appointed Qazi of 
Lakhnau. His works, Sullam al-Ulnm, a common text-book on 
Logic, and Musallam al-Thubut, an indispensable work on the prin¬ 
ciples of jurisprudence, form essential part of curricula of study in 
the Islamic religious institutions of the Indian sub-continent. 

Sayyid ‘All Khan Ibn Ma‘sum (d. 1705), 37 who wrote purely on 
non-religious matter, was appointed by Aurangzib Diwdn of Burhan- 
pur. He was well versed in the poetic art and was the author of 
several poetical compositions, most notable of which is his poem, 
al-Badi‘iyyah, that contains examples of all possible rhetorical con¬ 
trivances. The poem is regarded as a valuable contribution to Arabic 
literature on rhetoric. Besides, he compiled a biographical dictionary 


618 


LITERATURE 


of Arabic poets, called Suldfat al-Asr fi Mahdsin al-Shu’ara bi hull 
Misr , which included notices of about a dozen poets of Arabic who 
were Indian or connected with India. Sayyid ‘Abdul Jalil Bil- 
grairii (d. 1715), 38 who flourished towards the end of Aurangzib’s 
reigjn, was a distinguished scholar and composed fine verses. The 
contemporary writer, Ibn Ma‘sum, mentioned above, states that he 
never saw in India a scholar so accomplished as he was. 

Among the various centres of Arabic learning in Mughul India, 
Gujarat was the most prominent. Akbar’s conquest of Gujarat open¬ 
ed up ports like Cambay and Surat to those Indian scholars who 
wished to travel by sea to the Hejaz for higher study. The opening 
of the sea traffic resulted in close and frequent contact between India 
and Arabia, which in turn led to the extensive study of Hadlth in 
v/hich native scholars from Gujarat distinguished themselves in the 
subsequent centuries. 39 Thus Gujarat’s contribution to Arabic lite¬ 
rature, particularly on the theological subject, deserves special 
mention. 

‘Abdullah Muhammad bin Siraj al-Din ‘Umar Nahrwali al- 
Ulugkhani, better known as Haji Dabir, 40 a prominent noble and 
general serving in Gujarat under ‘Imadul-Mulk at the time of 
Akbar’s conquest of Gujarat, wrote Zafar al-Wdlih bi Musdffar wa 
Alih, a valuable history of Gujarat. Al-Nur al-Safir ‘an Akhbdr 
al-Qaran aVAshir (1603) by Muhyi al-Din ‘Abdul Qadir Aydurs 41 
of Ahmadabad is a chronology of the events of the tenth century 
of the Hijra, written in a simple, lucid and straightforward style. 
It also contains accounts of contemporary scholars and saints. 
Shaikh Wajih al-Din ‘Alawi of Gujarat (d. 1589) was a reputed 
saint-scholar who wrote several works on various Subjects of 
Islamic learning, mainly comprising annotations and glosses on 
Tajsir-i-Baiddim, Shark Wiqdya , etc. 

Jamal al-Din Muhammad Tahir (d. 1578) 42 of Pattan (Gujarat) 
who enjoyed the title of Malik al-Muhaddithm (Prince of Tradition- 
ists), has been immortalised by his invaluable works on Hadith, the 
magnum opus being his Majma‘ Bahdr-al-Anwdr. It is a voluminous 
dictionary of difficult and uncommon words in the Qur’an and Hadlth. 
According to Nawab Siddiq Hasan Khan, by writing this work, 
which met with universal approval and recognition, Tahir has placed 
the world of Islam under a deep debt of gratitude. 

Ja‘far bin Jalal bin Muhammad al-Bukhari, better known as 
Badr-i-‘Alam, 43 was a leading traditionist and divine of Ahmadabad 
during the days of Emperor Jahangir. He wrote his commentary, 
al-Faiz al-Tart, on the Hadith collection of Bukhari, in two volumes. 


619 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


His bigger work, entitled Rawdat al-Shdh, consisted of as many as 
twenty-four volumes, of which the first dealt with memoirs of the 
saints and the last two with traditionists and commentators of the 
Qur’an. 

In the Deccan, the Qutub Shahis of Golconda 44 were renowned 
patrons of Arabic studies. Muhammad ‘All Karbala’! composed his 
Hada’iq-i-Qutb Shdht and Muhazzib al-Din Damamlnl wrote his well- 
known commentary on the Qur’an, during the reign of ‘Abdullah 
Qutb Shah. Another significant work of the same age was Hakim 
Nizam al-DIn Gllanl’s Shajarat al-Ddnish consisting of more than a 
hundred brochures, pamphlets and extracts from other works on a 
variety of subjects such as medicine, law, philosophy and literature. 

XV. PERSIAN 

The advent of the Mughuls in India ushered in a glorious epoch 
of literary traditions in Persian, a language that enjoyed the status 
of the Latin of Central Asia. The impetus was given by no less a 
person than Emperor Babur himself, the founder of Mughul rule 
in India. Although this cultured monarch is known to the lite¬ 
rary world for his Tuzak or Memoir which he wrote in Turki, history 
testifies that besides his native tongue, he was an accomplished poet 
in Persian too. 

According to Abu-’l-Fazl, Babur was the author of a didactic 
mathnavi in Persian, entitled Mathnavt-i-Mubin . 45 The Emperor’s 
retinue included a number of poets and writers of Persian, notable 
among whom were F,aright, Nadir Samarqandl, Atishi Qandharl and 
Tahir Khawandi. Sam Mirza, the author of Tuhfad-Sdrrii, makes 
particular mention of two other poets, Shaikh Zain al-Din and Mulla 
Shihiab. 46 

The influx of Persian intellectuals from Iran to India during 
the 16th and 17th centuries constitutes the most vital factor in the 
development of Indo-Persian literature. Whatever be the cause of 
the decline of Persian poetry in Safavid Persia, in this respect Per¬ 
sia’s loss proved to be India’s gain. Ever since the return from 
Persia of the fugitive Emperor Humayun, swarms of Persian poets 
kept migrating to India and were attached to Mughul courts, where 
they found the atmosphere more congenial for the display of their 
talent. The literary efforts of these immigrants coupled with similar 
efforts of indigenous litterateurs created in India an intellectual 
tradition which sometimes seemed to outshine that of Iran itself 
both in output and quality. 47 

During the whole of the 16th and 17th centuries, India remain¬ 
ed the El-Dorado of Persian emigrants. Rightly has Dr. Hermann Ethe 


620 


LITERATURE 


remarked that the India Summer of Persian poetry, brought about 
by Akbar and his successors Jahangir and Shah Jahan, is one of the 
brightest features of the Mughul rule in India. The long and dis¬ 
tinguished chain of poets of Iranian and Indian origin brought about 
the cultural synthesis which led to the evolution of that exquisite 
body of poetry called Sabk-i-Hindi (Indian style), 48 represented by 
such illustrious names as FaizI, ‘UrfI, Nazlri, Talib-i-Amuli, Kalim, 
Ghani Kashmiri, Sa’ib and Bldil which could bring credit to any 
literature in the world. Most of these poets were born in Persia 
but their poetry was born in India and it invariably mirrored the dis¬ 
tinctive features of the Indian environment. Puns, chronograms, 
satires, original similes and concepts constitute the salient merits of 
Mughul poetry. 49 

Fond of poetry and poets, Humayun himself composed good 
verses and wrote a Persian Dlwan. 50 

Among the poetic geniuses of Humayun’s age were Shaikh 
Amanullah Panlpatl, Maulana Jalall, Mir WaisI and Damlrl Bil- 
graml. 51 Qasim Khan MaujI wrote a mathnavi, called Yusuf-u - 
Zulaikha which consisted of 6000 verses. Ghyath al-Dln Muham¬ 
mad, surnamed Khwandamlr, wrote the general history, Habib al- 
Siyar and among other works, compiled an authentic versified his¬ 
tory of Humayun, called Qdnun-i-H^mdyurii. Qasim Kahl of Kabul, 
court-poet of Humayun and Akbar, gained celebrity for his erudi¬ 
tion and poetic gift. 52 Yusuf bin Muhammad, a migrant from Herat, 
was attached to Humayun’s court and wrote Riydd al-Adwiya, Jdmi‘ 
al-Fawaid, Fawaid al-Akhbar and Badd’i al-Inshd. The emperor’s 
ewer-bearer, Jauhar Aftabchl, though not a very learned man, pre¬ 
pared a Memoir of Humayun, which is of unusual importance as a 
source book, in view of its being a reliable record of the Emperor’s 
private life during his exile in Iran. The Humdyun-ndma, com¬ 
piled by Gulbadan Begum, sister of Humayun, is an intimate ac¬ 
count of the events of the reigns of Babur and Humayun. Inter¬ 
spersed with a large number of Turkish words, the book reflects the 
influence which the Turkish language had on Persian at that time. 
Bayazld Bayat’s Tadhkira-i-Humdyun wa Akbar is a useful history 
of the reigns of Humayun and early years of Akbar. 

The accession of Akbar to the throne in 1556 marks an era of 
unprecedented blossoming of Persian verse and prose. The most 
dynamic factor behind this literary efflorescence was the muni¬ 
ficence of patronage and encouragement which the Emperor and his 
nobles gave to poets and writers, historians, thinkers, philosophers 
and theologians. 53 Abu-’l-Fazl states that thousands of poets were 
continually at the court of Akbar. At least fifty of them, according 


621 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


to the cumulative evidence of the Ain-i-Akbarl, Tabaqdt-i-Ndsiri and 
the Muntakhab al-Tawdrikh, produced Dlwans. 

Ghazall Mashhad! (d. 1572), the first poet-laureate of Akbar’s 
court, proved a very talented poet with his mathnavis, such as Mash- 
had-i-Anwdr, the Mir’at al-Sifat, Naqsh-i-Badi‘i Qudrat-i-Athar and a 
Diwan, entitled Athar al-Shabdb , an anthology of poems dedicated to 
Akbar. Faizi, who succeeded Ghazall as Akbar’s poet-laureate, was 
a versatile poet and writer. 54 Badaunl and subsequent memoir- 
writers have ascribed the authorship of over a hundred Persian 
works to Faizi, but unfortunately all the titles are not known to us. 
Abu-’l-Fazl, however, mentions a few works of Faizi, the prin¬ 
cipal among which is his Diwan which, according to Shibli, 55 was 
entitled TabdsKir al-Subh. The Diwan consists of qasidas, Ghazals, 
Tarkib bands, TarjV bands, elegies, Qita‘s and rubais. In pursuance 
of the literary practice then in vogue, Faizi had planned to write a 
Khamsah in imitation of the Khamsah of Nizami Ganj awl. He com- 
posed some portions under each proposed title, but could complete 
only two, i.e., the Markaz-i-Adwdr and the Nal Daman in imitation of 
Nizami’s Makhzan al-Asrdr and Laild Majnun respectively. Faizi’s 
prose works include a Persian adaptation of Lllavatl, his Epistles, 
chronogrammatically entitled Latifq-i-Fayyddi and Persian transla¬ 
tion of Hindu religious books. In short, Faizi was a true represen¬ 
tative of a great age. A leading Iranian literary critic, Dr. Rida 
Zada Shafaq, 56 asserts that Faizi enjoyed a great reputation in Otto¬ 
man Turkey and his influence was responsible for the popularity of 
Persian literature in that country. 

‘Abdur Rahim Khan-i-Khanan 57 was the very embodiment of 
erudition and culture during the reigns of Akbar and Jahangir. 
An accomplished scholar and talented poet, Khan-i-Khianan’s fame 
chiefly rests on his large-hearted patronage of men of letters and 
poets. Great literati of the age such as Mulla Shakibi, Mahwl 
Hamadani, ‘Urfi Shiraz! and Mulla ‘Abdul BiaqiS Nihawandi were 
directly attached to his court. He himself produced an exquisite 
Persian version of the Memoirs of Babur under royal orders. His 
remarkable library in Ahmadabad “embalmed the great ideals of 
the oriental world and the memory of a culture that had in its time 
profoundly influenced the world.” 58 

‘UrfI Shiraz! 59 was the brightest luminary in the Khan-i-Khanan’s 
poetic firmament and was the recipient of richest presents and 
highest rewards from his patron and from Akbar as well. The 
contemporary author, ‘Abdul BaqI Nihawandi 60 remarks that it 
would take a separate book to describe the numerous rewards and 
presents which ‘Urfi received from the Khan-i-Khanan. ‘Urfi’s great- 


622 


LITERATURE 


est legacy to posterity are his exquisite qasidas that are charac¬ 
terised by lofty themes, forceful diction, original constructions, 
freshness of metaphors and novelty of comparisons and lyrical dy¬ 
namism which contributed very much to the embellishment and de¬ 
velopment of Persian language and literature. Another talented 
poet attached to the entourage of the Khan-i-Khanan was Nazir i 
Nishapuri (d. 1618) 61 who gave a new dimension to Persian poetry 
by his genius and inventive mind. His verses are deeply tinged 
with suflstic notions of esoteric significance and noted for intro¬ 
duction of new and strange words and phrases. He is regarded as the 
‘Qa’-ianl of India’ for his sweetness of style and melody of diction. 

The most common subject of contemporary prose-writing was 
history. As the Mughul supremacy in India became well establish¬ 
ed under Akbar, the emperor began the practice of commissioning 
chroniclers to write official annals of the dynasty’s rule. The most 
important official history is the Akbar-ndma of Abu-’l-Fazl, the Em¬ 
peror’s confidant and minister. 62 This voluminous and monumental 
work is complementary to his Aln-i-Akban , an encyclopaedic 
directory of the administration of the day. His Inshd, collection of 
official despatches sent by the Emperor to foreign potentates, and 
his Ruqa'dt, collection of the author’s private and personal letters, 
written in highly florid and pedantic style with various rhetorical 
devices, are representative pieces of writings of the Indo-Persian 
literature. Selections from Abu-T-Fazl’s letters have always form¬ 
ed part of Persian syllabi at colleges and universities in India. The 
Tdrikh-i-Alfl of Mulla Ahmad Thattawi and others was also com¬ 
piled at the royal command and is mainly important for an account 
of Akbar’s religious views. Among the unofficial chronicles are the 
Muntakhab al-Tawdrikh of Mulla ‘Abdul Qadir Badaunl, which is 
characterised by thoroughness and sincerity, competence and au¬ 
thenticity, and the Tabaqat-i-Akbari of Nizam-ud-din Ahmad Bakhshi 
is a useful source-book, written in a simple and flowing language. 
Minor historical writings of the age included FaizI Sirhindi’s Tdrikh- 
i-Humdyun Shdhi, ‘Abdul Baqi Nihawandi’s Ma’dthiri Rahtrm and 
Shaikh ‘Abdul Haq Dihlawl’s Tdrikh-i-Haqql. The last-named au¬ 
thor was a leading divine and theologian of his age. He wrote on al¬ 
most every theological science and has to his credit such famous 
works as the Akhbdrul Akhyar, containing short biographies of 
Sufi saints of India; Ashi‘dtu’l Lam’dt, a commentary on the well- 
known book of tradition, the Mishkat, and Zddu’l Muttaqln , another 
hagiological work. Amir Fathulluh ShUfiazi was another distin¬ 
guished scholar of Akbar’s age. Badaunl calls him “the most learn- 


623 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


ed man of his times” and Abu-’l-Fazl remarks: “If the books of anti¬ 
quity should be lost, the Amir would restore them”. 63 

While the munificent patronage of Akbar and his nobles had 
more than ensured the development of Persian literature in North¬ 
ern India, the ‘Adil Shahi rulers of Bijapur were giving liberal en¬ 
couragement to the growth of Persian scholarship in the south. The 
court of Sultan Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah II (1580-1627) attracted a large 
number of poets and litterateurs from the north and from Iran itself. 
Malik Qummi (d. 1640) was the most prominent poet of the ‘Adil 
Shahi dynasty. The contemporary, Mulla Zuhurl (d. 1616), decided¬ 
ly the greatest of the Persian poets who flourished in the Deccan, is 
a consummate stylist both in verse and prose. His Saqi-ncLma, writ¬ 
ten on the model of the Gulistan of Sadi, amply reveals his exalted 
poetic genius. His Sih Nathr evidently projects him as a Persian 
writer of outstanding calibre, who dominated the intellectual taste 
of the contemporary elite and norms and standards of literary ap¬ 
preciation. Other prominent poets of the court of Bijapur were 
Haidar ZihnI, Sanjar, Baqar, Hasan ‘Askarl of Kashan, Rashid of 
Qazwin and Aqa Muhammad NamI of Tabriz. The ‘Adil Shahi 
period is to be especially remembered for having given to the world 
the celebrated Tarikh-i-Firishta or Gulistdn-i-Ibrdhim written by 
Abul Qasim Firishta during the reign of Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah in 1611. 
This monumental work is the most compendious of chronicles that 
medieval India has produced. The Qutb Shahis of Golconda were 
likewise great patrons of Persian scholarship. The peshwa Ibn-i- 
Khatun, who was Qutb Shahi ambassador to Iran, was responsible 
for the propagation of Persian studies in the kingdom. Mention 
may be made of the following Persian works of the period: 

(a) ‘All bin Taifur Bustami’s Hadd’iq al-Salatin , compiled in 
1681, a collection of lives of eminent Persian poets, both 
immigrant and native; 

(b) Muhammad Husain Tabrezl’s Persian dictionary, Burhan-i- 
Qdti compiled in ‘Abdullah Qutb Shah’s reign in 1651; and 

(c) Abu ‘Imad’s encyclopaedic work Khirqatu’l ‘Ilm in six 
volumes. Besides, there are four metrical histories of the 
Qutb Shahi dynasty, all compiled in the reign of Muhammad 
Qull Qutb Shah, namely, Nisbat Ndma-i-Shahrydri, Nasab 
Nama-irS hahrydri, Tdrikh-i-Qutb Shahi! and Tawdrikh-i- 
Qutb Shahi . Almost all the Deccani rulers had direct cul¬ 
tural contacts with contemporary Persia and hence nu¬ 
merous were the Irani poets and scholars who adorned 
their courts. 64 

Literary activity received great encouragement at the hands of 


624 


LITERATURE 


Akbar’s successor Jahangir (1605-1627), who seemed to inherit the 
refined scholarship of his great-grand-father, Babur. His autobio¬ 
graphy, TuZuk-i-Jahdngifl, is a work of great historical and literary 
merit. Left unfinished by the Emperor, the memoirs were com¬ 
pleted by Muhammad Had! 65 His courtier, Muhamad Khan, wrote 
Iqbal Nama-i-Jahangiri, which is a primary source material of the 
history of Jahangir’s reign. Important historical writings of the 
period are Ma’dthir Jahangiri of Kamgar Khan, Mawd’lza-i-Jahan- 
gir of Baqir Khan and Akhlaq-i-Jahangin of QazI Nurud-din 
Khaqani. Among the learned personages of Jahangir’s reign were 
Ghyath Beg known as 1‘timad-u’d-Daula, Naqib Khan and Ni‘ma- 
tullah. The culture-loving emperor maintained his ancestral tra¬ 
dition of showering generous patronage on poets, the majority of 
whom were emigres from Safavid Persia. Among those who bask¬ 
ed in the sunshine of royal favour were Naziri, Talib Isfahan!, 
Shaida, Sa‘ida-i-Gilam, Nishani and Munir Lahurl, while the court 
of the Emperor’s leading noble ‘Abdur Rahim Khan-i-Khanan, as 
mentioned above, was adorned by such a galaxy of poets as Shi- 
kabi, Hayati, Rasmi, Nau‘I and Thana‘1. But the most conspicuous 
poet of the age was Talib Amuli (d. 1626), the poet laureate of 
Jahangir, whose poetry is characterised by novelty of topics, figura¬ 
tive language and fine allegories and metaphors. 

Emperor Shah Jahan honoured the versifiers with bounteous 
rewards in the true manner of an Eastern monarch. Rightly has a 
Persian poet ‘All Qul! Salim compared perfection in poetry to 
henna that could develop its full colour only in India. Abu Talib 
Kallm coming from Hamadan succeeded Qudsi as Shah Jahan’s 
court-poet and completed, besides his Diwan, an epic poem, entitled 
Pddshah-ndma , commenced by Qudsi, describing Shah Jahan’s ex¬ 
ploits. Kalim once called India a second paradise in the sense that 
whoever quits this garden departs with regret. 66 But the greatest 
contemporary poet was Mirza Muhammad ‘All Sa’ib of Tabriz who 
was the creator of a new style in Persian poetry. The credit of 
introducing and perfecting illustrative poetry in Persian goes to 
him alone. Mainly attached to the court of Shah Jahan’s noble, 
Zafar Khan, Governor of Kashmir, $,a‘ib received from the Em¬ 
peror the title of Musta‘id Khan. Though he returned to Isfahan 
later on, he recorded his indebtedness to India in many of his verses 
and once compared his nostalgia for India to a lover’s longing for 
a beloved. 67 Other versifiers who rose to eminence during Shah 
Jahan’s rule were Qasim Khan Juwaini, Mir Muhammad Husain 
Sharqi, Muhammad Husain Rasmi and Mir Ra<Ja Danish Mashhadi. 
Among the leading native lyricists were Shaida Akbarabadi and 

625 


M.E.—40 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Hadhiq Fatehpuri. The heterodox Sufi, Sarmad (d. 1660), earn¬ 
ed celebrity for his exquisite quatrains, dealing with ecstatic and 
unorthodox mystic themes. 

The prose literature produced in that age is almost entirely re¬ 
presented by histories, such as the three Pddshdh-ndmas, written by 
Amina-i-Qazwini, ‘Abdul Hamid Lahurl and Muhammad Warith, 

the Shah Jahan-nama of Muhammad Tahir Ashna. Muhammad 
• • • • 

Sadiq Isfahan!, an official of Bengal of Shah Jahan’s time, was a 
noted historian and scholar and is mainly known for his two works, 
the Suhh Sadiq, a detailed historical and geographical work and 
the Shahid-i-Sddiq, a work of encyclopaedic nature, both dedicated 
to Prince Shah Shuja‘, Shah Jahan’s second son. 68 The Emperor’s 
eldest son, Prince Dari. Shukoh was an erudite scholar and an or¬ 
thodox mystic of the Qadiriyah order. 69 He had the yoga-vdsishtha, 
the Bhagavad-Gitd and the Upanishads translated into Persian. His 
M.ajma‘ul Bahrain is a collection of pseudo-lexicographical corres¬ 
pondence between the Sufi and Hindu cosmologies, esoteric beliefs 
and practices. The prince’s contribution to hagiography is well illus¬ 
trated by his twin works, Saflnat al-Auliya, a biography of Muslim 
saints, and the Sakindt aUAuliyd, containing an account of his spi¬ 
ritual guide Miyan Mir (d. 1635). Another member of the royal 
family, Jahan Ara Begum, daughter of Shah Jahan, had a genius 
for poetry. Her Munis al-Arwdh, a biographical account of Khvaja 
Mu‘in-ud-din Chishti, is marked by simple dignity and chaste scho¬ 
larship. Of the few epoch-making lexicographical works produced 
during the period under review, at least the following two deserve 
special mention: (a) The Farhang-i-Jahdngiri, compiled by Jamal- 
ud-din Husain Inju in 1608, is a well-known dictionary of purely 
Persian words dedicated to and named after Emperor Jahangir, and 
(b) The Farhang-i-Rashidi of ‘Abdul Rashid Tattawi, compiled in 
1654 and dedicated to Shah Jahan, is a revised and corrected ver¬ 
sion of the preceding lexicon. 

In the puritanical period of Aurangzib (1658-1707), royal pa¬ 
tronage to poets was withheld and Persian poetry lost its time- 
honoured place in the imperial court. But the Emperor’s own 
daughter, Zibun Nisi, with the nom-de-plume Makhfl, was a gifted 
poetess, well versed in Arabic and Persian. 70 The Diu)dn-i-Makhfi 
is a great monument of her poetic genius. But the most challeng¬ 
ing Persian poet of the age was Mirza ‘Abdul Qadir Bidil of Patna, 
whose poetry crystallises all the intellectual formulas of style em¬ 
ployed by his predecessors in India. His lyrical poems, said to com¬ 
prise about a lakh of verses, along with his mathnavis, evidently 
prove that he could produce genuine poetry in all its splendour 


626 


LITERATURE 


and yet honestly reveal his philosophical and mystical predilections. 
Bldil is one of the few native poets whose reputation has spread be¬ 
yond the frontiers of India. He is studied with much appreciation 
and reverence in Afghanistan. 

Several histories were written in Aurangzib’s time and they are 
noted for their authenticity, for they were not the results of the im¬ 
perial patronage. The best and most impartial history of the period 
is Muntakhab al-Lubdb of Muhammad Hashim Khafi Khan, which 
combined objectivity with historical imagination. The ‘Alamgir- 
rmma was compiled by Muhammad Kazim under Aurangzib’s 
orders. 71 The Mathnam-i-Alamgirl of Saqi Musta’ad Khan is par¬ 
ticularly rich in the description of Aurangzib’s Deccan campaigns, 
a chapter which was included in the work without the Emperor’s 
knowledge. The Mir’atu’l Alam of Bakhtawar Khan is remarkable 
for its biographical accounts of the intelligentsia of the age. 72 

The contribution of the Hindus to the development of Indo- 
Persian studies makes an impressive reading. Not only did the 
Hindus attain a high degree of proficiency in Persian but they vied 
with their Muslim compeers in composing verse and prose of high 
order. History testifies to the Muslim patronage of Sanskrit learn¬ 
ing in pre-Mughul era, but it was only in the reign of Akbar that 
the Hindus participated in the literary efforts in a full-fledged manner. 
Hindu scholars such as Kishujoshi, Gangadhar, Mahesa, Mahananda, 
Devi Misra, Madhusudana Misra, Chaturbhuja and Bhavan were en¬ 
gaged by the Emperor to collaborate with Muslim writers like FaizI, 
Abu-’l-Fazl, HajI Ibrahim Sarhindl, BadaunI, and others in the exe¬ 
cution of the programme of preparing Persian translations from 
Sanskrit classics. 73 The result was that the Rdmdyana , Mahdbhdrata, 
Singhasan Batisi etc. were rendered into Persian. Raja Todarmal 
(d. 1589), a Hindu courtier of Akbar, translated the Bhdgawat Pu- 
rdna into Persian. 74 One Makhanlal also rendered the Rdmdyana 
into Persian and called it Jahan-i-Zafar. Amarnath abridged the ac¬ 
count of the world from the four Vedas into Persian under the title 
Khaydldt-i-Shaidd. Jahangir continued to patronise translation of 
works from Sanskrit to Persian and encouraged the Hindu scholars 
to produce original works on Hindu law, rational sciences and lexi¬ 
cography. The first Hindu who achieved literary greatness in Persian 
was Chandra Bhan, poetically named Brahman, 75 who enjoyed the 
favour of Prince Dara Shukoh. His Dlwan of Ghazals and Quat¬ 
rains reflected his vast erudition and poetic excellence and a happy 
blend of Hindu and Muslim thought. One of his contemporaries, 
Jaswant Rai Munshi, also compiled a Dlwan in Persian. Bhopat 
Rai, better known as ‘Bigham Vairagi’ (d. 1719), wrote his famous 


627 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


mathnavi which mirrored his mystical thoughts and illustrates the 
influence of Jalal-ud-din Rumi on his poetry. Another branch of 
Persian writing in which the Hindus clearly surpassed contemporary 
Muslim achievements is epistolography; and Inshd of Madho Ram, 
written during Aurangzlb’s reign, marks the apex in the efforts of 
Kayastha Hindus in this particular field. Hindu historiography 
which began with Chandra Bhan Brahman’s Chahdr Chaman which 
is partly modelled on Abu-’l-Fazl’s A’in-i-Akbatl, was further en¬ 
riched by the works of Hindu chroniclers such as Bhagwan Dias, 
who compiled the Shah Jahan-ntima and Rai Vrindaban, who wrote 
the Lubb-ut-Tawankh. Aurangzlb also found a Hindu historian to 
record his victories and he was Xsvardas Nagar, the author of Futd- 
hdt-i-Alamglri. Munshi Sujan Rai’s Khulasat-iit-Tawarikh, written 
in 1695, is perhaps the most interesting work of history written by a 
Hindu in Persian. There were some minor Hindu historians such 
as Munshi Hiraman Lai who wrote his Gawdlior-ndma in Aurang- 
zlb’s reign and Narayan Kaul who compiled his Tdrikh-i-Kashmir 
in 1710. In short, up to the 18th century the total contribution 
of the Hindus to Persian poetry became substantial enough to form 
the subject-matter of a separate book called Tadhkira-ir’Gul-i-Rdnd, 
by Lakshml Narayan Shafiq. In fact, as Dr. S. M. Abdullah has 
remarked, 76 at the end of the 18th century the contribution of Hindus 
to Persian literature was equal to that of their Muslim compatriots. 
The Persian literature produced during the heyday of the Mughul 
suzerainty in India exercised a tremendous influence on the forma¬ 
tion and shaping of regional literatures, especially those cultivated 
by the Muslims. One of the most epoch-making results is the evolu¬ 
tion of literary Urdu. Other sister languages modelled on the Per¬ 
sian tradition are Punjabi, Pushtu, Sindhi, Baluchi and Kashmiri, 
all of which use Persian script. To all these regional langua(ges, 
Persian literature gave a number of literary genres, provided models 
for the writers and themes for numerous literary compositions. 

XVI. PROTO-URDU 

The word ‘ Urdu is derived from the Turki word Ordu which 
meant “a military camp.” The language, now known by that name, 
had not come into existence during the period under review, but 
it was a product of the dialect current among the Muslims who rul¬ 
ed over Deccan and South India from the 14th century onwards. 
The literary speech, arising out of it, and known as Dakhni or the 
‘Southern speech’, may be traced back to the 15th century. Its use 
was confined to the Deccan and South India, and it was employed in 
literature mostly by the Muslims of that region who were less in- 


628 


LITERATURE 


fluenced by the local Hindu spirit of the dialects and languages of 
North India than the other Muslims living in North India. This 
difference becomes clearly manifest from the fact that Perso-Arabian 
script was used in the Deccan, in writing the language almost from 
the beginning, and the literature gradually became more and more 
Muslim and Persian in its attitude, though it retained until the end 
of the 17th century “a good deal of its Indian vocabulary and Indian 
literary catchets and cliches.” 

The chief centres of Dakhni literature were Gujarat, Bijapur, 
Golconda, Aurangabad and Bldar. The oldest writer in this ‘Mus¬ 
lim Hindi tradition’ was the famous Sufi Saint Sayyid Muhammad 
Banda-Nawaz Gesu-Daraz who played an important role in the po¬ 
litics of the Bahmanl kingdom in 1422, as mentioned above (Volume 
VI, p. 256). He is said to have written over 100 works. 

Two great poets flourished in Gujarat in the 16th century, 
namely, Shah ‘Ali Muhammad Jan Gamodhani, whose poems were 
collected under the title Jawahiru-l-Asvdr (‘Jewels of Secrets’), and 
Shaikh Khub Muhammad, who composed Khub Tarang (‘The 
Waves of Khub’ or ‘The Good Waves’) in 1578. 

Dakhni literature was patronised by the Qutb Shahi Sultans of 
Golconda, one of whom, Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah (1580-1612), 
was himself a gifted poet. One of his courtiers, Mulla Wajhi, wrote 
the romantic poem, Qutub Mustari, the theme of which was the love 
of the Sultan, when still a prince, for a Telugu Hindu girl named 
“Bhagmati” whom he married, and named the city built in her 
honour after her, first as “Bhag-nagar” and then after her Muslim 
name “Haider-Begum”. This became the famous city of Hyderabad, 
the capital of the Nizams and at present of Andhra Pradesh. There 
were several other good romantic poets in Golconda, such as Ghaw- 
wlasi, Ibn-i-Nishati and Tab‘i. 

Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah II (1580-1627), the Sultan of Bijapur, was 
a great patron of letters and he himself wrote in Dakhni a book on 
music. Hasan Shawql wrote a heroic poem on the famous battle, 
generally known as the battle of Talikota (1565) in which the Muslim 
Sultans of the Deccan won a decisive victory over the mighty king 
of Vijayanagara. Among other poets may be mentioned RustumI 
who wrote a poem ‘in epic vein’ (on the story of ‘All, the son-in- 
law of the Prophet); Malik Khusnud, the author of the Yusuf-w- 
Zulaikha and another romance, both of Persian origin; and Mlran 
Hashimi. One of the greatest Dakhni poets was a Hindu (Brahmin) 
who wrote under the Muslim pen-name of Nusrati of whom it has 
been said that “he excelled in lofty imagination, freshness of subject, 
and aptness of diction.” He wrote a poem in eulogy of his master 

629 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Sultan ‘All Adil Shah II (1656-1672), and also a romance on a Hindu 
theme—the love-story of Manohar and Madhu-Malati, besides a 
number of odes and lyrics. 

Dakhni literature flourished up to the end of the 17th century, 
but declined after the conquest of the Deccan and South India by 
Aurangzlb. By the first half of the eighteenth century, the mantle of 
Dakhni fell on the newly rising Urdu speech of Delhi into which 
this “colonial form of a North Indian speech” virtually merged, and 
Urdu became well-established with its present name by 1750. 


1. Sukumar Sen, History of Bengali Literature, p. 96. 

2. Ibid., p. 97. 

3. Ibid., p. 98. 

4. For this work, cf. p. 567. 

5. Dr. S. K. Chatterji, Languages and Literatures of Modern India (Bengal 
Publishers Private Ltd.), 1963, p. 122. 

6. See p. 562. 

7. S.K. Chatterji, op. cit., pp. 128-9. 

8. Ibid., p. 129. 

9. Cf. p. 317. 

10. For a full appreciation of Bhalan’s works, see Shastri, Gujarati Sahityanun 
Rekhadarshana (Khanda 1), pp. 83-95; Vaidya V.K., Gujarati Sahityani Rupa- 
rekhd , pp. 46-50 and Munshi K.M., Gujarat and its Literature, p. 168 ff. 

11. Shastri calls him the Adikavi of Brajabhasha. op cit., p. 88. According to him, 
Bhalan was a contemporary of Surdas and was familiar with the poetic com¬ 
positions in Brajabhasha. 

11a. The gagarid or man bhat is peculiar to Gujarat. He has played a great role 
in the evolution and preservation of dkhydn literature. See Munshi, op. cit. 
pp. 166-167. 

12. This is supported not only by her songs but also an anecdote about her meet¬ 
ing with Sri Jiva Gosvami, a Vaishnava Sanyasi reputed for his learning and 
exposition of the tenets of Vaishnavism. She had gone to his place at 
Vrindavan when the saint’s disciples stopped her at the door and told her 
that their master did not see any woman’s face. Surprised, Miran gave a 
poignant but touching retort: “I was under the impression that in this land 
of Braja there is only one male (Purusha), that Supreme person, and the 
rest are his gopis . If you have contrived to remain a Purusha despite your 
stay in Braja, I do not know what to say of your discretion.’' The saint was 
struck with Mirah’s words of unique devotion. He at once realised that 
what he had learnt from sdstras was dry knowledge. He himself came out 
to pay homage to her. Ramlal, Bharat ke Sant-Mahatma , pp. 489-490, Bankey 
Behari, op. cit., pp. 102-103. 

13. The earliest collection of her hundred songs gradually increased to more than 
a thousand. Later poets and devotees of Miran composed songs which they 
attribute to this mad musician of Lord Krishna. 

14. At one time Narasirhha Mehta’s date was taken as fixed between 1414 and 
1480. According to Munshi, he can reasonably be placed between 1500 and 
1580 A.D. See Munshi, op. cit. Note on pp. 199-200. 

15. Narasirhha Mehta joyfully sang, unshaken in his faith and love: “Believe 
me, all worldly pleasure is shadowy. All things except Krishna are ephe¬ 
meral” ( Sukh Sahsari mithya kasi manjo Krishna Vina Bijun Sarva Kachu; 
Also Bhalu thayuh bhahgi janjdl , sukhe bhajishun Sri Gopal). 

16. Joshi Umashankar, Akho Ek Adhyayana, Chapter I, Akhana Chhappd, Intro¬ 
duction, pp. 1-22. 

17. Swayamjyoti, Akhana Chhappd, p. 25. 

18. Cf. Vaidya, op cit., p. 74. 

19. The date of birth of Ekanatha is given variously as 1521, 1528, 1533 and 1548 
A.D. The date of death is given as 1599 or 1608, Dr. S. K. Chatterji assigns 
to him the date 1548-1599. 


630 



LITERATURE 


20. A somewhat different view about the origin and antiquity of Malayalam is 
given in Vol. VI, pp. 529-30. Dr. S. K. Chatterji (op. cit. pp. 334-6) fixes 
the date of modern Malayalam in 1800 A.D. 

21. Muhammad Ishaq, India’s Contribution to the Study of Hadith Literature, 
Dacca, 1955, p. 232. 

22. Zubaid Ahmad, The Contribution of India to Arabic Literature, Jullunder, 
1946, p. 17, 42-43. The Kanz al-Ummdl is being published by the Da’irat ‘ul 
Ma’arif-i-Islamlyyah, Hyderabad, in several volumes; so far, nineteen volumes 
have been brought out. 

23. See, for a detailed study of Shaikh ‘Abd al-Haq’s life and works, K.A. Nizami, 
Haydt-i- Abdul Haqq, Delhi, 1953; Encyclopaedia of Islam, New Edition, pp. 
60—61; cf., Aziz Ahmad, An Intellectual History of Islam in India, Edinburgh, 
1969, p. 68. 

24. Muhammad Ishaq, op. cit., pp. 146-153. 

25. Zubaid Ahmad, op. cit., pp. 20-25. 

26. Shi c ru‘WAfam, Vol. Ill, p. 67. 

27. Zubaid Ahmad, op. cit., pp. 85-86, 191-193. 

28. H. K. Sherwani, Cultural Trends in medieval India , Bombay, 1968, p. 83. 

29.,' Bankipore Catalogue, Vol. IV, No. 107. 

30. ‘Aziz Ahmad, Studies in Islamic Culture in the Indian Environment, Oxford, 
1964, pp. 183-190. 

31. S. M. Ikram, Rud-i-Kauthar, Lahore, 1958, pp. 206-208, 213, 222 , 280 , 285. 

32. Ibid., pp. 334-335. 

33. Haji Khalifa, Kashf al-Zunun, Leipzig, 1835-52, Vol. IV, p. 925; VI, p. 241; 
VIII, p. 914. 

34. Muhammad Ishaq, op. cit., p. 154. 

35. Zubaid Ahmad, op. cit., pp. 17-18. 

36. Ibid., pp. 56-59, 127-130. 

37. Dr. M.A. Mu‘id Khan, The Arabian Poets of Golconda, Bombay, 1963, pp. 96- 
146. 

38. Ghulam Ali Azad Bilgrami, Subhat-al-Marjdn, Bombay, 1885, p. 80. 

39. S.M. Ikram, Muslim Civilization in India, New York, 1964, p. 238. 

40. Zubaid Ahmad, op. cit., p. 147. 

41. Muhammad Ishaq, op. cit., p. 98. 

42. Ibid., 124-129. ’ 

43. Ibid., pp. 164-165. 

44. Dr. M.A. Mu‘id Khan, op. cit., pp. 24-34. 

45. Abu-’l-Fazl, Akbar-ndma, Eng. Tr., Calcutta, 1902, p. 278. 

46. M.A. Ghani, A History of Persian Language and Literature at the Moghul 
Court, Allahabad, 1929-30, Part I, pp. 78-80. 

47. See Dr. Hadi Hasan, A Golden Treasury of Persian Poetry , Delhi, 1966, for 
short biographical sketches of poets, along with the specimens of their poetry 
in Eng. tr. 

48. ftndo-Iranica, Calcutta, Vol. XIII, 2, pp. 19-30, Dr. Momin Muhyluddin’s 
article, Sabk-i-Hindi. 

49. Cf. for a detailed study of Mughul poetry, Dr. Hadi Hasan, Moghul Poetry: 
its cultural and historical value, Madras, 1952. 

50. The unique Diwan of Humayun, belonging to the Khuda Bakhsh O.P.L., 
Patna, edited by Dr. Hadi Hasan, has been published at Hyderabad. 

51. A. Ghani, op. cit., Part II, pp. 35-36. 

52. See Dr. Hadi Hasan, Diwan-i-Kdhi, Calcutta, 1956. 

53. S.M. Ikram & P. Spear, The Cultural Heritage of Pakistan, O.U.P., pp. 103- 
109. 

54. Cf. Z.A. Desai’s article. Life and works of Faizi, in Indo-Iranica, Vol. XVI, 
1963, No. 3, pp. 1-35; S.M. Ikram, Rud-i-Kauthar, Lahore, 1958, pp. 148-160. 

55. Shibll Nu‘manl, Shi c ru-WAjam, A’zamgarh, 1945, Vol. Ill, p. 60. 

56. Ridazada Shafaq, Tdrikh-i-Adabiyydtid-Irdn, Tehran, 1321 (Solar) p. 374. 

57. Journal of the Pakistan Historical Society, Vol. Ill, Part II, April, 1955, pp. 
118-126. 

58. Ibid; cf. A. Ghani. op. cit., Part III, pp. 220-229. 

59. Indo-Iranica , Vol. X, No. 3, 1957, pp. 28-35, article on ‘UrfV. 

60. Ma'dthir-i-Rdhlmi, B.I. Series, Calcutta, 1931, p. 297. 

61. Indo-Iranica, Vol. XVI, No. 2, 1963, p. 76. __ 

62. Journal of the Pakistan Historical Society, Vol. XI, Part I, 1963, pp. 15-39, 
article on ‘Abul Fazl as historian and hagiographer’; A. Ghani, op. cit., Part 
III, p. 233-235. 


631 


% 



THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


63. S.M. Ikram, Muslim Civilization In India, New York, 1964, p. 153. 

64. H.K. Sherwani, Cultural Trends in medieval India , Bombay, 1968, p. 91. 

65. ‘Aziz Ahmad, An Intellectual History of Islam in India, Edinburgh, 1969, p. 24. 

66. Indo-Iranica, Vol. X, No. 2, 1957, p. 17. 

67. G. A. BilgramI, Sarw Azad, Hyderabad, 1913, pp. 100-101. 

68. Indo-Iranica, Vol. XXIV, No. 3 & 4, 1971, Nazir Ahmad’s article on Muham¬ 
mad Sadiq. 

69. ‘Aziz Ahmad, Studies in Islamic Culture in the Indian Environment, Oxford, 
1964, pp. 191-196. 

70. Yusuf Husain, Glimpses of medieval Indian Culture, Bombay, 1959, p. 93. 

71. H.K. Sherwani, op. cit., p. 58. 

72. ‘Aziz Ahmad, An Intellectual History of Islam in India , p. 24. 

73. Indo-Iranica, Vol. X, No. 2, 1957, p. 12; C’f. Abu-’l-Fazl,, Aui-i-Akbarl, (Eng. 
Tr.), Blochmann, Calcutta, 1927, pp. 122-123. 

74. G.A. Grierson, The Modem Vernacular Literature of India, Calcutta, 1889, 
p. 35. 

75. Islamic Culture, Vol. XIX, 1945, pp. 115-122, article on ( Chandra Bhan Brah¬ 
man See also Indo-Iranica, Vol. IX, No. 3, pp. 53-68, article on ‘ Chandra 
Bhan Brahman \ 

76. S.M. Abdullah, Adabiyyat-i-Farsi men Hinduwon ka Hissa, Delhi, 1942, p. 
30; Cf. Indo-Iranica, Vol. XV, No. 2, 1962, pp. 12-26, article on ‘ Hindu Efforts 
at Persian Studies \ 


632 


CHAPTER XX 


RELIGION 

I. HINDU RELIGION 
(a) General Review 

The majority of Hindus adhered to the orthodox cults of Siva, 
Sakti, Vishnu, Surya and Ganesa. But conflicting trends of liberalism 
and catholicity on the one hand, and rigid exclusiveness and con¬ 
servatism on the other, were noticeable within the Hindu religion in 
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Some of the Vaishnava 
and Tantric teachers proclaimed the rights of women and :§udras 
in the spiritual sphere and welcomed the aboriginals and hill tribes 
living on the borders to the Hindu fold. Efforts were made even 
to accommodate the Muslim brethren who preferred to adopt Hindu 
ways of life and thought. But vehement opposition was offered to 
such tendencies by the writers of digests on the Dharmasastras who 
laid the greatest possible emphasis on the maintenance of ceremo¬ 
nial purity against contamination from people considered as un¬ 
clean. Like a tortoise drawing itself within its own shell at the 
approach of enemy, the Brahmana nibandhakaras tried to maintain 
the integrity of Hindu religion by keeping themselves away from 
all contacts with the powerful Muslim community. They tried to 
regulate the life and conduct of all classes of Hindus in the minutest 
details for the sake of self-preservation. 

The earlier nibandhakaras like Lakshmidhara in the twelfth, 
Hemadri in the thirteenth and Chandesvara in the fourteenth cen¬ 
turies were influential ministers of independent Hindu rulers like 
Govindachandra Gahadavala, Mahadeva Yadava and Harisimha of 
Mithila. They wielded both secular and religious power. In the 
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries they had to depend on their 
religious and intellectual authority or at most on the support of 
petty chieftains. Rani Durgavati, who fell fighting against Akbar’s 
forces in 1564, engaged Padmanabha Misra to write out a digest 
in seven volumes, named after her as Durgdvati-prakdsa , but only 
the first part could be completed before her death and the project 
had to be given up. Todarmal was only the revenue minister of 
Akbar and no independent ruler; yet he maintained the tradition 
of patronising the Smriti writers by engaging a host of scholars to 


633 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


produce the Todarduanda , an encyclopaedia of law, fasts, festivals, 
purificatory ceremonies, gifts, modes of conduct as well as of astro¬ 
nomy and medicine. In the seventeenth century Mitra Misra wrote 
his celebrated Vira-mitrodaya under the patronage of Virasimha of 
Orchha (1605-1627). Nilakantha’s patron was Bhagavanta, a Bun- 
dela Chief and Anantadeva composed his Smriti-Kaustubha under 
the shelter of Baz Bahadur (1638-78) of Almora. Of all the later 
writers of Nibandha } Kesava Pandit alone had administrative ex¬ 
perience. He served ShivajI and rose to be a Judge ( Dandddhyak - 
sha) under Shambhuji. Eminent Smdrtas like Raghunandana and 
Ramanath Vidya-Vachaspati of Bengal, Pltambar Siddhanta-Vaglsa 
of Kamarupa and Kamalakara Bhatta of Maharashtra had no royal 
patron to back them. But such was the tremendous force of their 
learning and personality that they were able to counteract much 
of the liberalising influence of the reformers. The majority of the 
Hindus remained faithful to the orthodox ideals preached by the 
Smdrtas. 


(b) Religious Rights of the Sudras 

The Bhakti movement in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries 
tended to raise the status of the non-Brahmanas. Some of them be¬ 
came spiritual preceptors even of Brahmanas. But the orthodox 
Brahmanas resisted their claims vehemently. Some of the Smdrtas 
went so far as to condemn the Kshatriyas and Vaisyas as Sudras and 
refused to concede to the latter the rights which they had enjoyed 
in the twelfth century. The earliest symptom of the conflict be¬ 
tween the Brahmanas and non-Brahmanas may be detected in the 
famous controversy between the Vadagalai and Tengalai schools of 
Sri Vaishnavas in South India. The Tengalais held that a true de¬ 
votee belonging to lower castes should be considered as equal to 
a Brahmana, because such a person rose above all castes and creeds. 
They further asserted that spiritual knowledge could be obtained 
through a teacher of the lower order. The Vadagalais were staunch 
followers of the caste system and they refused to admit the right 
of anybody excepting a Brahmana to impart spiritual initiation or 
instruction. 1 The liberal views of Tengalais did not remain con¬ 
fined merely to the theoretical plane. A Tamil copper-plate inscrip¬ 
tion of 1596 A.D. records that in the reign of Venkatapati Deva, a 
Sudra priest joined with a large number of other Sudras and made 
Kandiya Devar King of Vriddhachalam in the presence of Muttu 
Krishnappa Nay aka. 2 

The theory and practice of the Tengalais appear to have been 
introduced in Northern India by Gopala Bhatta, the South Indian 


634 


RELIGION 


follower of Chaitanya, through his work, Hari-bhakti Vilasa. He 
quotes the authority of the Skanda-Purana to show that not only 
the Brahmanas, Kshatriyas and Vaisyas but also the Sudras and 
women have got the right of worshipping the Sdlagrdma-sild? 
Sanatana Gosvamin supports this proposition in his commentary 
on the above work by quoting the authorities of the Vdyu, Ndradiya 
and Bhdgavata Purdnas as well as the Hayaslrsa-Pdnchardtra. He 
also alludes to the practice of the saintly persons in the Madhya- 
desa, and especially of the best of the !Sri Vaishnavas of the south 
as valid proof for the same. It is noteworthy that his ancestors 

belonged to Karnatak and his great-grandfather, Fadmanabha, set¬ 
tled down in Bengal. He was, therefore, familiar with the southern 
customs. He also cites the authority of the Bhdgavata and the 
commentary of iSridharasvamin to prove that the Vaishnavas, even 
though born of lower castes, are not only equal to the Brahmanas 
but also superior to them. 4 He then refers to the story of Priyavrata 
in the Brahma-Vaivarta-Purdna wherein is related the fact that a 
hunter named Dharmavyadha worshipped the Sdlagrdma-sild. But 
in subsequent times the Brahmanas managed to interpolate certain 
verses in the aforesaid Purdna prohibiting the Sudras from wor¬ 
shipping the Sdlagrdma-sild. 5 

Some of the non-Brahmana followers of Chaitanya became spi¬ 
ritual preceptors not only of the three lower orders but also of the 
Brahmanas themselves. Narahari Sarkar of Srlkhanda, Burdwan, 
belonging to the Vaidya caste, had many Brahmana disciples. Narot- 
tama Thakura, who was a Kayastha by caste, gave initiation to Brah¬ 
manas like Ganganarayana Chakravarti, Ramakrishna Chakravarti 
and Dvija Basanta. 6 In Maharashtra Tukaram, a Sudra saint in the 
seventeenth century, likewise made some Brahmana disciples. 
Similarly in Assam &ahkaradeva and his principal disciple, 
Madhavadeva, were Kayasthas by birth, but recruited many dis¬ 
ciples including Brahmanas. They had to face, however, severe op¬ 
position from the Brahmanas. Many of the Brahmana disciples of 
Madhavadeva such as Gopal Deb, Hari Deb and Damodar Deb seced¬ 
ed from him in the seventeenth century and founded separate com¬ 
munities. They became known as Bamunia Gosains. They in¬ 
sisted on the strict observance of the caste system and refused to 
admit the authority of any but a Brahmana to give spiritual initia¬ 
tion. They seem to have made a compromise with the iSakti cult 
as is indicated by their taking of the flesh of goats, pigeons and 
ducks. 7 

A great saint like Tulsidas also appeared in the role of cham¬ 
pion of the exclusive rights of the Brahmanas to be spiritual teachers. 


635 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


While describing the conduct of people in the Kali age he sarcastic¬ 
ally remarks that the &udras contend against the Brahmanas and 
assert that they are in no way inferior to the Brahmanas and fur¬ 
ther allege that the real Brahmanas are those who know the Brah¬ 
man. He states with evident regret that the Sudras now impart 
knowledge to the Brahmanas, take the sacred thread and accept 
reprehensible gifts. He further adds that those who belong to the 
lowest castes like oilmen, potters, Chandalas, Kiratas, Kols and 
Kalwar, or those who have lost their wife or property, get their 
head shaved and become Sannyasis; they get their feet worshipped 
by Brahmanas and thus destroy their prospects in this as well as in 
the other world. Finally he remarks ruefully that the Sudras pre¬ 
sume to perform japa, austerities and vratas and to teach the 
Pumnas from an exalted seat. 8 This is certainly a fling at the 
popularity of Ravidas, the shoe-maker, Dharna the Jat, Sena the 
barber and other religious teachers belonging to the non-Brahmana 
castes. 

The writers of Nibandhas made determined efforts to prevent 
the non-Brahmanas from usurping their rights and privileges. They 
stoutly refused to concede to the Sudras the right to worship the 
Salagrama^sila. Kamalakara Bhatta, who flourished in Maha¬ 
rashtra in the seventeenth century, had considerable sympathy for 
the Sudras. But he, too, stated that the Sudras should not read the 
Pumnas themselves but should engage Brahmanas to expound 
these. 9 But Lakshmidhara in the first quarter of the twelfth cen¬ 
tury had recognised the right of the Sudras to read the Pumnas and 
recite the Pauranic mantras. Kamalakara allowed the Sudras only 
to repeat the thirteen-lettered Rama -mantra (Sri Rama, jaya Rama, 
jay a jaya Rama) and five-lettered Siva -mantra (Namah Sivdya ). 
Both Raghunandana of eastern India and Kamalakara of western 
India allowed the Sudras to perform Vratas and make gifts to 
Brahmanas, but they prohibited them from reciting the appropriate 
ma/ntras which were to be uttered by the priest, while his unfor¬ 
tunate client was simply allowed to repeat the word Namah (Obei¬ 
sance). 10 

Raghunandana of Navadvipa (Nadia), who introduced him¬ 
self as the son of Harihara Bhattacharyya belonging to the Vandya- 
ghatlya section, was the greatest of digest-writers on Dharmasastra 
in the sixteenth century. He wrote as many as twenty-eight works 
on different aspects of the social and religious life of the Hindus and 
all these are collectively known as the Smrititattva. He appears 
to have been indebted to his teacher Srmatha Acharya Chudamani 
(c. 1470-1540 A.D.) for some of the titles of his books. In his 


636 


RELIGION 


Jyotishtattva he illustrates a certain proposition by referring to the 
Saka year 1489 (1567 A.D.) and it shows that he must have been 
alive up to that year at least. In less than half a century his autho¬ 
rity was recognised all over northern and western India, as is prov¬ 
ed by his views having been quoted in the Nirnayasindhu written 
by Kamalakara Bhatta in 1612 A.D. Raghunandana was a valiant 
champion of the rights of the Brahmanas. This may be illustrated 
by a simple example. It is stated in the Agastya-Samhitd that a 
person’s worshipping of the deity becomes fruitless if he offers 
flowers from trees and plants owned by another person without 
securing his permission. 11 Raghunandana states in his Ahnika- 
tattva as well as the Ekddasitattva that this dictum is not applicable 
to the twice-born classes. 12 He thus gives a free license to the 
twice-born castes to take away flowers from other people’s gardens 
without taking the permission of the proprietor. 

To Raghunandana the Brahmanas were the only twice-born 
caste. Citing the authority of the Manusamhitd and the Vishnu 
Purdna he came to the conclusion that the Kshatriyas had ceased 
to exist ever since the time of Mahapadma Nanda and like the 
Kshatriyas the Vaisyas and Ambashthas too had become Sudras on 
account of non-performance of appropriate duties. 13 Thus the 
Hindus, according to him, were classified into two categories—the 
Brahmanas and Sudras. Kamalakara Bhatta accepted this theory, 14 
though Kesava Pandit, who was associated with the Judicial Depart¬ 
ment under Shivaji, Shambhuji and Rajaram, recognised the exist¬ 
ence of the Kshatriyas and Vaisyas and prescribed different penalties 
for reviling persons of different castes. In Orissa, too, the law-book 
attributed to Prataparudra ordained difference in the degree of 
penalty to be awarded to the Kshatriyas and Vaisyas for slander 
and libel. 15 Anantadeva, whose patron Baz Bahadur ruled over 
Almora and Nainital from 1638 to 1678 A.D., defines a grama or 
village as a place inhabited by Brahmanas and Sudras, and a purl 
or town as one where besides the above mentioned castes, the 
Kshatriyas also reside. * A pattana, according to him, is one in which 
the Kshatriyas, duly installed, and the Vaisyas, fit to carry on busi¬ 
ness, dwell together. A Kheta is one where the three higher castes 
reside and live upon agriculture; a nagara is one where all the 
castes including the mixed ones reside and the area of which is four 
times that of an ordinary Kheta. 16 

This question assumed great importance during the reign of 
Shivaji. With the support of Gagabhatta, Shivaji succeeded in re¬ 
storing to the Syennavis, Chandrasenlyas, Kayasthas, Marathas and 
some other castes the rights and privileges of Shodasa-Samskdras. 


637 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Raghunandana conceded only one Sa 7 hskara, namely marriage, to 
the ISudras. 17 In a royal decree, dated 28 January, 1677, ShivajI 
called himself a Kshatriya and referred to the Vaisyas also. 18 All 
these go to show that Raghunandana’s theory about the existence of 
the Brahmanas and iSudras only in the Hindu religious fold was not 
accepted by many. Raghunandana wrote a special book entitled 
Sudrakriyd-Vichdra-tattva for ascertaining the religious rites and 
ceremonies which the ISudras were entitled to perform. 

(c) The Tantrik Cults 

The Tantras did not make much discrimination between the 
Brahmanas and non-Brahmanas in the spiritual sphere. They ad¬ 
mitted the right of all classes to the Tantrik Gayatri and Sandhyd. 
All were entitled to read the Tantras and recite the Tantrik mantras. 
But it must be admitted that the Tantras recognised castes for all 
secular purposes. 19 

Tantricism had fallen into disrepute in the early middle age. 
But earnest and sustained efforts were made in the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries to purge it of baser elements. The Kdma- 
khyd Tantra classifies the Tantrik worshippers into three groups 
—the Divyas, Viras and Pasus. Men with the Divya disposition 
are contented, fearless, truthful, attentive to all and loved by all. 
They have been compared to Siva. Those who are of Vira disposi¬ 
tion are so strong, vigorous, courageous and enterprising as to in¬ 
spire fear in the minds of the Pasus, who are slaves to the six pas¬ 
sions, namely lust, anger, greed, pride, illusion and envy. Accord¬ 
ing to the Kularnava Tantra, the Sakti of the pasu is not awaken¬ 
ed. The same Tantra explains the true significance of the much 
abused five M’s (pancha-makdra) . The nectar which flows from the 
union of the KundalinI sakti with Siva at the sahasrara in the head 
is true wine. He who kills by the sword of jnana the animals of 
merit and demerit and devotes his mind to the supreme iSiva is the 
true eater of flesh. He who controls all his senses and places them 
in his Atman truly takes fish. He who is permeated by the bliss 
which arises out of the union of the supreme sakti and Atman, en¬ 
joys the true union; others are mere fornicators. 20 That this is not 
a mere idealised picture is proved by Muhsin Fan!, an acute Muslim 
observer, who states that in 1623 A.D. he migrated in his infancy 
from Patna to Akbarabad with his relatives and came under the 
influence of Chaturvapah (d. 1637) and his disciple Ganesa. 21 He 
writes that when a learned sakta was shown a statement in a book 
counselling immorality, he said that the text was contrary to 
custom and no such thing was to be found in the ancient books. 


638 


RELIGION 


The Muslim author refers to a class of Saktas who never drink wine 
and never indulge in adultery. 22 

A number of saintly scholars produced a number of Tantric 
treatises during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Thus 
Mahldhara, a citizen of Ahichhatra settled at Varanasi, wrote the 
Mantra-mahodadhi in 1589 A.D. Brahmananda Giri, the cele¬ 
brated author of the Sdktdnanda-tarangini and Tdra-rahasya must 
have been earlier than him, because his disciple Purnananda’s 
Saktakrama was written in 1571 A.D. Brahmananda elaborates 
the various rites to be performed in the course of the worship of 
Sakti. Furnananda was a more voluminous writer. His treatises 
covered subjects ranging from abstruse philosophy to magical rites 
in connection with the Tantrik ceremonies. He was born in a 
village Katihali, in the Mymensingh district of Bangladesh. He 
made many disciples in East and North Bengal and his descendants 
held the position of hereditary gurus for many generations. An¬ 
other Tantric writer of the sixteenth century was Sankara of Gauda 
(Bengal) who bore the title of Agamacharya. In his Tdrd-rahasya- 
varttika he explains the mode of worshipping Tara with special re¬ 
ference to the method of initiation and purification. 223 The most 
famous author of this sect was Krishnananda Agamavaglsa of 
Navadvlpa. His Tantrasdra is a work of high authority not only 
in Bengal but also in the whole of northern India. As he quotes 
from Purnananda’s SrUattva-chintdmani 23 which was written in 
1577 A.D., he must have flourished some time after that date. Rama- 
toshana Vidyalamkara who compiled the Prdna-toshani-tantra in 
1820, was seventh in descent from Krishnananda; it may therefore be 
presumed that the latter flourished in the seventeenth century. 24 
Those who hold that he was a contemporary of Chaitanya depend 
on uncorroborated legends. Another Bengali writer on the Tan- 
tras was Raghunatha Tarkavaglsa who wrote the Agama-tattva- 
vildsa at Napada in Andul near Calcutta in 1687 A.D. Though 
north-western India in earlier times and north-eastern India in the 
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries happened to be citadels of 
Tiantricism, yet other parts of India were not free from its in¬ 
fluence. A Brahmana of the Kanchl region, named Srinivasa Bhatta 

• • 

Gosvamin went on pilgrimage to Jalandhara and was initiated by 
a Tantrik preceptor, Sundaracharya, who asked him to settle down 
at Varanasi. He wrote several works on the method of worship¬ 
ping Siva, Chandl, Ganesa, Vishnu and Surya. His son Jaganni- 
vasa became the spiritual preceptor of a number of ruling chiefs, 
of whom the most notable was Devlsimha of Bundel. Jaitrasimha 


639 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


of the Vaghela dynasty was the author of a work relating to the 
method of worshipping Bhairava. 

Not only the !&aivas and Saktas but also the Vaishnavas drew 
upon the Tantras. Sanatana Gosvamin relates how one of the 
heroes of his Brihat-Bhdgavatdmnta, an ignorant Brahmana of 
Pragjyotisapura, used to worship the goddess Kamakshya sincerely. 
The goddess revealed to him in a dream the ten-lettered Gopdla- 
mantra and instructed him' how to meditate on it, as well as the way 
of performing worship.^ 5 It is worth noting that this is the very 
mantra with which Isvara-Purl initiated Chaitanya at Gaya. Sana¬ 
tana Gosvamin in his commentary on the tenth Book of the Bhaga - 
vata-Purdna has cited the authority of the Trailokya Sammohana- 
tantra 26 and the Rudra-Ydmala-tantra. 21 Gopala Bhatta has quoted 
the authority of many of the Tantras like the Gautamdya Tantra 28 
Trailokya-Sammohana-T antra 29 Ndrada Tantra 30 Sammohana 
Tantra 31 and Sanatkumdra Tantra 32 

The Sakta PUhas or holy places were originally four or seven 
in number, but these were spread over the whole of India. When 
Krishnananda Agamavaglsa wrote his Tdntrasdra, the number 
swelled to fifty-one, of which only two were located in Bengal. 
But the Pithanirnaya , written probably in Bengal towards the end 
of the seventeenth or the beginning of the eighteenth century, claims 
nearly one-third of the total number of Fithas for Bengal alone. 33 
This probably illustrates the popularity of the &akta cult in Bengal. 
This is also supported by Mukundarama ChakravartI, who mentions 
a large number of places associated with the !§akti cult in his 
Chandy-mangala 34 written towards the close of the sixteenth cen¬ 
tury. The poet’s grandfather was a strict vegetarian, his village 
deity was Chakraditya and he begins his work with hymns to 
Ganesa, &iva, Sarasvati, Chaitanya, Rama, Lakshmi, Chandi and 
Sukadeva Gosvamin. Though his ostensible object was glorifying 
Chandi, he did not miss any opportunity of praising the Vaishnavas 
and their tenets. 35 

Despite the serious attempts of learned scholars and holy as¬ 
cetics to reform the Tantrik &akti cult, certain sections of people 
continued to follow the path of sensual enjoyment in the name of 
religion. Kaslnatha Bhatta Bhada, alias 'Sivanandanatha, who flou¬ 
rished at Varanasi in the seventeenth and the eighteenth centuries 
had to write a series of books to refute the Vdmdcharti or the Leftist 
doctrines and practices which, according to him, were widely pre¬ 
valent in those days. He, however, claimed to have established the 
Dakshinackdra or the Rightist form of worship on a firm footing. 36 


640 


RELIGION 

The Aghorepanthls whose horrible practices were condemned 
by Bhavabhuti and Rajasekhara continued to exist even up to the 
seventeenth century. A revolting account of their most abominable 
ways of life has been given in the Dablstdn? 1 

(d) The gaivas 

No new movement appears to have arisen amongst the Saivas 
during the period under survey. But a large proportion of the 
people continued to be followers of Saivism. Appayya Dikshita 
(1520-1592), the famous author of more than one hundred works on 
diverse subjects, attempted to build up a synthesis between Vedantic 
monism, Saivism and the Siddhanta or Agama schools. His syn¬ 
thetic doctrine known as the Ratna-traya-parikshd seeks to establish 
the identity of Sahkara-Parvatl and :&ahkara-Narayana concepts. 
He lived under the patronage of the Nayakas of Vellore. Tayu- 
manavar, a famous Saiva saint of the seventeenth century, also 
preached the unity between the Vedanta and the Saiva Siddhanta. 
He was a high official in the court of the Nayaka ruler of Tiruchirap- 
palli. It is said that as the widowed queen offered herself and the 
kingdom to him he gave her noble advice and left the kingdom in 
search of spiritual life. A group of five great saints, namely &iva- 
prakasa I, iSantalihga, Kumaradeva, Sivaprakasa II and Chidambara 
Svamin, all belonging to the Vlrasaiva or Lihgayata sect, flourish¬ 
ed in the seventeenth century and composed beautiful hymns and 
scholarly treatises. 

Some of the Saivas in the sixteenth century practised satyd- 
graha and self-immolation in defence of their religious beliefs. 
Fr. N. Pimenta relates that he saw with his own eyes a group of 
Saiva priests at Chidambaram offering resistance to Krishnappa 
Nayaka of Gingee in 1597, when the latter placed a gilded pole 
called Sign of Perimal at the Govindaraja shrine there. As the 
prince did not care to yield to their opposition, they climbed the 
towers and ‘cast themselves down’ in his presence and twenty of 
them died instantaneously. At this Krishnappa got angry and 
ordered the rest of the priests to be killed. Two of them thus lost 
their life and seeing this a woman ‘cut her own throat’. 38 

In Bengal Saivism in its popular form underwent a remarkable 
change. The tribal deity of the aboriginal Koch tribe in North 
Bengal appears to have been identified with Rudra-iSiva in this 
period. Mukundarama Chakravarti slightly touches upon the in¬ 
fatuation of the Koch women for Siva. This theme has been ela¬ 
borated with great gusto by Ramesvara, a poet of the early eight¬ 
eenth century, in his givtiyana . The same poet has depicted Siva 

641 

ME—41 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


as a peasant cultivator, because his wife Parvatl failed to supply 
adequate food to her sons out of the alms secured by him. 

(e) Contending Religious Forces in Eastern India 

Assam, Cooch Behar and Tripura were strongholds of the &akti 
cult. Human beings used to be sacrificed on special occasions in 
all these places. Gait quotes the authority of the Haft Iqlim to 
show that some Ahoms used to offer themselves for sacrifice to a 
tribal goddess called Ai at the time of her annual festival. Such 
people were known as Bhogis. They were allowed to do whatever 
they liked from the day they expressed their desire to sacrifice 
their life. Rich and nourishing food was supplied to them with 
a view to making their body plump, as the goddess was supposed 
to have been specially pleased with such victims. 39 Raja Nara 
Narayana of Cooch Behar (c. 1555-87 A.D.) erected a new temple 
of Kamakhya and on the day of its consecration sacrificed as many 
as one hundred and forty men and offered their heads to the god¬ 
dess on copper salvers. 40 The Rajamdld states that Maharaja 
Dhanyama^dkya of Tripura (c. 1490-1514 A.D.) stopped the prac¬ 
tice of sacrificing annually one thousand human beings before the 
fourteen gods and goddesses, that is Siva, Durga, Hari, Lakshmi, 
Sarasvatl, Kartika, Ganesa, Brahma, the Earth, Sea, Ganges, Fire, 
Kamadeva and the Himalayas, the titular deities of the royal family 
of Tripura. He ordained that only the worst criminals and captives 
of war should be offered as sacrifices. Rajadhara, son of Amara- 
manikya, who ruled between 1586 and 1600, became a convert to 
Vaishnavism. He built an excellent temple of Vishnu and engaged 
singers to sing kirtana songs all the twenty-four hours. According 
to the tradition current in the Nityananda family it was Gopljana- 
vallabha, the son of VIrabhadra, who took the lead in introducing 
Vaishnavism in Tripura. Bloody sacrifices, however, did not cease 
till Govindamanikya took effective steps to prevent them in the 
second half of the seventeenth century. 

&ankaradeva, born about 1487 A.D. 41 of a Kayastha family of 
feudal chiefs of the Brahmaputra valley, 41a introduced Vaishnavism 
in Kamarupa and Cooch Behar. His biographers relate that he did 
not get congenial atmosphere in Assam under the Ahom King Chu- 
hungmung Svargadeo (c. 1497-1539 A.D.) for the propagation of 
his faith and that he fled to the domains of Raja Nara Narayana of 
Cooch Behar. The latter allowed him liberty to preach his religion. 
Madhavadeva, the greatest of his disciples, met him for the first 
time in 1522 A.D. and accompanied him to Cooch Behar in 1543. 
Sankaradeva and Madhavadeva appear to have attained great 

642 


RELIGION 


success in their mission in the kingdom of Nara Narayana. Fitch 
who visited his kingdom in the latter part of the sixteenth century 
writes of the conduct of the people: “There they be gentiles and 
they will kill nothing. They have hospitals for sheep, goats, dogs, 
cats, birds and for all living creatures. When they be old and lame 
they keep them until they die. If a man catch or buy any sick thing 
in other places and bring it thither, they will give him money for 
it, or other victuals and keep it in their hospitals or let it go”. The 
Vaishnava movement attracted some tribal people too. The rulers 
of the Heramba principality in Cachar became followers of §ahkara- 
deva. Madhavadeva writes in his Nam-Ghosha: “Garos, Bhutias, 
Muslims take the name of Hari; it is a pity such Harimdma is criti¬ 
cised by some of the learned”. 42 Some Brahmanas became their 
disciples but the majority of them remained hostile to them. Raja 
Rudra Simha (1696-1714) compelled the &udra Gosains to wear a 
distinctive badge round their neck and prohibited the Brahmanas 
from showing reverence to them. 

The sect founded by Sankaradeva and Madhavadeva is known 
as the Mahapurushias. Some European savants imagined them as 
followers of Chaitanya’s school. 43 But there are four fundamental 
points of difference between the two. Firstly, ISahkaradeva considers 
God as formless and does not believe in image worship, which the 
Bengal Vaishnavas consider essential. Secondly, salvation is consi¬ 
dered the objective of spiritual life by iSahkaradeva while the fol¬ 
lowers of Chaitanya spurn it and yearn for loving servitude of Radha 
and Krishna. Thirdly, ISahkaradeva does not recognise Radha at all. 
Fourthly, the Bengal Vaishnavas recite the sixteen names beginning 
with the words, Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, but the Assam Vaish¬ 
navas recite only four names, Rama Krishna, Rama Krishna, 44 The 
chief centres of propagation of Sankaradeva’s religion were the 
satras, or refuge of devotees. At the centre of the satra lies the 
Ndmaghara, where either the Gita or the Bhalgavata is kept on the 
pedestal and the holy name is recited. 

iSahkaradeva led the life of a householder with his wife and 
children, but Madhavadeva remained an ascetic. Some time after 
the latter’s death in 1596 A.D. several sub-sects sprang up. 
Vaihsi Gopaladeva founded a number of satras in Upper Assam 
and installed a stone image Govinda at Kurua Banhi. His spirit¬ 
ual preceptor, Damodaradeva, was the founder of the Brahma r Sam - 
hati or Bdmunia school. Another school was founded by Anirud- 
dhadeva, who had to secede from the main body because he could 
not resist the temptation of introducing some of the occult practices 
of Tantricism in the Vaishnava rituals. Many of his followers were 


643 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


fishermen, who lived on catching the mod fish and hence the name 
of the sect became Mod Maria, the catchers of mod fish. But the 
apologists of the school explained the name as the Maya Maria 
or killer of nescience. The Thakuria sect was organised by 
§ankaradeva’s grandson, Purushottama Thakur, who was originally 
a follower of Madhavadeva. Another follower of the latter, named 
Gopaladeva also seceded and founded the school known as Kala 
Samhati. 

A careful perusal of the Chaitanya Bhdgavata, written by Vrin¬ 
davana Dasa, the last disciple of Nityananda, some time between 
1546 and 1550 A.D., reveals the division of Chaitanya’s followers 
also into various sub-sects. Chaitanya died in 1533 and Nityananda 
and Advaita must have passed away some time before the composi¬ 
tion of this work. This author states that an attempt was made by 
some people to identify Advaita with Krishna. 45 At another place 
he says that those who neglect Chaitanya and worship Advaita are 
doomed, be they even the sons of Advaita. 46 A rift was noticeable 
between the followers of Gahgadhara and those of Advaita. 47 The 
number of traducers of Nityananda was so large that Vrindavana 
Dasa had to undertake the writing of this work mainly with a view 
to extolling his virtues. Nityananda did not observe any of the 
social conventions. This might be one of the reasons why Rupa 
Gosvamin and Raghunatha Dasa did not mention his name in any 
of their works. Vrindavana Dasa severely condemns those who do 
not show proper respect to Nityananda. He also deprecates the 
section of devotees who take delight in describing Chaitanya as 

a lover of women like Krishna. Narahari Sarkar of Srikhanda was 

• • * • 

the chief protagonist of such a section and that is why Vrindavana 
Dasa does not mention his name even once in his book. Narahari 
also took the lead in initiating his followers with the mantra asso¬ 
ciated with the name of Chaitanya. The theology of the Bengal 
Vaishnavas was formulated at Vrindavana by the six Gosvamls, 
Sanatana and Rupa and their nephew Jiva, Gopala Bhatta, Raghu¬ 
natha Bhatta and Raghunatha Dasa. These Gosvamls drew their in¬ 
spiration from Chaitanya indeed, but they inculcated the doctrine 
of worshipping Radha and Krishna. To them Chaitanya was more 
a means to an end than an end in himself. Their works were 
brought from Vrindavana to Bengal by Srinivasa A chary a, the dis¬ 
ciple of Gopala Bhatta. Srinivasa was able to convert Vira Hamblr, 
the powerful ruler of Bishnupur in the district of Bankura in the 
last quarter of the sixteenth century. 

Vira Hamblr constructed some magnificent temples dedicated 
to Krishna at Bishnupur and composed a few beautiful lyrics in 

644 


RELIGION 


i 


Bengali. In one of these poems he states that it was Srinivasa 
Acharya who showed him the way of devotional life and made him 
discard the princely arrogance. 48 But history relates that he did 
not give up fighting, sometimes on behalf of the Mughuls and occa¬ 
sionally against them, even as late as 1608. Narottama Thakur 
and Syamananda, two of the associates of Srinivasa Acharya, took 
prominent part in propagating Vaishnavism in Bengal and Orissa 
respectively. The former brought about a synthesis between the 
different schools of Bengal Vaishnavism and held a grand festival 
at Khetari about the year 1582 A.D. to signalise the fact. The im¬ 
ages of Radha and Krishna along with those of Chaitanya and his 
two wives were installed there on the anniversary of the birthday 
of Chaitanya. Narottama also introduced the Gadanhatl school of 
Klrtana song on that occasion. Jahnava Devi, widow of Nitya- 
nanda, was accepted as the undisputed leader of the vast congre¬ 
gation of the Vaishnavas. It was at her instance that the various 
religious ceremonies were performed. She undertook three trips 
to Vrindavana and was received with unique honour by the Vai- 
shnava authors and preceptors there. She is credited with propa¬ 
gating the religion in the localities through which she passed. 49 Slta 
Devi, the wife of Advaita, did not come out of the pardah but she, 
too, introduced a new sub-sect in which the male devotees took the 
garb of women. Buchanan Hamilton found the chief seat of the 
Sakhlbhava Vaishnavas at Jangalitala near Gauda and discovered 
that it was established by Slta ThakuranI, who initiated two male 
disciples and named them Jangall and Nandinl. 50 He noticed that 
the sect was popular amongst the lower order of the people. 

Biographies and accounts of Vaishnavas written in the sixteenth 
and early seventeenth centuries reveal that out of the 490 leading 
followers of Chaitanya there were as many as 239 Brahmanas, 37 
Vaidyas and 29 Kayasthas. 51 But the majority of the rank and file 
of the Bengal Vaishnavas belonged to other castes, residing mainly 
in West Bengal and North Bengal. Vaishnavism was carried to East 
Bengal by the followers of Narottama Thakur later on. An emi¬ 
nent historian states that Chaitanya took up the noble mission of 
improving the lot of the lower castes and untouchables by bring¬ 
ing them in his fold and according them equal status with the so- 
called higher castes. 52 This is why the whole of the prosperous 
merchant class known as the Suvarnavaniks which had been de¬ 
graded by Ballalasena out of spite accepted Vaishnavism. But the 
virile Namasudra or Chandala caste residing in East Bengal con¬ 
tinued to be votaries of the Sakti cult. Many influential Brah¬ 
manas, Vaidyas and Kayasthas, too, remained attached to Saktism. 


645 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Some cases of conversion of high caste &aktas to Vaishnavism are 
described in the Premavilcisa, Bhakti-ratndkara and Narottama- 
vilasa, but these must have been exceptional. At the same time 
it is worth noting that Brahmana poets like Mukundarama Chakra- 
vartl in his Chandir-mangala, Rupamma Chakravarti in his Dharma- 
mangala and a Kayastha poet like Ketakadasa Kshemananda in his 
Manasd-mangala have made obeisance to Chaitanya and to his Vai- 
§hnava followers. Both the &aktas and the &aivas rendered homage 
to Manasa, the goddess of snakes, i&itala, the goddess of small-pox, 
Shashthi, the patron goddess of children, and to Dharma, who is 
supposed to have been the incarnation of Buddha. Some of the 
Buddhist Sahajiyas became Vaishnava Sahajiyas. Some of the ear¬ 
liest works of the latter were written in the seventeenth century. 
Thus Rasika-dasa composed the Rasatattva-sara in the first quarter 
of the seventeenth century, Akinchana-dasa wrote the Vivarta- 
vilasa in the middle of the century and the Agama was copied in 
1688. 53 These works extol extra-marital love and hold that the 
union of the human and divine is literally possible. 541 

In Orissa the Brahmanas were attached more to the cults of 
Sakti and 3§iva than to Vaishnavism. The existence of the Gopi- 
natha temple at Remuna and the Janardana temple at Alalnatha 
proves that Vaishnavism had some followers in Orissa before the 
advent of Chaitanya. Rai Ramananda wrote the drama Jagan- 
natha-mangala, depicting the love of Radha and Krishna before he 
met Chaitanya. Gopijanavallabha in his Rasika-mahgala, written 
in 1660 A.D., states that the masses of people as well as the feudal 
chieftains were addicted to wine, women and other vices, and they 
were hostile to the kirtana song and to the Vaishnavas, whom they 
drove away from villages. 55 If this description is to be relied on, the 
conclusion becomes inevitable that Vaishnavism could not make 
much progress during the lifetime of Chaitanya. Five great poets 
of Orissa, namely, Jagannatha-dasa, Balarama-dasa, Achyutananda, 
Ananta and Yasovanta-dasa, were collectively known as the Pancha- 
sakhas or five friends. In the $ unya-samhitd, written by Achyuta¬ 
nanda it is related that all of them danced and performed kirtana 
song in the company of Chaitanya. 56 Some of them are said to have 
been initiated by Chaitanya, Nityananda and Sanatana Gosvamin. 
But the internal evidence furnished by their writings shows that they 
were crypto-Buddhists. There were some fundamental points of 
difference in the doctrine and mode of worship between them and 
the Bengal school of Vaishnavism. The sub-sect founded by Jagan¬ 
natha-dasa is known as the Ati-badl (too great) sect. The Oriyas 
claim that this appellation was given by Chaitanya in appreciation 


646 


RELIGION 


of the Bhagavata written by Jagannatha-dasa 57 , but the Bengali 
Vaishnavas treat it as a term of deprecation. 58 

The credit of making Chaitanyaism popular in Orissa goes to 
Syamananda and his disciple Rasikananda. The former was a Sad- 
gopa and the latter a Karana by caste. Syamananda studied the Vai- 
shnava scriptures at Vrindavana under Jiva Gosvamin. Rasikananda 
converted a number of feudal lords, the chief of whom was Vaidya- 
nath Bhahjdeo of Rajgarh. Not only the Hindus but also many ab¬ 
origines and a few Muslims became converts to Vaishnavism. 59 

(f) Vaishnavism in Northern India 

A great wave of Vaishnavism passed through the length and 
breadth of northern India in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. 
It was much more emotional than the movement which originated 
in southern India in earlier centuries. According to the Vallabha- 
chari sect the area between Varanasi and Prayaga was the citadel 
of the Sakti cult before the advent of their Master. 60 But a remark¬ 
able change took place not only in this area but also in the whole 
of Northern India on account of the activities of disciples and 
admirers of Vallabhacharya, Hita Harivamsa, Haridasa SvamI, Srl- 
bhafta and, above all, of Tulsidasa. 

The Pnshtimdrga or religion of grace set up by Vallabhacharya 
(1479-1531) was fully organised and developed by his son Vitthala- 
natha (1516-1576). While Vallabha laid emphasis on serving 
Krishna mentally 61 , Vitthala introduced the practice of worshipping 
the deity eight times a day with vocal and instrumental music and 
offering him daintiest food. Vallabha has not mentioned the name 
of Radha in his Knshnasraya and ChatuhslokH, though her name 
occurs in the Krishna-vremamrita , Krishnashtaka and Purushottama - 
sahasra-stotra , ascribed to him. Vitthala is extremely devoted to 
Radha. He says that it is through her grace that one is able to per¬ 
form worship and meditation. He holds the sweet speech of Radha 
dearer than salvation itself 62 . He engaged Kumbhan-dasa, Surdas, 
Paramananda-dasa and Krishna-dasa, four of the disciples of his fa¬ 
ther, and Govindasvami, ChhitasvamI, Chaturbhuja-dasa and Nanda- 
dasa, four of his own disciples, to compose and sing songs celebrat¬ 
ing the love of Radha and Krishna. These eight prominent poets 
became collectively known as the Ashta-chhapa or the Eight Die- 
stamps producing coins in the shape of poems. 63 Vitthala undertook 
extensive proselytising tours to Dvaraka, Cutch, Malwa, Mewar and 
other parts of Rajasthan and Gujarat and made innumerable dis¬ 
ciples. Of these, two hundred and fifty-two were most prominent 
and their life is described in a big work. Vitthalanatha finally settled 


647 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


down, at Gokul. He had seven sons and four daughters. His 
fourth son, Gokulanathji (1552-1610) was a gifted author and com* 
mentator. His most notable work is the Chaurdsl Vdrtd. Each of 
the seven sons of Vitthala established his gaddi or own seat of teach¬ 
ing in Rajasthan, Gujarat and the neighbourhood of Mathura, and 
helped to diffuse the teachings of the sect. The profession of spirit¬ 
ual teacher became strictly hereditary amongst the male descend¬ 
ants of Vitthalanatha. In most of the temples of the sect the child 
• • 

Krishna is worshipped. 64 

The most prominent poet of the sect is Surdas (c. 1478-1581). 
From his own writing we learn that he completed his Sur-sdrdvall 
in 1545 A.D. when he was sixty-seven years old. Vallabha depicts 
Radha as the eternal spouse of Krishna. Surdas gives an elaborate 
description of the marriage of Radha with Krishna, but she is not 
portrayed as settling down to conjugal life, exhibiting the wifely 
virtues like Sita or Savitri. This is why her marriage with Krishna 
has been called a marriage of theological convenience, for it makes 
their relationship more proper. 65 Unlike the Gaudlya Vaishnava 
poets, Surdas takes delight in describing the manifestation of the 
supreme powers of Krishna in his sports with friends of both the 
sexes. His Krishna tells Radha: “Living in Vraja, you have forgot¬ 
ten yourself; know that Prakriti and Purusha are the same, there is 
a difference only in word”. 66 To the poets and theologians of the 
Chaitanyaite sect Radha is the hlddinl sakti (the energy of infinite 
bliss) of Krishna. 

The Radha-Vallabhl sect, founded by Hita Harivaihsa (c. 1503- 
1553), assigns to Radha a place superior even to Krishna. Those 
who are content with the love of Krishna and do not know Radha 
are satisfied with a mere drop of nectar while neglecting the ocean 
of nectar, which is Radha. 67 Commenting on this verse by the 
founder of the sect, Harilal Vyasa says that Radha is the only object 
of worship; she is the spiritual preceptor and also the mantra it¬ 
self. Farquhar relates that one of the votaries of the sect told him: 
“Krishna is the servant of Radha. He may do the coolie-work of 
building the world, but Radha sits as queen. He is at best but her 
Secretary of State”. 68 The Gaudlya Vaishnavas hold that Hita Hari¬ 
vaihsa was originally a disciple of Gopala Bhatta, but as he took the 
food offered to the deities on the day of fasting he was discarded. 
The temple of Radha Vallabha at Vrindavana was constructed in 
1585 A.D., according to an inscription which is missing. But an in¬ 
scription on one of the pillars of the temple gives the date as 1626 
A.D. The plan of the temple is much the same as that of Harideva 
of Govardhan, which was visited by Chaitanya, though it is on a 


648 


RELIGION 


much larger scale. Muhsin Fan! wrote in the middle of the seven¬ 
teenth century that the Radha-Vallabhls ‘‘deliver their wives to the 
disposition of their preceptors and masters and hold this praise¬ 
worthy”. 69 But this writer must have confused the Radha-Vallabhi 
sect with the sect of Vallabhacharya. The latter has been held up 
to ridicule for such a practice in a dramatic work in Sanskrit, entitled 
Pdkhanda Dlnarma Khandana, written in 1639 A.D. It is stated in 
this work that the “chief religion of the worshippers of Vallabha is 
the offering of one’s son, daughter and wife—not the worship of 
Brahmanas learned in the Vedas, not the observance of hospitality, 
the Sraddhas and the Vratas ”. Much reliance, however, cannot be 
placed on such writings. Tod in his Annals and Antiquities of 
Rajasthan speaks highly of Damodara, the head of the sect in Mar- 
war and writes: “his conduct and character are amiable and un¬ 
exceptionable”. 

Another Vaishnava sect was founded by Haridasa-svamI, the 
spiritual preceptor of the celebrated musician Tansen. The Bhdk- 
Sindhu states that Haridasa was born in Samvat 1441 and died in 
1537 and at the same time describes him as a contemporary of Akbar. 
If we take the word Samvat for the Saka, his dates will fall between 
1519 and 1615 A.D. Growse showed that as there followed only 
eight Mahants after Haridasa up to the Samvat 1825, Haridasa must 
have flourished at the end of the sixteenth and the beginning of 
the seventeenth century. 70 The Bhaktamdla describes him as a verit¬ 
able Gandharva for his melodious songs. Akbar is said to have visit¬ 
ed him with presents. Nabhajl writes that at his door a king stood 
waiting in hope of an interview. The famous temple of Biharljl or 
Banke Biharijl belongs to this sect and it is visited by more people 
than any other temple at Vrindavana. In 1876 Growse found some 
five hundred descendants of SvamI Haridasa managing this temple. 

The Rama cult popularised by Ramananda found its greatest poet 

in Tulsidasa (1532-1623). He did not establish any sect nor did he 

set up any big temple. But his Rdmacharita Mdnasa (1574) exerts 

a much greater influence in moulding the religion of the people of the 

Hindi-speaking regions than any other book or religious reformer. 

He also wrote eleven other works. The writer of the Dablstdn found 

the followers of Rama cult purer in character than the devotees of 

Krishna. 71 
• • 

This author mentions a sect known as the Manushya Bhaktas 
or worshippers of mankind. They knew no being more perfect 
than mankind 72 and recognised the being of God in man. Such an 
idea occurs in a poem ascribed to the Bengali poet Chandidasa. But 
the idea is as old as the Mahabhdrata itself. 73 


649 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


(g) Bhakti movement in Western India 

The Bhakti movement in Western India, which had become 
powerful at the time of Jnanes\ ara, received a new impetus in the 
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. 74 One of its greatest exponents 
was Eknath who completed his brilliant exposition of the eleventh 
book of the Bhdgavata Parana in 1572 A.D. His date has been dis¬ 
cussed above (p. 630, f.n. 19). He expounded the ChatnhslokI Bhd¬ 
gavata in 1036 verses and also composed twenty-six abhangas called 
Haripdth. These works proved a great spiritual force in Mahara¬ 
shtra and helped to create there a sense of unity amongst different 
classes in society. Though a Brahmana by caste, he proved a cham¬ 
pion of equality of rights in the spiritual sphere and a great advocate 
of the popular dialect. He sings the glory of the Kali age, which 
has been condemned as an accursed age by the orthodox writers: 
“Blessed is this Kali age, in spite of its wickedness, because we can 
attain salvation simply by singing the glory of Hari. All castes, all 
creeds, assemble together and praise the Lord according to their 
knowledge and faith. Your sex or caste does not count.... This 
kirtana is the privilege of the lowest and meanest person. It will 
deepen your faith and strengthen your spirit. Even the happiness 
of mukti sinks into insignificance before the ecstasy of kirtana”. 15 
These words strongly recall the preachings of Chaitanya. Ekniath 
once gave to the Mahars the food prepared as an offering to his fore¬ 
fathers. The influence he exercised on all classes of people was 
extraordinary. For example, Ramavallabha-das, son of the Prime 
Minister of Devagiri, happened to get a copy of his Bhdgavata during 
a raid on a place and considering this as a divine favour he gave 
himself up entirely to religious meditation. 76 

Tukarlam (1608-1649) has been called the supreme exponent 
of Bhakti in Maharashtra. He was a great devotee of Rama and 
performed kirtana consisting of religious discourses interspersed 
with songs which attracted crowds of people. The songs were mostly 
composed by Tukaram himself in a metre known by the name of 
Abhafig. Hundreds of his Abhangs have been collected and pub¬ 
lished. Their teaching is that God is to be attained by devoted 
love and by no other means. In several of his abhangs he thanks 
God that he was born in the Sudra caste and during a famine lost 
his money and one of his wives was crying for food. 77 In another 
abhang he writes: “I was born in a Sudra family, thus was set free 
from all pride. Now it is thou who are my father and mother, O 
Lord of Pandhari. I have no authority to study the Vedas; I am 
helpless in every way, humble in caste says Tuka”. He describes 


650 


RELIGION 


himself as initiated into Vaishnavism by a wandering devotee call¬ 
ed Babaji, who said that his predecessors were Raghava Chaitanya 
and Kesava Chaitanya. 78 Bahini Bal states in her autobiography that 
her guru Tukaram received initiation from Babaji Chaitanya, who 
in his turn got it from Kesava Chaitanya, the disciple of Raghava 
Chaitanya. 79 The guru of Raghava was Visvambhara, which was 
the name of Chaitanya when he was a householder. As four gene¬ 
rations of gurus may cover one hundred years, and as the interval 
between the birth of Tukaram and the assumption of the ascetic’s 
robe by Chaitanya is 102 years, there appears to have been some 
historic connection between Tukaram and Chaitanya. This hypo¬ 
thesis is strengthened by an abhang of Bahini Blai, who says, “My 
line of Guru ancestry is from the great Chaitanya. In remember¬ 
ing his greatness I am also great in heaven. I make my sashbdnga 
namaskdra to him. Let us make our offerings before Sadhu Chai¬ 
tanya Raja (which means Chaitanya, the prince among saints). 
Chaitanya is the all-pervading sadguru'\ m Some of the hymns of 
Tukaram bear a striking resemblance to the last of the eight verses 
composed by Chaitanya. 81 Tukaram was at first persecuted by the 
Brahmins but later on some of them like Ramesvar Bhatt, Kache- 
svar Kandoba and Gangaram Mavala Kaduskar became his warm 
admirers and followers. In the sanad granting property to Nara- 
yanarao, the son of Tukaram, at Dehu, occurs the definite statement 
that “Tukaram the Gosavl used to do pujd to the god with his own 
hand”. 82 

A new sect of Rama worshippers was founded by Dad'u, a cotton- 
cleaner of Ahmadabad, who flourished about the end of Akbar’s 
reign. He inculcates devotion to Rama and meditation on him. His 
followers are divided into three classes, viz. the viraktas or ascetics, 
the nagas who are bearers of arms and enter into the service of 
princes, and the vistaradhdrins who are ordinary house-holders. 

Ramdas (1608-1681), whose original name was Narayapa, was 
not associated with the Pandharpur movement. He established a 
small but powerful sect, worshipping Rama. He evinced much 
greater organising ability than any other Maratha saint. He is cre¬ 
dited with the setting up of eleven hundred maths , many of which 
had temples attached to them. More than forty of these maths exist 
even today. These became the centres of propagating his religion. 
Moreover, he and his prominent disciples undertook extensive tours, 
in the course of which thousands were attracted to his fold. His 
masterly work, the Ddsabodh , proved a source of inspiration to the 
people of Maharashtra. Shivaji became his disciple and made hand- 


651 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


some donations for the maintenance of the maths. In a letter writ¬ 
ten in 1678 ShivajI acknowledged his indebtedness to his Guru thus: 
“You instructed me to establish a kingdom and a religion, to wor¬ 
ship Brahmanas and deities, to protect the people and relieve them 
of their sorrows”. The headquarters of the RamadasI sect is at Saj- 
jangarh, near Satara. He had many ascetic followers, but he consi¬ 
dered family life as the best possible life for any man. He advises 
the householders to be kind in speech, temperate in habit and un¬ 
ceasing in their devotion. 83 He condemned laziness, gossiping and 
garrulous spirit. His high ethical teachings helped to build up the 
Maratha nation. But the sect associated with his name has got only 
a few thousand followers, while the Pandharpur movement, popu¬ 
larised by Tukaram, is still a great living force. 

The Sakta and Saiva cults were highly popular in Gujarat in 
earlier times, but Vaishnavism gained larger number of followers 
during the period under survey. The Census of 1891 which was not 
conducted on a scientific basis, stated that only 2% of the Hindu 
population in Gujarat were Jains, 8% Saivites, mostly Brahmins, 
15% were animists and 75% were Vaishnavites. 84 The sect of Valla- 
bhacharya has got the largest number of followers amongst the rich 
trading and cultivator classes. Gopaldas, a disciple of Vitthalnath, 
wrote the V allabhdkhydna , a poem giving a lucid exposition of the 
fundamentals of the beliefs and practices of the sect. This work, 
written in Gujarati, has got commentaries in several other languages 
and it is read with interest wherever Vallabhism flourishes. 85 

(h) Religious movements in Southern India 

Having given rise to a number of influential religious sects from 
the seventh to the thirteenth centuries, Southern India appears to have 
been following the older paths in the sixteenth and seventeenth cen¬ 
turies. The only notable exception is the rise of the Haridasa or 
Dasakuta movement in Karnataka in the sixteenth century. Some 
scholars trace the origin of the movement to Sripadaraya (d. 1492), 
who introduced temple services in the Kannada language in place of 
Sanskrit. His disciple Vyasatirtha or Vyasaraya (1447-1539) ap¬ 
pears to have been the head of the Madhva sect at Udipi when Chai- 
tanya visited the math. His disciples first of all began to assume 
the title of Dasa. 86 According to Rice the Dasa poets “received 
their inspiration from Madhvacharya and from Chaitanya who, 
about 1510, visited all the chief shrines of South India, teaching 
everywhere to chant the name of Hari.” 87 Purandara-dasa (1480- 
1564), the greatest of the Dasa poets, emphasised the efficacy of re¬ 
citing the name of Hari. He composed more than two thousand 
songs. As Chaitanya and Nityananda are called the fathers of the 


652 


RELIGION 


Kirtana song in Bengal, Purandara is called the originator of the 
Karnataka music. In one of his songs he condemns ostentatious 
austerities as a mere show for the sake of earning livelihood. He 
writes: “All acts done without the abandonment of the sense of 
T, without communion with the holy souls, without belief that every¬ 
thing goes on only at the instance of the Lord, and without the vision 
in silence of the Lord, are merely austerities practised for liveli¬ 
hood”. While Purandara was a Brahmin, his contemporary poet 
Kanakadas was born in the Kurub or caste of hunters. The Brah¬ 
mins opposed his admission to the company of Vyasaraya and he 
wrote pathetically that the lotus born in mud is offered to the feet 
of god, that the milk produced from the body of the cow is taken 
by the Brahmins and the musk grown on the body of deer is used 
in anointing the body of the high-caste persons. The Dasas used to 
walk on foot from place to place, singing kirtana songs, exhorting 
the people to live a life of truth, virtue and devotion to God. They 
were able to reform the society by the example of their saintly life. 88 

In the famous temple of Guruvayur in South Malabar a saint 
named Narayana Bhatta composed in about one thousand verses a 
summary of the Bhagavata Purana in 1588 A.D. This book, known 
as Ndrayaniyam, is widely studied and recited in southern India. 

The Dasa saints refer to Udipi, Srlrangam and Tirupati as 
places of pilgrimage. The sanctity of the temple at Tirupati is also 
testified to by Manucci. 89 The birth-places of some of the medieval 
saints acquired the status of places of pilgrimage. Thus the temple 
at Sriperumbudur near which Ramanuja was born became a centre of 
attraction for devotees. 50 Alindi and Dehu near Poona have become 
holy places on account of their association with Jnanesvara and 
Tukaram respectively. Similarly Navadvipa has become a place of 
pilgrimage for the followers of Chaitanya, who was born there. 

(i) Liberal Trends in Hinduism 

While the orthodox Brahmins considered any kind of contact 
with the Muslims as contamination, the Vaishnavas welcomed them 
in their fold. Chaitanya converted not only the famous Muslim 
saint Haridas but also a few Pathans, headed by Bijuli Khan. 91 
Muhsin Fan!, who does not make any reference to the Bengal Vai¬ 
shnavas in his Dabistan-ul-Majahab, writing about the Vairagis, 
says: “Whoever among the Hindus, Mussalmans or others wishes 
is received into their religion, none are rejected, but on the con¬ 
trary all are invited.” 92 He must have noticed this practice amongst 
the Vaishnava ascetics of Upper India. He himself admits that he 
received the favour of a Hindu saint named Chatur Vapah. 93 In 


653 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


1642 A.D. he met another saint, Narain Dias, in Lahore and wrote: 
“A great number of Mussalmans adopted their creed, such as Mirza 
Saleh and Mirza Haidar, two noble Mussalmans who became Vai- 
ragis.” 94 

A Hindu courtier of Akbar went so far as to produce an apo¬ 
cryphal chapter of the Atharvaveda entitled the Alla Upanishad. 
It begins with salutation to Ganesa and the invocation of the mystic 
Om. It states that he who sustains all things and is the bestower 
of blessings is Allah, and he is identical with Mitra, Varuna and 
Indra. Akbar is described as a messenger of God and a prophet 
rasul but not al-rasul, the prophet. 95 Dara Shukoh writes in the 
introduction to his translation of fifty-two Upanishads that some 
of the most learned pandits and Sannydsis of Banaras explained to 
him the difficult passages of the Upanishads in A.H. 1067 (A.D. 
1656). This is an unmistakable evidence of liberalism on the part 
of the Hindu scholars. 

Some sects arose in the seventeenth century to emphasise the 
unity of religion between the Hindus and Muslims. Dadu (1544- 
1603) founded the Parabrahma Sampradaya with a view to uniting 
different faiths in one bond of love and comradeship. He compiled 
an anthology of the religious literature of different sects in the clos¬ 
ing years of the sixteenth century. Two of his eminent disciples 
were Sundaradasa (1597-1689) and Rajjab. Baba Lai, a Kshatriya 
of Malwa, gave seven interviews to Dam Shukoh in 1648 and their 
conversation is recorded in a Persian work entitled Nadu un mikat, 
which appears to be an admixture of the Vedanta and Sufi doctrines. 
Another Hindu saint, Prannath, who acquired great influence with 
Chhatrasal, the Raja of Bundelkhand, went a step further. He com¬ 
posed a book called Mahitariyal in which he placed texts from the 
holy Qur’an and the Vedas side by side to prove that their tenets 
are not essentially different. He allowed his Hindu and Muslim 
disciples to follow the rituals and laws of their respective religions, 
but insisted on both the Hindus and Muslims dining together at 
the time of initiation. 96 

Following in the wake of Raidas, the cobbler-saint, Sadhana, a 
butcher, attained great reputation as a saint. He used to worship 
the Sulagrdma-sild. Two of his songs are included in the Granth 
Sahib. A robber tribe of Rajasthan called Meo produced the founder 
of a new sect in Laldas in the second half of the sixteenth century. 
His followers, known as Laldasls, do not believe in rituals and they 
show their devotion in singing and reciting the name of God. 97 


654 


RELIGION 


The diverse Hindu sects were usually tolerant to one another 
during our period of survey. But cases of bitter hostility were not 
totally unknown. The Dabistan records a case of fierce fighting 
between the shaven-headed Yairagls and the Naga Sannyasls at 
Hardwar in 1640. The quarrel must have arisen on the question 
of precedence in taking the bath in the Ganges on the occasion of 
the Kumbha Mela. The Naga Sannyasls killed a number of the 
Vairagis. 98 


II. THE SIKH RELIGION 

It has been mentioned above (pp. 305 ff.) that Sikhism was, to 
a large extent, a reaction against the oppression of the Muslims 
to which Nlanak, the founder of the sect, was an eye-witness. Ano¬ 
ther contributing factor was the Bhakti cult which was then at its 
height in India. Nanak, like other medieval saints, such as Rama- 
nanda (14th century) Kablr and Namdev (15th century), and Chai- 
tanya (16th century), was a child of this movement. These two 
factors and forces—Muslim oppression and Bhakti cult—shaped the 
growth and development of both Sikhism and the Sikh nation. 

The same forces may be said to be at work, in greater or less 
degree, for the other Bhakti movements mentioned above. Thus 
we find that one of their principal aims was to remove the bitter¬ 
ness then prevailing between the Hindus and Muslims. It may not 
be a mere coincidence or accident that many of these movements 
laid great stress on the abolition of idolatry and caste distinctions, 
which constituted two fundamental differences and causes of pro¬ 
vocation and persecution between the two communities. These 
medieval saints preached that there was only one God and laid 
stress on the brotherhood of man, resembling, in these respects, their 
Muslim counterparts, the Sufis. They all declared that it does not 
matter if God was called by any name, Allah, Khuda, Ram or Hari. 

Nanak preached to Hindus and Muslims alike. It was then a 
blasphemy to equate Hinduism and Islam. But Nanak had malice 
to none and love for all. To win the confidence of Muslims he would 
sit in graveyards for hours or even for days in meditation uttering 
verses in praise of Allah. He would join prayers in mosques, point¬ 
ing out to some that their hearts were not concentrated on God, but 
were wandering in their homes or fields. He explained the signi¬ 
ficance of their five daily prayers thus: they have five different 
meanings—firstly to speak the truth, secondly to earn their liveli¬ 
hood by right means, thirdly to give away in charity in the name of 
God, fourthly to cherish good intentions, and lastly to praise God." 


655 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Nanak preached to Hindus against idol worship and caste distinc¬ 
tions both by word and deed. He preferred taking food with his 
disciples of low castes. People made offerings to the Guru both 
in cash and kind in accordance with old traditions. In the begin¬ 
ning Nanak distributed all this among the poor who came to listen 
to him. Afterwards he organised a free community kitchen called 
Langar where all dined without any consideration of caste, creed or 
religion. In the sangat 99a (congregation) and pangat (langar) all 
were equal. As everybody was required to earn his livelihood by 
fair means and hard work, all persons from a labourer to a lord 
and from a peasant to a prince were considered alike in dignity 
and prestige. The contribution made by every Sikh in the form 
of cash, kind or service in the Langar was held in similar esteem 
and regard. It was in this way that Nanak tried to loosen the bonds 
of caste system. This also developed the spirit of charity, fellow- 
feeling and service and made the new movement popular. Langar 
became a symbol of equality and fraternity among his followers. 

Nanak laid emphasis on the observance of five things: (1) Nam 
or singing the praise of God, (2) Dan or charity for all, (3) Ashndn 
or the daily bath to keep body clean, (4) Seva or service of huma¬ 
nity, and (5) Simran or constant prayer for the deliverance of soul. 

(a) Nanak’s journeys 

Nanak wished to examine the actual working of religions at 
their great centres and also to give his own message of love and 
peace. For this purpose he undertook four great journeys. First, 
he went to the east (1496 to 1509) mainly to visit holy places of 
Hinduism up to Bengal, Assam, and Sikkim, perhaps Tibet also. 
Next he travelled to the south as far as Ceylon (1510 to 1515) for 
seeing Buddhist and Jain places of note. His third journey was to 
the north (1515 to 1517) to examine Sidh maths or places of famous 
saints in Kashmir and the Himalayas. Lastly, he went to the west 
(1517 to 1521) in Muslim countries of Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq and 
Arabia, to study Islam. He travelled on foot. 

Nanak adopted peculiar practices and repartees to drive home 
his teachings into the minds of his audience. At Hardwar he saw 
people bathing in the Ganga and throwing water towards the rising 
sun. He also entered into water, turned his face towards the west 
and began to throw water in that direction. The people asked what 
he was doing. He enquired what they were doing. He was told 
that they were offering oblations to their ancestors’ souls. Nanak 
replied that he was sending water to his fields in Punjab. They 
asked how this water could reach there. At once the retort came: 


656 


RELIGION 


“If this water cannot reach my fields which are so near, how can 
your water reach heaven which is so far away?” At Mecca in deep 
sleep his feet turned towards the Kaba, the sacred shrine of Islam. 
Somebody kicked him condemning this disrespect to the house of 
God. Quick came the simple reply in sweet tongue: “Turn my 
feet in the direction where all-pervading God is not present.” 

(b) Nanak’s religion 

Nanak’s religion consisted in the love of God, love of man and 
love of godly living. Nanak’s God was the true Lord, the Creator, 
unborn, self-existent, immortal, omnipresent, unrivalled, transcen¬ 
dent, formless and omnipotent; yet He possessed many attributes 
of personality. He was an Ocean of Mercy, the Friend of man, the 
Healer of sinners, Cherisher of the poor and Destroyer of sorrow. 
He was wise, generous, beautiful and bountiful. He was the Father 
and Mother of all human beings and took care of them. Christ 
could think of relationship between God and man as that between 
father and son. To Nanak this relationship appeared as between 
husband and wife. A son could not be the constant companion of 
his father, but a faithful wife could not remain away from her 
spouse. This position also raised the status of woman. True devo¬ 
tion, complete surrender of self and thoughtful constant repetition 
of the Name as opposed to mechanical ritualism, would enable an 
individual to reach God. “Efface thyself so that thou obtain the 
bridegroom.” God could be attained by repeating His Name con¬ 
tinuously. Without Sat Nam (the True Name) nobody could get 
salvation. Name signified worship and devotion to God and feel¬ 
ing and realising His presence at all places and at all times. He thus 
established deep spiritual unity between man and God. The Sikhs 
greeted each other by saying Sat Nam, Sat Kartdr or Sat Sri Akdl, 
meaning True Name, True Creator or True Timeless one. 

Nanak held that for the realisation of God, Guru was essential. 
He was a divine gift. God manifested Himself for the salvation of 
mankind in some teacher or Guru. Without him God could not be 
realised. It was only through the Guru that a man could have com¬ 
munion with God. “Man shall not be emancipated without the 
Guru’s instruction; see and ponder upon this. Even though man per¬ 
formed hundreds of thousands of ceremonies, all would still be 
darkness without the Guru”. 100 The Guru could lead one to re¬ 
demption, and in His presence there was no necessity to worship 
any god or goddess. But the Guru could be found only through 
God’s grace. From his disciples Nanak demanded complete surrender 
to the Guru. Only then salvation could be achieved through the 

657 

M.E.— 42 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


superior spiritual power of the Guru. The faithful disciple would 
follow Guru’s instructions implicitly. He must listen and sing with 
the utmost devotion and reverence Gurbani or the hymns composed 
by the Guru and practise Gurmat 101 or the wisdom as revealed 
through the Guru’s hymns. But the Guru was a teacher and not 
an incarnation of God. “He was a man among men calling upon 
his fellow creatures to live a holy life.” 102 He was to be obeyed 
but not to be worshipped. Nanak declared that his own Guru was 
God. His disciples addressed him by the appellation of Sat Guru 
or the True Guru. 

Nanak laid stress on spiritual discipline which implied de¬ 
votion, service and culture of emotions. He asserted that salva¬ 
tion could be attained only through upright character and good 
deeds. In Japji, Nanak says: 

Words do not the saint or sinner make, 

Action alone is written in the book of fate, 

What we sow that alone we take, 

O Nanak, be saved or for ever transmigrate. 

He further observed: “Abide pure amid the impurities of the 
world: thus shalt thou find the way of religion.” 103 He explained it 
thus: “They are not to be called pure who wash their bodies and 
sit at leisure; rather the pure are they, O Nanak, who enshrine the 
Lord in their hearts.” 

Nanak emphasised the importance of Karma to escape from 
the transmigration of soul. “Life is as the shadow of the passing 
bird, but the soul of man is, as the potter’s wheel, ever cir¬ 
cling on its pivot.” 104 He denounced all the external marks of holi¬ 
ness, fasts, pilgrimages and penances. He condemned asceticism and 
renunciation of the world. A householder was equally acceptable 
to God as a hermit, and secular business did not stand in the way 
of emancipation. As a matter of fact ascetics and those who had 
renounced the world had nothing to do with Nanak’s religion. His 
religion concerned worldly men who led a family life and earned their 
bread by hard labour. He bitterly censured people who in the garb 
of saintliness went abegging for their food and clothing at the door 
of a householder. Live in the world, but lead a good life, and help 
others to do so, he asserted. Sadh Sangat or Satsang, viz. association 
with virtuous and holy men, would help in achieving this object. 
Work, worship and distribute (Kirt karo, Nam Japo and Wand Ch- 
liako) was his motto. 

In Nanak’s time Indian society was based on caste and was 
divided into countless water-tight compartments. Men were con- 


658 


RELIGION 


sidered high and low on account of their birth and not according 
to their deeds. Equality of human beings was a dream. There 
was no spirit of national unity except feelings of community fellow¬ 
ship. In Nanak’s view, divine love was the criterion to judge whe¬ 
ther a person was good or bad. As the caste system was not based 
on divine love for all, he condemned it. Nanak aimed at creating a 
casteless and classless society, of the modern type of socialist so¬ 
ciety in which all were equal and where one member did not exploit 
the other. Nanak insisted that every Sikh house should serve as 
a place of love and devotion, a true guest house ( Sach Dharmsdla). 
Every Sikh was enjoined to welcome a traveller or a needy person 
and to share his meals and other comforts. Bhai Gurdas says: 
“Wherever the holy feet of Guru Nanak touched, Dharmshalas 
sprang into existence.” 105 

Woman received great consideration from Nanak. She was 
given equal status with man. She was allowed to attend his sermons 
along with men. Purdah was discouraged. Women joined in the cho¬ 
rus in singing hymns. For langar men brought provisions and fuel 
wood, while women cooked food. Men and v/omen both served meals 
to the pangat • Nanak condemned Sati or the custom of self-im¬ 
molation of widows on the pyres of their dead husbands. The Guru 
said: “How can they be called inferior when they give birth to 
great men? Women as well as men share in the grace of God and 
are equally responsible for their actions to Him.” 106 

Guru Nanak called his religion Gurmat or Guru’s wisdom. 
This word occurs in the hymns of Guru NSnak more than two hun¬ 
dred times. His disciples called themselves Sikhs from Sanskrit 
word sishya, meaning a learner or a person who takes spiritual 
lessons from a teacher. The public called them Nanak Panthls, 
Nanak Prastan or Sikhs. 107 The Sikh congregations were called 
Sangat. The places where Sikhs gathered to listen to the Guru’s 
sermons and sing hymns in praise of God were known as Gurd- 
waras. im The community kitchen where all ate without any dis¬ 
tinction was called Langar and the persons eating there formed a 
Pangat. 


(c) Difference from other reform movements 

In certain respects Nanak’s religion differed from other reform 
movements, as of Ramanand, Kabir, Chaitanya and Gorakhnath. 

1. The latter laid stress on fundamentals of Hinduism, believ¬ 
ing that their acceptance would ultimately bring about social re¬ 
adjustment. Sikhism from the very beginning concentrated on 
social reform and repetition of the Name. 


659 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


2. Conception of God in Sikhism is different from that of other 
Bhakti leaders. The Sikh God is Akdlpurkh. He is without body, 
formless and timeless. The other leaders believed in Rama and 
Krishna being incarnations of God. 

3. Sikh religion had no mythology, no traditions and no am¬ 
biguity. It was plain and simple. Believe in one God, have faith 
in the Guru and lead a good life, then success in this world and 
salvation after death are yours. The other reformers mainly con¬ 
cerned themselves with salvation of the soul. 

4. In Sikhism renunciation of the world was prohibited, while 
the other sects advocated it. 

5. No other Bhakti leader dislodged Sanskrit from the posi¬ 
tion of being the sacred language of Hinduism, though they prea¬ 
ched in the local tongue. This factor was mainly responsible for con¬ 
fining Sikh religion to the Punjab as the Punjabi language was not 
understood outside this province. 

(d) Guru Ndnak was a reformer and not a revolutionary 

Some writers like Macauliffe, Bhlai Kahan Singh and Teja Singh 
are of the opinion that Guru Nanak was a revolutionary because he 
tried to destroy all the prevalent religious institutions as well as 
the structure of society of his time. They hold that the Guru’s bit¬ 
terest attack was aimed at the annihilation of caste system, and that 
he tried to build a new society in place of the old one. Payne and 
G. C. Narang are of the view that Nanak belonged to the great 
family of Bhakti leaders. Marking the difference between a re¬ 
former and a revolutionary it may be pointed out that a reformer 
does not adopt an independent path and does not preach destruction. 
He only removes the corruption and abuses which have crept into 
the old institutions in such a way that it does not injure the feelings 
of others. A revolutionary does not care for the sentiments of other 
people. He fearlessly incurs the displeasure of the supporters of old 
institutions and invites vehement opposition to his plans. Nothing 
of the kind happened in case of Nanak. 

(1) Nanak’s denunciation of caste was not revolutionary in 
character. His opposition to caste system was so mild that no Brah¬ 
man or any other high caste Hindu organised any opposition to him. 
On the contrary he was loved by one and all. The reason was that 
nobody objected to his reform scheme and removal of what was harm¬ 
ful to society. Kablr had already denounced it in equally strong 
terms. The German traveller, Baron Hugel, says that the Sikhs 
worship one God, abhor images and reject caste, at least in theory. 109 


660 


RELIGION 


(2) In the same way, Nanak’s denouncement of fasts, penances 
and pilgrimages implied attacks on perversions and not on the basic 
beliefs of Hindu religion. He laid stress on the limited utility of 
the existing institutions and practices. He did not call upon his 
disciples to give up pilgrimages and fasts altogether. He only wanted 
to clarify that such practices and formations had not much to do with 
divine love, and did not serve as a means of salvation. 

(3) Nanak did not deprecate the holy scriptures such as the 
Vedas and the Qur’an. He never questioned the wisdom and phi¬ 
losophy contained in them. He criticised the blind and mechanical 
reading of these texts without realising God through them. “What 
availeth thee to read the Vedas and Puranas? It is like loading a 
donkey with sandal whose perfume he availeth not.” 110 Bhai Gur- 
das declared that the superstitions prevailing at Guru Nanak’s time 
were due to the ignorance of the Vedas by people. 111 

(4) Even the sacred thread was not wholly condemned. He 
denounced the ignorance of the implications of its use, and wearing 
of it only for the sake of form. Muhsin FanI writes that a devoted 
and true disciple of Guru Hargobind, named Sadh, perhaps abbre¬ 
viation of Sadhu Ram, accompanied him from Kabul to Punjab. 
He had the sacred thread on. He tore it off and gave it toi the author 
of the Dablstan to tie up his broken coat belt. 112 According to Mal¬ 
colm, “the family of Govind, proud of their descent, had not laid 
aside the Zunnar, or holy cord, to which they were, as belonging to 
Cshatriya race, entitled.” 113 On one occasion Guru Gobind Singh 
wanted some thread to fasten his sword belt. Day a Singh, the first 
member of the newly created Khalsa, a Khatri of Lahore, broke his 
sacred thread and gave it to the Guru. 114 

(5) Similarly while challenging the predominant position of 
Hindu deities, Nanak did not hold them in any disrespect. He 
simply wanted to show that they were not superior to God. Muhsin 
Fan! says: “Nanak praised Musalmans as well as the avtars and 
gods and goddesses of the Hindus; but he held that all these had 
been created and were not creators, and he denied their incarna¬ 
tion. It is said that he held in his hand the rosary of Muslims and 
wore the sacred thread around his neck.” 115 While it does not ap¬ 
pear probable that Nanak wore it because he freely mixed with 
Muslims in India as well as abroad, his disciples of high caste did 
not completely discard it. 

(6) Malcolm further says that Nanak suggested no change in 
the civil institutions of Hinduism. 116 Nanak did not dictate or even 
preach civil or criminal laws, and no modification was proposed by 
him in the old system then prevalent. 117 Cunningham observes: “He 


661 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


left the progress of his people to the operation of time: for his con¬ 
gregation was too limited, and the state of society too artificial, to 
render it either requisite or possible for him to become a municipal 
law-giver, to subvert the legislation of Manu, or to change the im¬ 
memorial usages of tribes or races.” 118 

It shows that Guru Nanak did not wish to destroy the existing 
institutions of his time. His chief aim was to condemn the form 
which had been substituted for the worship of the True Lord. 
In place of mere ritualism and conventionalism he desired sincere 
love and devotion. He introduced reforms in social customs, in re¬ 
ligious practices, in the toleration of all the religions and in the 
unity of mankind. We may, therefore, conclude that Nanak was a 
true reformer rather than a revolutionary. 

During the last fifteen years or so of his life, Nanak led a settled 
life at Kart'arpur, the present Dera Baba Nanak on the western bank 
of the Ravi. Here the Sangat and Pawgat, the two important insti¬ 
tutions of Sikhism, were organised on a firm basis and functioned 
regularly and punctually. His disciples, though small in number, 
formed a well-knit community. Cunningham says: “He left them 
erect and free, unbiased in mind and unfettered by rules, to become 
an increasing body of truthful worshippers.” 119 He was loved and 
respected both by Hindus and Muslims alike. That is why he was 
called: ' ! 

Guru Nanak Shah faqir, 

Hindu ka Guru aur 
Musalman ka pir. 

Nanak passed away at Kartarpur on 22 September, 1539, at 
the age of seventy. 

(e) Expansion of Sikhism , 1539-1606 

Guru Nanak gave the people of the Punjab an idea which was 
ultimately to mould his followers into a powerful community. It 
naturally required time for constant schooling, under regular guid¬ 
ance. Before his death, he nominated his most devoted and sincerest 
disciple, Bhai Lahna, a Trehan Kshatriya, his successor. Nanak cal¬ 
led Lahna Ang-e-Khud, a limb of his own body, and declared at his 
death that his soul would migrate into the body of Lahna. He came 
to be called Angad. 120 This was a step of far-reaching significance, 
Nanak had rejected the claims of his son Srlchand because he be¬ 
lieved in the nothingness of the world. Nanak himself was a house¬ 
holder, and so was Bhai Lahna. Nanak thereby excluded renun¬ 
ciation of the world from Sikhism and confirmed it as a religion 


662 


RELIGION 



of householders. Further, Guruship in Sikh religion acquired 
a unique status, and provided a living ideal for its fol¬ 
lowers. The life of the Sikhs centred around the personality of 
the Guru which they assimilated and emulated by close personal 
contact with him. 

Guru Angad (1539-1552) shifted from Kartarpur to Khadur in 
Amritsar District situated on the Beas river, in order to avoid the 
impending conflict with Guru Nanak’s sons. He turned his attention 
first to the collection of Guru Nanak’s hymns which were written 
in Lande Mahajani. Guru Angad being the son of a village shop¬ 
keeper knew Lande Mahajani script. It is rather rough and crude 
and cannot easily and properly be deciphered. In it vowel sounds 
are omitted. There was a danger that Guru Nanak’s hymns writ¬ 
ten in Lande Mahajani might be misinterpreted. Guru Angad beauti¬ 
fied the Lande alphabets by givirig them better shape, like the al¬ 
phabets of Dev Nagari script, which was used for Sanskrit. He also 
modified the order of Lande alphabets. The new script came to 
be called Gurmukhi, 121 meaning that it came from the mouth of the 
Guru. It was in this script that Guru Angad wrote the hymns of 
Guru Nanak. 

Following the example of Guru Nanak, the langar was con¬ 
tinued. It was looked after by his wife, and its expenses were 
met out of the offerings made by his Sikhs and other visitors. Guru 
Nanak’s son Srichand had renounced the world, and his disciples who 
practised celibacy and asceticism were termed Udasls. They pro¬ 
fessed to belong to Sikhism, but Guru Angad emphatically declared 
that there was no place for renunciation in Nanak’s teachings as his 
religion concerned householders. He asserted that the followers of 
Srichand had no connection whatsoever with Sikhism. Thus he pre¬ 
served the purity and originality of Sikh religion. 

Guru Angad nominated his 73-year-old devout disciple, Amar 
Das, a Bhalla Kshatriya, his successor, who held this office from 
1552 to 1574. Guru Amar Das established the practice of obliging 
all visitors to partake of food in his free kitchen before seeing him, 
thus regularising the system of interdining (Pahle pangat pichhe 
sang at ). 122 The Sikh tradition says that Emperor Akbar visited the 
Guru and was so much impressed by the spirit of service and devo¬ 
tion among the Sikhs that he granted a few villages revenue-free for 
the support of the langar. Amar Das sanctified human life by de¬ 
claring against torturing the body and committing Sati. He also de¬ 
nounced purdah system prevailing among womenfolk. He invited his 
followers to gather in a general body twice a year on the days of 
Baisakhi and Diwali in April and October-November, obviously to 


663 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


enable them to fraternise with one another. Guru Amar Das made 
a departure from previous practice in appointing his successor. 
Hitherto the Guruship had been on a non-family basis. But the 
Guru conferred the Guruship on his son-in-law Ram Das and his 
descendants, thereby making Guruship hereditary. The claims of 
his two sons were turned down. 

Guru Ram Das (1574-1581), added to the solidarity of the grow¬ 
ing community by providing it with a sacred tank to which he gave 
the name of Amritsar (the tank of nectar). 123 Before his death Guru 
Ram Das nominated his youngest son Arjun Mai 124 his successor 
against the protests of his eldest son Prithichand. 

Guru Arjun, (1581-1606), fifth in succession, born on 15 April, 
1563, was an original thinker, illustrious poet, practical philosopher, 
great organiser, eminent statesman and the first martyr to faith. 
He called upon sangatias to collect offerings from the Sikhs at the 
rate of one-tenth of their income and upgraded them as Masands or 
nobles. 115 This proved a profitable source of income to meet the 
enormous expenditure of the Guru’s building plans and made the 
Sikhs accustomed to submit to regular discipline. 

To inspire the minds of his disciples with the grandeur and 
glory of the new religion Guru Arjun began to live in an aristo¬ 
cratic style. He erected ‘‘lofty buildings” 126 at Amritsar, wore 
rich clothes, kept fine horses procured from Central Asia and some 
elephants, and maintained retainers in attendance. The great 
Mughul Emperor Akbar visited him at Amritsar and showered 
praise on him. 

But the most valuable achievement of Guru Arjun was the com¬ 
pilation of a holy book for the Sikhs known as Adi Granth and 
popularly called Granth Sahib or Guru Granth. The Guru wished 
to lay down the exact hymns to be sung and correct rituals to be 
performed by the Sikhs. He also desired to raise the status of 
Sikhism from a sect to a religion. This object could be attained by 
providing the Sikhs with holy scriptures of their own like the Vedas, 
the Bible and the Qur’an. He therefore decided to record the hymns 
of all the Gurus in the form of a book. 

The Granth, written in verse in Gurmukhi script, was completed 
in 1604. It contained 974 hymns of Guru Nanak, 62 of Guru Angad, 
907 of Guru Amar Das, 672 of Guru Ram Das, 2218 and 116 Shabads 
of Guru Arjun, including his famous Sukhmani or Psalm of Peace, 
sayings of 16 Bhaktas both Hindu and Muslim such as Farid, Kablr, 
Namdev, Dhanna, Surdas, Pipa and Ramanand, and songs of min¬ 
strels including those of Mardana, Satta and Balwand. One hundred 


664 


RELIGION 


and fifteen hymns of Guru Tegh Bahadur and one verse of Guru 
Gobind Singh were added later. The discourses of Guru Nanak as 
Japji, Sodar and Kirti Sola were given in the beginning. 

The compilation of the Adi Granth formed an important land¬ 
mark in the history of the Sikhs. It became the sacred book of 
the new faith, and created consciousness among the Sikhs of their 
being a separate community. It served as a source of divine 
wisdom, felicity and bliss. Its fascinating hymns chanted in deep 
reverence and devotion inspired the minds of listeners to lofty 
ideas of plain living and high thinking. The Granth serves as the 
symbolic representation of the Gurus. 

The subsequent history of Sikhism, ending in its great trans¬ 
formation under Guru Govind Singh (1675-1708) has been dealt 
with in Chapter XI. 


III. ISLAM 

We have already seen how by the end of the 15th century 
Sufi saints had established their centres ( Zdwiyas ) in various parts 
of the country and how they, especially the saints of the Chishtiya 
order, had succeeded in gaining large number of adherents among 
the Muslim masses. 

Historically, Sufism was a religious system which in the course 
of its development had imbibed several beliefs which are essen¬ 
tially of Hindu origin and which, in one form or another, were al¬ 
ready familiar to the Hindus and the majority of the Indian Muslims 
converted from Hinduism, who came into contact with the great 
Sufi teachers. It is not strange, therefore, that in the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries it came to be a common practice with the bulk 
of the Indian Muslims to be attached to some religious preceptor, 
usually a Sufi, just as the Hindus considered the guidance of a, Guru 
to be essential for one's spiritual salvation, so that almost every re¬ 
ligious-minded Muslim linked himself up with one Sufi Silsila 
(chain) or another as a sine qua non of respectability and religious 
awareness. 127 

It must not, however, be supposed that the Sufis were having it 
all their own way throughout these two centuries. The primal strife 
between the SharVat (Muslim Law) and the Tariqat Sufism) which 
started in the lands where Sufism first made its appearance, was 
very much in evidence in India also. The custodians of the Law, 
the ‘Ulema, usually attached to the royal court or holding lucrative 
posts as Muftis (Legal Advisers) and Qazls (Judges) in provincial 


665 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


towns, were actively hostile towards any religious movement which, 
in their opinion, was calculated to mar the pristine purity of Islam 
and to open a way towards reconciliation between kufr (infidelity) 
and imdn (faith). How far their hostility was actuated by a sincere 
religious zeal or by worldly motives, is open to doubt, but the fact 
remains that they often exercised a strong influence upon their 
royal masters and lost no opportunity of cruelly persecuting all 
those who were accused of the slightest deviation from the orthodox 
belief. There were, moreover, occasional popular movements of a 
fanatical type led by religious zealots styling themselves as reform¬ 
ers or renovators of the Muslim faith, which succeeded in doing 
a lot of mischief before they were suppressed and rendered inno¬ 
cuous. Some of these leaders took advantage of the common Mus¬ 
lim belief, originally Shiahite but generally accepted by the Sunnis 
also, of the re-appearance of the Hidden Imam, al-Mahdi, who will 
lead back the erring adherents of Islam to the path of virtue and 
piety, and fighting the forces of disbelief and heresy, re-establish the 
kingdom of God on this earth. One such pretender was Syed 
Mohammad of Jaunpur, to whom a passing reference has been made 
in an earlier chapter 128 and who succeeded in winning over quite a 
large number of followers, some of them well-placed in life and 
holding responsible offices. 129 The fact that his appearance almost 
synchronised with the unifying movement started by some of the 
Indian spiritual leaders, is significant and illustrates the existence 
side by side among the Indian Muslims, as among those of other 
countries, of two cross currents of thought, one leading towards 
tolerance and sympathetic compromise and the other heading to¬ 
wards bigotry and puritanic aloofness. It was chiefly due to this 
that the Mahdawi movement remained confined to a small section 
of the Muslims only and had almost fizzled out by the time the 
greatest of the Mughul Emperors, Akbar, came to the throne, al¬ 
though some remants of the Mahdi’s followers lingered on in dif¬ 
ferent parts of the country, one of whom, Shaikh ‘Ala’I, was scourg¬ 
ed by Makhdumal Mulk, 130 and died as a result of the punishment 
inflicted upon him. 

The religious life of the Indian Muslims was agitated not only 
by periodic outbursts of puritanism directed mostly against any 
tendency that smacked of Hinduising Islam, but also by the Shiah- 
Sunnl differences which became accentuated after the establish¬ 
ment of the Mughul rule. Babur, the founder of the Mughul em¬ 
pire in India, was a devout Sunni who had been deeply influenced 
by the teachings of a Transoxanian saint, ‘Ubaidullah Abrar, 131 but 
was, at the same time, remarkably tolerant towards the Shiah faith, 


666 


RELIGION 


and his cortege contained several notable Shiahites who had served 
him faithfully during all his hectic career. The story that his son 
and successor, Humayun, was persuaded by the Shah of Iran, Tah- 
masp Safawl, with whom he had sought refuge after his flight from 
India, to accept the Shiah faith, is probably a myth; 132 yet there can 
be no doubt that some of his most loyal servants who accompanied 
him back to India and helped him in regaining his lost throne were 
Shiahites, the most prominent among them being Bairam Khan, a 
scholar and soldier of unique talents. The more or less friendly re¬ 
lations that continued to prevail between the Mughul Emperors 
coming after Humayun and the Iranian Shahs of the Safawl dynasty, 
encouraged further immigration of Shiahite Iranians into India where 
they were cordially received by their kinsfolk and countrymen al¬ 
ready comfortably settled in the capital and other important towns. 
The result of this continuous inflow from Iran was a remarkable Per- 
sianization of the Mughul court—a phenomenon which on the whole 
helped in raising the cultural level of the higher strata of the Muslim 
society of India. But another result, which was not so wholesome, 
was the intensification of the differences between the Sunni and 
Shiah communities and there has never been a complete reconcilia¬ 
tion between the two Muslim sects. That their differences have not 
very often resulted in blood-shed and violence, has been mainly due 
to the fact that the Shiahites in India formed a very small minority 
and have, consequently, refrained usually from any show of active 
hostility towards the Sunnis, who have had, more often than not, the 
backing of the Muslim rulers, the majority of whom were of Sunnite 
religion. 

When, therefore, Akbar acceded to the throne of his father, 
he was faced with a situation which was not at all pleasant to his 
peaceful nature and which, moreover, was fraught with a grave 
danger of inter-communal strife on a large scale and the disintegra¬ 
tion of the empire as a consequence. There were on the one hand 
the bigoted Sunni ‘Ulema represented by the Shaikhul Islam, Makh- 
dum al-Mulk, and the Sadar-us-Sudur (Supreme Judge) Abdum-Nabl, 
both of whom had dominated the state policy to a considerable ex¬ 
tent during the Surl period and who had continued to maintain their 
privileged position under Humayun and Akbar. As custodians of 
the Law, their verdict was looked upon as final on all religious and 
social matters, and the young emperor, who had not had the advan¬ 
tage of liberal education himself, had perforce to seek their guid¬ 
ance and to abide by their decisions during the early years of his 
reign. Any show of open hostility towards them might have cost 
him the support of a large and powerful section of the orthodox 


667 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Muslim community, a risk which he could ill afford to take at that 
stage. On the other hand, the Sufis of the Chishtiya school had 
been gradually losing their hold on the minds of the influential 
Muslims ever since the death of Khwaja Nizam-ud-dm Auliya of 
Delhi who might be regarded as the last of the great mystic saints of 
India, and consequently their restraining and chastening influence 
was no longer there to counter the bigotry of the Sunni ‘Ulema. 
The greatest representative of that school in Akbar’s time was 
Shaikh Salim Chishti for whom, as is well-known, Akbar had a 
great regard, but he was not a man of the same calibre as some 
of his illustrious predecessors had been and does not appear to have 
wielded any great influence in the Delhi or Agra court circles. The 
emperor on his part was deeply conscious of his own duties as a 
ruler and realised full well that a certain amount of harmony among 
the various religious communities living in this vast country was 
essential for effective administration, and that could only be brought 
about by curbing fanaticism and intolerance in whatever form they 
might make their appearance. For a time he felt himself to be help¬ 
less, but when the high-handed actions of the ‘Ulema, taking advan¬ 
tage of his lenience, began to exceed all limits, he had to take cour- 
age in both hands and to adopt effective measures to dislodge them 
from their exalted positions. He had, moreover, become thoroughly 
disillusioned about the personal characters of these ‘Ulema and dis¬ 
gusted by their petty squabbles springing more out of mean, worldly 
motives than religious or moral considerations, a demonstration of 
which they used to give in the weekly gatherings in the ‘Ibadat Khana 
at Fathpur SikrI, so fondly erected by Akbar for his moral and spirit¬ 
ual edification, to which reference has been made above (pp. 134-5). 

The second and a bolder step taken by the emperor, now in 
open revolt against the ‘Ulema, was to declare himself to be the 
spiritual as well as the secular head of the State and to be authoris¬ 
ed in his own person to make any such changes in the Law (Shari'at) 
as he deemed to be in conformity with the general welfare of his 
subjects. This act of Akbar’s has a strangely remarkable resem¬ 
blance to what an almost contemporary western ruler, Henry the 
Eighth of England, had done in order to free himself from the over¬ 
bearing tutelage of the Church of Rome. Scriptural authority was, 
however, needed for this drastic measure, which was readily sup¬ 
plied by Shaikh Mubarak, who brought to the emperor’s notice 
certain Qur’anic verses and traditions of the Prophet sanctioning 
such powers for a Muslim ruler. A manifesto was consequently 
prepared by the Shaikh and duly signed by several jurists elevat¬ 
ing the emperor to the rank of a “Mujtahid of his time” ( Mujtahid - 


668 


RELIGION 


i-‘Asr). 133 Those who protested were ruthlessly suppressed and in 
several cases executed. 134 

The comparative ease with which Akbar could adopt these 
drastic measures, emboldened him to advance a step further. This 
was the promulgation of a new religion based on a four-fold path 
of renunciation, 135 called the Din-i-Ildht in which the emperor ap¬ 
peared as not only a prophet but an “ avatar '’ of God himself to 
whom all homage was due and before whom every one should pros¬ 
trate himself exclaiming all the while “Allahu Akbar” a form of 
greeting which may mean “Allah is Great” as well as “Akbar is 
Allah”. 136 Muslim historians generally have accused Shaikh Mubarak 
and his sons, FaizI and Abu-T-Fazl—particularly the latter—of being 
Akbar’s evil genius responsible for misleading him from the path of 
rectitude. But this charge is probably not substantiated by facts. 
There can be little doubt that Abu-’l-Fazl helped and abetted the 
emperor in his rebellion against the ‘Ulema at whose hands he and 
his father had suffered grievously, but the idea of founding a new 
religion would seem to be Akbar’s own, as by its help he sought to 
secure that religious unity in his dominions which was so dear to his 
heart. The Dm-i-Ildhi, however, remained little more than a freak 
and failed to exert any influence on the popular mind. Some of 
Akbar’s closest and most devoted associates flatly refused to accept 
the new religion, notable among them being his foster-brother, 
Khan-i-A‘zam Mlrza ‘Aziz and Raja Man Singh. r37 The latter, when 
asked by Akbar to be converted as a disciple replied with character¬ 
istic candour and boldness: “Sire, if disciplehood means loyalty, I 
have already given ample proof of it. If, however, it means religion, 
I am a Hindu and can embrace Islam if you so desire. I know of no 
other path except these two which I might adopt.” 138 Protests against 
these innovations were also made by some sincere well-wishers of 
the emperor who considered the steps taken by him to be nothing 
short of heresy and feared not only for his spiritual salvation but 
also for the welfare of the Muslims in India generally. But the em¬ 
peror stuck to his own ideas of a cosmopolitan religion till his last 
days, although it would be too much to suppose, as certain modern 
historians have done, that he had definitely renounced Islam. 139 On 
the other hand there is evidence to show that he died a Muslim and 
devoutly recited the ‘Kalima’ before he breathed his last. 140 

Akbar’s innovations did not, as we have said above, produce 
any wide repercussions in the religious life of the Indian Muslims 
since he made no attempt to propagate his new religion among the 
masses, but some of them did affect their social customs, such as 
the sanctioning of marriages with non-Muslims, 141 the legalizing of 


669 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


brothels, the banning of cow slaughter, and the permission to shave 
beards. 142 That these measures which must have been hateful to 
the pious Muslims did not produce any general rising against him 
was certainly due to his statesmanship and the loyal support of 
his nobles, both Hindus and Muslims. News of what was happen¬ 
ing in India reached the neighbouring Muslim countries also and 
evoked protests from their rulers, but Abu-’l-Fazl, who was in 
charge of Akbar’s foreign diplomatic correspondence, set their 
minds at rest—or at least tried to do so—by skilful and ingenious 
interpretations of the emperor’s objectionable edicts, thus prevent¬ 
ing any open breach of friendly relations. 143 According to Abu-’l- 
Fazl’s explanation, the emperor claimed neither to be a prophet 
nor an incarnation of God, but he was only a “mujaddid”, (reli¬ 
gious reformer) and according to certain Apostolic tradition such a 
reformer was expected to appear towards the end of the first millen¬ 
nium after the Hijra. 144 In fairness to Akbar it must be admitted 
that similar claims had been made by other Muslim Tulers before 
his time, such as the Fatimid caliphs of Morocco and Egypt, and 
even Sultan ‘Ala-ud-dln Khalji of India used to style himself as 
“Khallfatullah” (the Representative or Deputy of God) which was 
one of the titles assumed by Akbar. An echo of the belief in the 
spiritual powers claimed by Akbar, moreover, can be traced even 
in the later Mughul period, for it continued to be a common prac¬ 
tice for the courtiers to address their royal master as “pir—o-mur- 
shid”, titles which have an essentially spiritual or religious signi¬ 
ficance and could properly be used only for a moral and spiritual 
preceptor. It is thus that even the orthodox descendant of Akbar, 
Aurangzlb, has addressed his father Shah Jahan in his letters, and 
the same form of address was popularly used in the days of Baha¬ 
dur Shah II, the last Mughul King of Delhi. 145 

Nor was the emperor alone in taking advantage of the popular 
belief about the appearance of a reformer at the end of the first 
millennium, for about this time there came to India a saintly re¬ 
presentative of the Naqshbandiya Sufi sect, one of whose pupils 
claimed, and is largely acknowledged, to be the “Reformer of the 
Second Millennium” (Mujaddid Alf Thani ). The founder of this 
sect, Khwaja Baha’uddin Naqshband, was born near Bukhara in 
1318 and died in 1389, and his teachings became very popular in 
Turkestan, thanks mainly to the efforts of one of his pupils Khwaja 
‘Ubaidullah al-Ahrar to whom a reference has been made above. 
The saint who introduced the new system in India, Khwaja BaqI 
Billah, settled down in Delhi a few years before Akbar’s death. He, 
however, did not live there long, dying in 1603, at the comparative¬ 
ly young age of 41. It was his pupil, Shaikh Ahmad of Sarhind, 


670 



RELIGION 


popularly known as Imam Rabbani and Mujaddid Alf Than!, 146 who 
continued the teachings of his master and by the force of his great 
personality made them popular in India. He sent his emissaries 
and preachers to the royal camp and succeeded in converting some 
influential courtiers to his own point of view. His activities roused 
the suspicion of Emperor Jahangir specially because he was ac¬ 
cused by some of his opponents of making extravagant spiritual 
claims. 147 He was summoned to the royal court and ordered to 
explain his conduct, and as he was unable to satisfy the emperor, 
the latter ordered him to be incarcerated in the Gwalior fort, where 
he remained for about a year. Later on the emperor pardoned him 
and bestowed upon him a Khil‘at (robe of honour), and he remain¬ 
ed in the royal camp for about four years, travelling with it to 
several places and propagating his new Sufi doctrines. 

The central idea of the Naqshbandl school of Sufism which 
Syed Ahmad represented was to bridge the gulf, as far as possible, 
between orthodoxy and mysticism, in other words to purge the 
Sufistic discipline of all such beliefs and practices which Islam did 
not sanction or which in some cases were actually repugnant to 
its spirit. Thus the new system rigidly banned the holding of pan¬ 
theistic beliefs, the listening to music ( samd c ) as a means of attain¬ 
ing spiritual ecstasy, the keeping of long vigils (chilla and mura- 
qaba), the loud and prolonged repetition of certain religious for¬ 
mulas ( zikr ), the big concourses of men and women at the shrines 
of saints ( Urs ) and the practice of making vows and offerings in 
the name of these saints for the achievement of worldly ends (nazr 
and nayaz). We find Syed Ahmad, therefore, waging a relentless 
crusade against all these things, as they had in his opinion a de¬ 
moralising effect and corrupted the religious beliefs of the Muslim 
masses, and, paradoxically enough, while making apparently fan¬ 
tastic claims about his own spiritual trances, rigidly enjoining con¬ 
formity with the orthodox belief and practice upon his followers. 

In addition to reforming Indian Sufism, a second task to which 
Syed Ahmad devoted himself with characteristic energy was to 
wean the Indian Muslims of certain social customs and practices 
which they had borrowed from their Hindu neighbours, and to raise 
up their moral outlook and social status generally. It pained him 
to see the Muslim converts still adhering to some of their old un* 
Islamic ways as much as to find that in spite of the Muslim rule in 
this country, the Muslims were in some spheres of life actually in 
an inferior position and were deprived of their legitimate rights and 
privileges, religious or otherwise, due to the very lenient policy of 


671 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


the rulers towards the non-Muslims. He was a bitter critic of the 
indulgence shown in this respect by Akbar, although it would be 
difficult to maintain, as Maulana Azad has done, that he was respon¬ 
sible for uprooting the heresy the seeds of which had been sown 
by that monarch. 148 He advocated a firm and strong attitude to¬ 
wards! the Hindus in order to make them realise that they could not 
lord it over the Muslims inspite of their subordinate position, and 
may on the whole be described as an irreconcilable opponent of all 
attempts at Hindu-Muslim unification or rapprochement whether re¬ 
ligious or social. He insisted on the necessity of the presence among 
Muslims of a supreme religious leader at all times who may keep 
their religion free from the dross of shirk and ilhad (polytheism and 
heresy), and with this end in view developed the theory of qayyu- 
miyat, i.e. the existence of a qayyum (sustainer) in the world. The 
qayyum of his conception was, however, much more than a reformer; 
he was, according to some descriptions given by his disciples, a sort 
of agent plenipotentiary of God on this earth who looked after 
and actually controlled all that happened here. The qayyum, there¬ 
fore, was possessed of the same, or practically the same powers as 
the functionary in Sufi hierarchy usually called the Qutbul Aqtdb 
(Pole of the Poles). It is needless to say that his disciples natural¬ 
ly regarded him as the First Qayyum, while three other great tea¬ 
chers of the school, namely Syed Ahmad’s son, Khwaja Mohammad 
Ma‘sum, Khwaja Mohammad Naqshband, and Khwaja Mohammad 
Zubair have been accorded the same exalted position after him. 

It will be clear from what has been said that Syed Ahmad start¬ 
ed a reactionary religious movement undoing much of the work of 
communal reconciliation accomplished by the Chishtiya saints. He 
would even appear to have influenced Emperor Jahangir to a certain 
extent, inspite of the latter’s gentle temperament and tolerant dis¬ 
position. 149 But whatever one may think of his uncompromising atti¬ 
tude towards non-Muslims, there cohld be no doubt that he was a 
sincere and zealous Muslim and strove with all the means at his dis¬ 
posal for their worldly welfare and spiritual salvation. Yet his in¬ 
fluence on the popular Muslim mind apparently waned soon after his 
death, for already in the days of Shah Jahan, himself a reputedly or¬ 
thodox Muslim, the process of rapprochement had re-started and the 
emperor’s eldest son, Dara Shukoh, and his daughter Jahan Ara, be¬ 
came ardent disciples of a saint of the Qadirfya school from Persia, 
Mulla Shah, who was noted for his religious tolerance. Dara Shukoh, 
as a matter of fact, was an ardent champion of Hindu-Muslim unity 
and hobnobbed with Hindu Yogis and Pandits as freely as he did 
with the Muslim mystics and scholars. One of his associates 


672 


RELIGION 


(Munshis, to be more exact) was Chandra Bhan Brahman, who has 
written some very fine Persian verses in a mystic strain and was 
the recipient of special favours from his princely master. The Naq- 
shbandiya school, as a matter of fact, failed to attract many Muslims 
to its fold at any time, although several silsilas of this sect survive 
up to this day either independently or merged with silsilas of other 
schools. It is not unusual to find the titles Chishti and Naqshbandl 
both together affixed to the names of pious Muslims, while some 
others also add to these the title “Qadiri”. 

The Qadiriya school, 150 which traces its origin to Shaik ‘Abdul 
Qadir of Gilan who lived in Baghdad in the eighth century, was first 
introduced in India during the reign of Emperor Akbar, probably 
by Arab merchants visiting the ports of Surat and Khambayat, and 
received a great fillip due to the advocacy of its principles by ano¬ 
ther very remarkable personality of the Mughul period, namely, 
Shaikh ‘Abdul Haqq of Delhi who was contemporary with Akbar and 
Jahangir and is looked upon as one of the greatest religious scholars 
born in India. He had imbibed the Qadiriya teachings at Uchch in 
Sind which appears to have been a great centre of this particular 
school of thought, and although later on he also enrolled himself 
among the Naqshbandiya, his religious thought and general outlook 
of life seem to have been determined by those teachings. Shaikh 
‘Abdul Haqq’s fame, however, rests not so much on his spiritual at¬ 
tainments, which must have been considerable, but on the invalu¬ 
able contributions made by him to Islamic learning, specially the 
science of Hadlth; and he is the author of several famous works. 
He died in the 16th year of Shahl Jahan’s reign. The Qadiriya school 
continued to be popular among the better educated Muslims due to 
the teachings of two others of its famous exponents in India, one of 
whom was Mir Mohammad, popularly known as Mian Mir, of Lahore, 
and the other was Mulla Shah of Badakshlan, who settled down in 
Kashmir and used to visit Lahore frequently to pay his respects to 
his teacher, Mian Mir. It was in Kashmir that Prince Dara Shukoh 
and his sister, Jahan Ara, met the saint in 1639, and became his dis¬ 
ciples. 

With the accession of Auranfgzib to the throne of Delhi, the 
Sufi movement in India seems to have received a definite set-back. 
This stern monarch, himself an orthodox and pious Muslim, was in¬ 
tolerant of heresy in any form and was always prompt in punishing 
drastically any open breach of the Law ( Shari'at ). This, coupled 
with a general intellectual decline, was certainly responsible for any 
new religious ideas being developed in the 17th century in Mhslim 
India. Aurangzib’s reign had heralded the triumph of SharVat 

673 

M.E.—43 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


against tarlqat. The emphasis was now on the codification and 
clarification of the Muslim law as expounded by the great jurists, 
and any attempt at original thinking was not only discountenanced 
but actively opposed. 151 It was sought to confine Islam to narrow 
channels and to deprive it of all elasticity of belief, thus creating 
an atmosphere of religious bigotry and intolerance. There can be 
little doubt that Aurangzib’s policy was dictated by laudable moral 
ideals and he worked sincerely for rooting out corruption and dis¬ 
honesty both in religious belief and worldly conduct, but it is equal¬ 
ly true that he did not achieve any remarkable success in his efforts. 
On the other hand he succeeded in intensifying mutual distrust 
among the various sections of his subjects without bringing about 
any general moral uplift among the Muslims. The banning of wine 
and music had been tried before his time as a means of stamping 
out moral delinquency and had failed to achieve the desired object. 
Some of his officials were thoroughly corrupt, 152 and he was pain¬ 
fully conscious of this fact and bitterly realised the failure of his 
mission at the end of his long reign. 


To sum up this brief survey of the religious life of the Indian 
Muslims during the Mughul period, we might say that on the whole 
this period marked the decline of the pantheistic form of Sufism 
and that the moderate schools, like the Naqshbandiya and Qadiriya 
became more popular than the Chishtiya school which had exer¬ 
cised undisputed sway over the minds of the devout Muslims in 
the preceding period. This was partly due to the fact that no out¬ 
standing saint of the Chishtiya sect appeared in India during this 
period and partly to the emergence of certain bitter critics of that 


sect who, helped by the prevalent political and social conditions, 
succeeded in attracting a large number of followers. Religious 
divines and scholars continued to hold lucrative posts as qazis and 
muftis, but their power over their royal masters suffered a sharp 
decline, due to their worldly greed and cupidity combined with 
senseless bigotry and parochialism. The accounts given by con¬ 
temporary historians of the fabulous wealth which some of them 
managed to amass by all sorts of questionable means and their 
high-handed actions in dealing with those who had the temerity 
to differ from them in religious matters, clearly show the extent 
of their moral turpitude, so that it was they themselves who were 
really responsible for their downfall and not any radical change of 
attitude towards religion on the part of the rulers or their subjects. 


1. A. Govindacharya, The Aspadasa Bhedas between the Tengalais and the Vada- 
galais in the J.R.A.S. 1910, pp. 1103 ff.; J.B.B.R.A.S. X3QV. pp. 126ff.; I.A. 

AIll. pp. 252 ft. 

2. Sewell, Lists II C.P. No. 75, p. 9. 

3. Hari-bhakti Vildsa, Ch. V, pp. 491-93, (Berhampore ed.). 


674 




RELIGION 


4. Bhagavata , IV. 21.12 and Sanatana Gosvamin’s commentary on the 
Hari-bhakti Vilasa, V. 223. 

5. Brah ma - V aivarta-P urdua* Janmakhanda, Ch.) 21 as quoted in the SabdaA 
Kalpa-druma, pp. 1514-15 which also cites the authority of the Padma - 
Purana, Pdtdlkhanda, Ch. XI showing that the &udras adhering to the Vedic 
path attain salvation by worshipping the &alagrama £ila. 

6. Narahari Chakravarti, Bhakti-ratnakara (Berhampore ed.), p. 30. 

7. Sir Charles N.E. Eliot, Hinduism in Assam in J.R.A.S., 1010, pp. 1160 ff. 

8. Rdmacharita-mdnasa, Uttarakdnda, p. 483 (Nagari Pracharini Sabha ed.). 

9. 6udra Kamalakara, pp. 13-14. 

10. Raghunandana, Suddhitattva, pp. 624-25 (Bangabasi ed.). 

11. Agastya Samhita, XIII.46. 

12. Bhabatosh Bhattacharya, Raghunandana’s Indebtedness to his predecessors, 
J.A.S., XIX, 1953, pp. 174-175. 

13. £uddhitattva (Bangabasi ed.), pp. 166-67. 

14. Sudra Kamaldkara quoted by P.V. Kane in the History of Dharmasastras, II, 
p. 381. 

15. Sarasvati Vildsa, p. 478 (University of Mysore ed.). 

16. Rdfadharma-Kaustubha, XII. 63 (Gaekwad Oriental series). 

17. Suddhitattva, p. 163. 

18.i K.S. Thackarey, Grapnanyacha Sadyanta Itihasa , pp. 154-55. 

19. Gautamiya Tantra Ch. I; Sir John Woodroffe, Shakti and Shdkta, pp. 5105-6. 

20. Atal Behari Ghosh, The Spirit and Culture of the Tantras in the Cultural 
Heritage of India, IV, p. 248. 

21. Dabistan (London, 1901 ed,), p. 247. 

22. Ibid, II. pp. 154, 164 (1833 ed.) quoted by Woodroffe, Op. Cit. p. 584. 

22a. Chintaharan Chakravarty, The Tantras—Studies on their religion and litera¬ 
ture, pp. 67-68. 

23. Tantrasdra , p. 155. 

24. D.C. Sircar, The Sakta Pithas , pp. 74-80. 

25. Sanatana Gosvamin, Brihat Bhdgavatamrta, II. 1. 36-37. 

26. Sanatana Gosvamin, Vaishnava-toshani commentary on the Bhagavata, X. 55.1. 

27. Ibid., X.5.1-2 and X.39.37. 

28. Hari-bhakti Vildsa, I. 58, 192, 236, 237, 432-35, 462, 913, 1146-50, 1208, 1344; 
II.9-10; III.4, 220-23; IV. 100-102. 

29. Ibid., I. 60-62, 71-73, 377-8; IV.39-40, 46-49, 58-60. 

30. Ibid., 1.85. 

31. Ibid., I. 126, 136, 407, 410, 451. 

32. Ibid., II. 16-17. 

33). D.C. Sircar, The Sdkta Pithas, p. 23, and Appendix V. 

34. Kavikankana Chandl—Introductory portion, Dig-Vandana (Bangabasi ed.). 

35. Ibid., p. 306. See for example, merits of the Kali age towards the end of 
the book. 

36. Chintaharan Chakravarty, Op. Cit., p. 75. 

37. Dabistan, (1901 ed.), p. 253. 

38. Purchas, Pilgrims , X. pp. 208-09. 

39. Gait, History of Assam (2nd Ed. p. 59). 

40. J.R.A.S., 1910, p. 1163. 

41. The date of his birth is given as 1449 A.D. by K. L. Barua ( Early History of 
Kdmarupa, p. 308), as one of the arguments to prove that jlahkaradeva 
could not have been a follower of Chaitanya. This date was doubted by 
Gait who thought it was thirty or forty years too early. His view agrees 
with the date 1487 given by R.M. Nath (The Background of Assamese Cul¬ 
ture, p. 54) and is supported by the fact, admitted by Barua, that &ankara- 
deva* was a contemporary of king Naranarayana of Cooch Behar whose rule, 
as mentioned above, falls between A.D. 1555 and 1587, the dates furnished 
respectively by the coins of himself and of his successor. 

41a. &ankaradeva relates the history of this family in his Assamese Bhagavata, 
Dasama Skandha, verses 12001 and 12002. 

42. Namaghosha (ed. by Haramohon Das). 

43. Eliot, Charles N.E.: Hinduism in Assam, J.R.A.S., 1910, p. 1169. 

44. Namaghosha, verses 872 and 874. 

45. Chaitanya-Bhdgavata , II. 22, p. 318 (ed. Atul Krishna GosvamI). 

46. Ibid., III. 4., p. 460. 

47. Ibid., II. 23, p. 341 and II. 24, p. 346. 

675 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


48. Bhaktiratnakara, p. 581. 

49. Prema-vilasa, ch. xvi. 

50. Buchanan Hamilton: Purnea Report, p. 273. 

51. Majumdar, Bimanbehari: Chaitanya Chariter Upadana, (2nd. ed.), p. 567. 

52. Majumdar, R.C.: Kcumala Lectures, p. 124. 

53. Calcutta University Ms. No. 1144, and Basu, Manindra Mohan: Post-Chaitanya 
Sahajiya cult of Bengal. 

54. Dimock, Edward C. (Jr.): The Place of the Hidden Moon-Erotic Mysticism 
in the Vaishnava Sahajiya Cult of Bengal (University of Chicago, 1966). 

55. Rasika-mahgala, Bk. I, ch. Ill, p. 13. 

56. Sunya-samhita, ch. I. 

57. Sivakaradasa: Jagannatha-charitdmrita, ch. III. 

58. Haridasa Dasa: Gaudiya Vaishnava Abhidhana, Vol. II, p. 1241. 

59. Rasika-mahgala, p. 121. 

60. Chaurdsi Vaishnavoh ki varta (Agrawala Press), p. 372. 

61. Vallabhacharya: Sodasa-Grantha (Bombay ed.) Siddhanta muktavali, verse I. 

62. Vitthalanath: Svdmi-stotra and Svaminyashtaka. 

63. Mittal, Prabhudayal: Ashta-chhapa-parichaya, p. 33. 

64., S.M. Pandey and N. Zide’s article on Surdas in Krsna, Myths, Rites and 
Attitudes, ed< by Milton Senger (University of Hawaii, 1966), p. 188. 

65. Ibid., p. 185. 

66. Sursugar 2305. 

67. Hita Harivamsa’s Rddhd-sudha-nidhi, verse 76. 

68. Farquhar, J.N.: Outline of the Religious Literature of India, p. 318. 

69. Dabistan-uLMajhab (Walter Dunne Publication, Washington, 1901), p. 262. 

70. Growse, F.S. on SwamI Haridas, J.A^S.B., xlv, pt. I (1876); pp. 312 ff. 

71. Dabistan, p. 263. 

72. Ibid., p. 283. 

73. Mahabharata (Poona ed.), XII. 288.20, which states: Na Manusha-sreshtha- 
taram kihchit. 

74. Khare, G.H. in his Sri Vitthal and Pandhdrpur states that Jnanesvara was 
neither a devotee of Vitthala nor the founder of the Varakarl sect. 

75., Natesan: Shri Ekandth, p. 30. 

76. Edwards, J.F.: The Life and Teachings of Tukaram, p. 134. 

77. Deming, W.S.: Selections from Tukaram, p. 190. 

78. Ibid., pp. 39 and 91. 

79. Abbott, Justin E.: Bahini Bai, a Translation of her Autobiography and 

verses with the Marathi original, p. 1, verses 7-8. 

80. Ibid., pp. 97-98. 

81. Cf. Chaitanya’s verse in Rupa Gosvamin’s Padydvali, No. 337 (ed. S.K. De) 

with Tukaram’s abhahga translated by Macnicol: Psalms of the Maratha 

Saints, XVIII. 

82. Pangarkar, L.R.: Sri Tuloaramache Charitra (Poona, 1920), pp. 332-334. 

83. Ddsabodh, ch. XIV., sec. 7. 

84. Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. IX, pt. I, pp. 1-3. 

85. Thoothi, N.A.: The Vaishnavas of Gujarat, p. 234. 

86. Karmarkar, A.P.: Mystic Teachings of the Haridasas of Karnataka, p. 10. 

87. Rice, Edward P.: A History of Canarese Literature, p. 59. 

88. The Journal of the Music Academy, Madras, Vol. XIII, p. 67. 

89. Manucci: Storia de Mogor, II, p. 135. 

90. Francis Buchanan: Journey from Madras through the countries of Mysore, 
Canara and Malabar, in, p. 468. 

91. Chaitanya-charitdmrita, II. 18. Bijul Khan has been identified with the foster- 
of India), Vol. IV, p. 390. 

son of Bihar Khan Afghan, the chieftain of Kalinjar, by Pramatha Chaudhuri: 
Nana Charcha, pp. 111-127. 

92. Dabistan, p. 264. 

93. Ibid., p. 247. 

94. Ibid,, p. 266. 

95. Mitra, Rajendralal: Journal of the Bengal Asiatic Society, XLI (1) 1877, p. 170. 
A manuscript of the Allah Upanishad is also noticed in Dr. Buhler’s Catalogue 
of Sanskrit Manuscripts from Gujarat, p. 44. 

96. Wilson, H.H.: Religious Sects of the Hindus (ed. 1958), p. 196. 

97. Sen, Kshitimohon: The Medieval Mystics of North India (Cultural Heritage 
of India, Vol. IV., p. 390). 

98. Dabistan, p. 267. 

99. Selections from the sacred writings of the Sikhs, pp. 77-78. 

676 


RELIGION 


99a. The word Sangat appears in the Adi Granth at numerous places. 

100. Macauliffe, The Sikh Religion, i. 302. 

101. Dr. Trilochan Singh in his Guru Nanak’s Religion on p. 1 in a footnote 
states that the word Gurmat is mentioned in the Adi Granth in the hymn£ of 
Guru Nanak in Ragas Gujri, p. 505, Ramkali, p. 904, Maru, pp. 1008, 1009; 
Basant, p. 1190 and Sarang, p. 1233. 

102. Cunningham, A History of the Sikhs, 40, f.n. 1. 

103. Macauliffe, i, 60. 

104. Rag Asa in the Adi Granth quoted by Cunningham, A History of the Sikhs, 
39. 

105. Bhai Gurdas, Var, i, pauri 27. 

106. Var Asa, xix. 

107. The Dabistan, 223. 

108. The word Gurdwara occurs many a time in Guru Nanak’s hymns such as 
in Asa, p. 351, Suhi, p. 730, Ramkali, pp. 930, 933 and Maru, p. 1015; vide 
Trilochan Singh, Guru Nanak’s Religion, p. 2. 

109 Travels, 283. 

110. M;> cauliffe, vi, 247. 

111. Bhai Gurdas, Var, i, 21. 

112. The Dabistan , Persian, 239. 

113. Sketch of the Sikhs , 67-68, f.n. 

114^ Bhai Santokh Singh, Suraj Prakash, Rut iii, 28. 

115. The Dabistan, Persian, 223. 

116. Sketch, 44, 147. 

117. Ward, The Hindoos, iii, 463. 

118. A History of the Sikhs, 1966 edition, 41-42. 

119. Ibid, 41. 

120. Guru Nanak was so highly pleased with Bhai Lahna’s devotion that he 
observed: “Thou hast performed excessive devotions. Between thee and me 
there is now no difference. None of my Sikhs hath such faith and con¬ 
fidence in me as thou and therefore I love thee most of all. Thou art 
verily Angad, a part of my body. I congratulate thee.” Macauliffe, ii, 9. 

121. Grierson remarks: “The true alphabet of the Punjab is known as the 

Landa or ‘clipped’. It is connected with the Mahajani character of Northern 
India and resembles it in having a very imperfect system of vowel sounds. 
Vowel sounds are frequently omitted.” Linguistic Survey of India, ix, Part 
i, 624. The author remembers a joke in this connection. It is said that a 
banker went to a village to recover his loan. The farmer had ready money 
and wanted to settle the account on the spot. The banker sent a messenger 
with a note in Lande script demanding his bahi or account book. The word 
bahi was misread as bahu and the banker’s wife accompanied the messenger. 

122. Suraj Prakash, i, 30. 

123. “In 1577 he obtained a grant of the site, together with 500 bighas of land 
from the Emperor Akbar on payment of Rs. 700 to the Zamindars of Tung, 
who owned the land”. District Gazetteer of Amritsar, 1883-84. 

124. The Sikhs call him Arjun Dev. Most of the writers mention his name as 
Arjun. The almost contemporary author, Muhsin Fani, names him Arjun 
Mai. The Dabistan, 233. 

125. They also preached, settled disputes and kept the S-ikhs under a regular 
administrative system. The Masands were not paid any salary. They re¬ 
tained a portion of the offerings received by them with the approval of the 
Guru. 

126. The Dabistan, 234. 

127. How essential, according to the common Muslim belief, it was to have a 
spiritual teacher, is manifest from the phrase “be.plr” (without a spiritual 
guide), which came to be a term of strong reproach and abuse, synonymous 
almost with another term, “bad-ma’ash” meaning a rogue or scoundrel. 

128. Cf. Vol. VI, pp. 608, 637. 

129. He is said to have converted several rulers also, notably Osman Khan of 
Gujarat (Jalor) and Nizamul-Mulk of the Deccan (See Tadhkira by Nadwi). 
His two staunch and powerful opponents were Shaikh ‘All Muttaqi (d. 975 
H.) and Tahir b. Muhammad Fatani (of Pattan) (in Gujarat), who was 
eventually killed by his followers in 986 H. while on his way to Emperor 
Akbar’s court where he was proceeding to make complaint against their 

677 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


high-handed actions. He was a learned scholar and a leader of the Bohras 
of Gujarat. For details of his career, see Tadhkira ‘Allama Shaikh Muham¬ 
mad bin Tahir by Abu Zafar NadwI. 

130. Another noted scholar of the period. For him, see Tadhkira (Aziad) pp. 43- 
48. This happened in the days of Salim Surl. 

131. Babur translated into Turkish a didactic poem ( Mathnavi) by this saint, 
known as Risala-i-Walidlya. This translation, a manuscript of which exists 
in the Rampur State Library, was published in the Bengal Asiatic Society 
Journal (Special issue) in 1910. 

132. Badauni (I: 445) says that Humayun was made to read out a prepared do¬ 
cument containing a confession of the Shiah faith. Cf. Jauhar Aftabrahl. 

133. For the text of this cleverly drafted manifesto, see Badauni, II: 271; Cf. Rud- 
i-Kauthar, pp. 32-33. 

134. Among these were Qutbuddln, Akbar’s foster-brother, Shahbaz Khan Kam- 
boh, Mulla Mohammad Yazdl and Muiz-zul Mulk, the last two of whom 
were imprisoned and ultimately done away with. 

135. Renunciation i.e. of property, of life, of honour and of religion. 

136. Mulla Shlrl, a contemporary poet, composed the following satirical couplet on 
this occasion: 

Bdshdh imsal dawd-i-Nubuwat Karda-ast 
Gar Khuda Khwahad pas az sail Khuda Khwdhad Shudan 
(The king has this year claimed prophethood; God willing after a year he 
will become God). See Badauni, II: 309. 

137. Raja Bhagwan Das was another important dissenter. Mirza ‘Aziz, however, 
later on accepted the new cult after his return from Mecca where he had 
been permitted to go on his refusal to accede to Akbar’s request. 

138. Darbdr-i-Akbari, p. 565. 

139. e.g. Sir Wolsley Haig in the Cambridge History of India. 

140. Thomas Roe (according to Rud-i-Kauthar, p. 26 seq.). 

141. This usually took the form of Muslim men marrying non-Muslim women, 
but that in certain cases, especially among the Rajputs, Muslim women were 
married to non-Muslims is proved by what Jahangir says about Kashmir 
(Tuzuk—M emoirs). 

142. Curiously enough,, a Muslim jurist, Mulla Abu Said, a nephew of Khwaja 
Aman of Panipat, is said to have produced a tradition of the Prophet saying 
that the people of paradise will be without beards in support of this sanc¬ 
tion. See Badauni, II: 301 seq. for a detailed account of these un-Islamic 
edicts of the emperor. Note specially the banning of Arabic studies (II: 363) 
and of Islamic sciences (II: 303). 

143. The Uzbek Sultan ‘Abdullah was one of those rulers who protested. 

144. The same belief prompted the compilation of Tarikh-i-Alfi (Alf meaning a 
thousand), a notable historical work of Akbar’s reign, which, however, was 
never completed. See Badauni, II: 318. 

145. It is interesting to note that by thus addressing the monarch,, the courtier 
placed himself in the position of a “murid” (disciple) which is exactly what 
Akbar demanded of those who entered the Dln-i-Ildhl, although a Hindi 
equivalent of the word, i.e. chela , was used for the Arabic word murid. 

146. Reformer of the second millennium. 

147. Shathlyat in Sufi parlance, mainly contained in his letters (Maktubat). One 
of these known as the eleventh letter in which he had described his maqa- 
mat (stations in a spiritual trance) specially roused a bitter controversy and 
alienated some of his fond admirers. 

148. Tadhkira (Azad), p. 239 seq. 

149. See Bazm-i-Timurlya, pp. 166-168. 

150. Two other Sufi schools, the Shattarlya and the Shadhillya, also gained some 
adherents in India about this time, but they never became very popular. 
Followers of the Shadhillya sect are found in Hyderabad, and elsewhere. 

151. This was in accordance with the general orthodox belief that the door of 
ijtihad (exercise of personal discretion) had been closed after the days of 
the great jurists, the founders of the four madh-habs. 

152. Thus QazI ‘Abdul Wahhab, the Chief Judge of Gujarat, in whom Aurangzlb 
had great confidence, is said to have been addicted to wine and left behind 1 
lakh gold coins and 5 lakh rupees in addition to other valuables. (See Rud- 
i-Kauthar, p. 282; Cf. Ma ( athirul Umard ). 


678 


CHAPTER XXI 


SOCIAL CONDITION 

The society and culture during the Mughul Age was not entirely 
new or radically different from the culture of the preceding or suc¬ 
ceeding ages. The Indian culture in all ages has been fundamentally 
the same, and the differences we notice at different times are, gene¬ 
rally speaking, those of detail and not of the essence. So, an attempt 
has been made to describe, under a few major heads, the various 
facets of the society and culture during the period under review. 1 

Dress 

The dress of the poor people of various communities was very 
much alike. Workmen, tillers of the soil and other labourers con¬ 
tented themselves with a cotton langota tied round the waist and 
reaching down to their knees. Babur refers to it in his memoirs. 2 
During winter common people, except paupers, put on small quilt¬ 
ed coats which lasted for years. In northern India even the poor 
put on turbans to protect their head from heat or cold. In the cold 
weather quilted caps were common in some parts of northern India, 
especially in Kashmir and the Punjab. The upper classes spent lavish¬ 
ly on their dress, and wealthy Muhammadans wore both shdlwars 
and breeches or tight trousers. Over their shirts they put on nar¬ 
row waist-coats. The qaba or a long coat coming down to the knees 
was worn as an upper garment. The rich also carried over their 
shoulders shawls of very fine woollen fabric of various colours. It 
was the fashion to tie one’s waist with a scarf of beautiful and costly 
multi-coloured stuffs. Men carried arms and adorned themselves 
with a katdr or a dagger. The Mughul rulers were very particular 
about new fashions and invented many new dresses. Akbar em¬ 
ployed skilled tailors to improve the style of costumes in his ward¬ 
robe. The Ain-i-Akbarl describes eleven types of coats. 3 Father 
Rudolf found Akbar clad in a dhoti of the finest and most delicate 
silk. Monserrate writes about the dress of Akbar: “His Majesty 
wore clothes of silk beautifully embroidered in gold. His Majesty’s 
cloak comes down to his hose and boots cover his ankles completely 
and (he) wears pearls and gold jewellery.” 4 Turbans were the 
common head-wear of all communities,^ those of the Muslims were 
usually white and round-shaped, while those of the Hindus were 
coloured, straight, high and pointed. Stockings were not used by 


679 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


any section of the people. The general style of the shoes was Tur¬ 
kish viz. pointed in front and open above with low heels to be 
easily undone when necessary. The men of taste had their shoes 
made of velvet of several colours or of brocade covered with silk 
leather, and sometimes set rubies and diamonds on the instep of 
their shoes. Ladies had not many varieties of dresses. The com¬ 
mon apparel of the womenfolk was a piece of cloth called ‘sari’ 
wrapped round the middle part of the body and thrown over the 
head and an dngiyd or a small jacket worn round the chest. Breeches 
or shalwdrs and shirts were common among Muhammadan ladies. 
GJidgrd too was popular among them. The rich women put on qabtis 
of fine Kashmir wool. Some of them also used Kashmir shawls 
of the finest quality. Ladies, both Hindu and Muhammadan, covered 
their heads with a dopdtpa of fine cotton, or silk wrought with silver 
or gold threads, according to their means. Muhammadan ladies, 
whenever they moved out, put on white shrouds or burqas. There 
were, of course, exceptions and local variations from the general 
types. 


Toilets 

Hair dyes, recipes for the cure of baldness and the removal of 
hair from the body were known from ancient times and practised 
in medieval age. Soaps, powders and creams had their substitutes 
in ghasul, myrobalans, opatanah , and pounded sandal wood. Soap 
was known and used in India from ancient times. Precious scents 
of diverse kinds were in use. The Ain-i-Akbafl gives a long list of 
scents and their prices. 5 Nur Jahan’s mother prepared a new itar 
from roses and named it itar-i-jahangiri. Abu-’l-Fazl, in the 
Ain-i-Akbari , describes 16 items for a woman’s toilet which include 
bathing, anointing, braiding the hair, decking the crown of her head 
with jewels, sectarian marks of caste after decking with pearls, 
jewels and gold, tinting with lamp-black like collyrium, staining the 
hands, chewing betel leaf and decorating herself with various orna¬ 
ments, as nose-rings, necklaces, and wearing a belt hung with small 
bells, garlands of flowers, etc. Hindu ladies usually tied their hair 
behind their heads. Sometimes they twisted up their hair upon the top 
of the head like a pyramid, sticking gold bodkin in the centre. The 
use of the false hair has also been referred to. 6 Hindu ladies consi¬ 
dered it auspicious to put a vermillion mark and to anoint the part¬ 
ing of their hair. Collyrium was used for the eyes. It was usual 
for high class ladies to use missia for blackening between the teeth 
and antimony for darkening their eye lashes. 7 Indian women fre¬ 
quently used mehidi (henna leaves) to give red colour to their 


680 


SOCIAL CONDITION 


hands and feet. It served as a nail polish to redden their finger 
nails. They reddened their lips by chewing betel-leaf which served 
them as a lip-stick. 


Ornaments 7a 

Women were anxious to adorn, one might say even load, them¬ 
selves with a variety of bulky ornaments. Ladies bedecked every 
limb of their bodies from head to foot with different types of orna¬ 
ments. Abu-’l-Fazl enumerates 37 in his list in the Am-i-Akbari. 
Chank, Mang , Kotbiladar (perhaps the modern Chandraman ), Sekra, 
and Binduli adorned the head and the forehead. Karnphul, Pipal 
Patti, Mor Bhanwar and Bali were the different types of ear-rings. 
Nose-ornaments seemed to have been introduced by Muhammadans. 
Nath and Besar were their different types. Laung or a flower-bud 
—a small stud of single diamond or ruby fixed at the corner of the 
left nostril—enhanced the beauty of the face. Around the neck 
were worn necklaces of gold, pearls, and other precious stones 
which contained five to seven strings of gold beads. The upper 
part of the arms was ornamented with bazubands, and tad. Gajrah 
or Kangan, a bracelet, adorned their wrists. They decorated their 
wrists up to the elbow with bracelets called Churis. Chhudr Ghan- 
tikd and Kati Mekhald were the two varieties of gold belts. Rings 
were worn on toes andi fingers. Jehar served as an ankle ornament. 
Ghunghru were worn between the Payal (ornaments of legs) and 
Jehar (ankle ornament). Bhank and Bichwah were the ornaments 
used for the instep while Anipat decorated big toe. 

As for men, Muslims were usually against ornaments; some 
of them, however, put on amulets. Hindus, on the other hand, 
adorned themselves with ear and finger rings. Rajputs put on brace¬ 
lets as well. All the Mughul Emperors except Aurangzib adorned 
themselves with rich jewellery on important occasions. 

Diet 8 

Khichari 9 was the most popular dish of the common people who 
could ill afford to spend on dainty dishes. Rice formed the chief 
food of the people of the East and South. The Gujaratis preferred 
rice and curd. Jahangir refers to the food of the Kashmiris which 
usually consisted of boiled rice and boiled salted vegetables, 10 chiefly 
a leafy plant called karam. The people of the North, however, 
generally took chappatis of wheat, jowar or bajra. The middle 
classes managed to have three meals a day. The poor, too, managed 
to have light refreshments in the form of some parched pulse or 
other grains between the three regular meals. The upper classes 


681 



THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


invariably used wheat flour, boiled rice and cooked vegetables of 
various sorts. Hindus in general being vegetarians, confined them¬ 
selves to pulses, curd, butter, oil and milk and its several prepara¬ 
tions. They prepared rice, aromatic birinjes and puddings of rice 

mixed with almonds and raisins. On his abstinence days, Jahangir 
would take lazizah, i.e., Khichari, prepared in the Gujarati style. 11 
Abu-’l-Fazl gives a detailed list of various vegetables and meat and 
sweet dishes in the Ain-i-Akbari. 12 

Muhammadans prepared rice and aromatic birinjes as q ahull, 
duzdbiryan, qimah palao, and pudding of rice mixed with almonds 
and raisins and strewn with butter and pepper. Sweet dishes con¬ 
sisted of halwa, sweetmeats, and comfits prepared from refined sugar 
and falpida. 13 An idea of the variety of dishes served at a noble’s 
dinner can be had from the description of Asaf Khan’s banquet to 
Sir Thomas Roe 14 and that of the Governor of Ahmadabad to Man- 
delslo. 15 Mukundarama’s gorgeous description of feasts and veget¬ 
able dishes leaves us in little doubt as to their popularity among the 
upper class Hindus. 16 


Kitchens and Utensils 

The utensils used in Hindu kitchens were all made of brass or 
bronze, while those of the Muhammadans were earthen ware or 
made of copper. The Mulghul kings used gold or silver utensils and 
were fond of precious China and glassware. Aurangzib, however, 
used earthen or copper vessels. Hindus paid great attention to 
cleanliness and a special place called chauka invariably rubbed over 
with cow-dung was reserved for cooking meals, which none was 
allowed to enter with shoes on. Bathing was a pre-requisite before 
meals. Hindus would at the outset put apart a small portion of 
their food as an humble homage to the gods. Akbar used to pu>t 
apart the share of the dervishes before he commenced his meal. 17 

The ordinary people used the leaves of the trees, stitched to¬ 
gether with rushes, as plates. In the case of the Rajas and other 
rich men, food was brought from the kitchen in bowls or vessels of 
silver or gold. Table manners required not to use one’s left hand 
or lick the fingers. Wives did not make it a custom to join their 
husbands at tables, but took meals separately. The kitchen and 
table manners of the Muhammadans were quite simple, though not 
always as clean as those of the Hindus. They were free to cook 
wherever and whenever they liked and eat everything except the 
flesh of swine. A dastarkhwan was spread on the floor and dishes 
arranged thereon. The whole family sat together and partook of 


682 


SOCIAL CONDITION 


the dishes jointly. No napkins were used and the procedure of 
washing was not always adhered to. 

The manner of cooking in the royal kitchen and the process 
of sending in of plates and the measures adopted to check poisoning 
have been elaborately described in the Ain-i-Akbari. ls 

Intoxicants 

Wine, opi'um, bhang and tobacco, were the most common into¬ 
xicants indulged in Mughul times. Betel, tea and coffee were also 
sometimes included in this class. The masses were generally op¬ 
posed to intemperance which was looked upon as a vice and even 
a sin. The strict prohibition enforced by almost all the Mughul 
kings was no less a factor in discouraging the use of wine among 
the people. Severe punishments were inflicted for excessive drink¬ 
ing and disorderly conduct. The nobles, however, indulged in heavy 
drinking and many of them fell victims to alcohol. All the Mughul 
emperors excepting Aurangzib took wine several times a day. 
Babur and Jahangir were renowned drunkards. Humayun was more 
fond of opium. Aurangzib totally abstained from wine while Akbar 
and Shah Jahan would not pass the limits of decency. 

Nira, Mahua, Kherra , Bhadwar, Jagre , and toddy were 
some of the well-known varieties of country wine. Some superior 
kinds of wines were also imported from foreign countries like Por¬ 
tugal and Persia. Opium was in use among a large number of peo¬ 
ple especially Muhammadans and Rajputs. The latter would double 
the dose on the eve of a battle. Its stimulating effect animated them 
with extraordinary courage and bravery to fight more valiantly and 
heroically. Some of the Mulghul emperors particularly Humayun 
and Jahangir were very fond of this intoxicant. Tobacco gained 
rapid popularity among common people soon after its introduction 
in India in 1605 by the Portuguese. Smoking became so habitual 
with one and all in the short interval of a decade or so that Jahangir 
had to order its prohibition by special enactment in 1617 on account 
of its harmful effects. 19 The decree, however, remained a dead 
letter and several travellers refer to its wide popularity. Manucci 
mentions Rs. 5,000 as tobacco duty for a day in Delhi alone. 20 

Betel was in most common use among all classes of people 
throughout India. It was necessarily chewed after meals but most 
of the people went on taking it throughout the day. Its choicest 
varieties were Bilhari, Kakar, Jaiswar, Kapuri, Kapur Kant, and 
Bangalah. Makhi leaves of Bihar and Keroah of Orissa were also 
much sought after. 


683 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Tea and coffee were not taken as beverages in those days but as 
intoxicants. These drinks were taken by quite a large number of 
people especially those of Coromandel Coast. There seems to have 
been coffee shops, if not coffee houses, in some of our cities like 
Delhi and Ahmadabad. 21 

Houses and Furniture 22 

Mughul palaces, or more appropriately palace-fortresses, were 
usually situated on the bank of a river or a stream. Some of these 
were built on rocky eminences “just turning into or overhanging 
lakes or artificial pieces of water.” These palaces consisted of two 
parts—inner and outer. The inner part contained the quarters of 
the queens, the princesses, the private council hall, the retiring 
rooms, the luxurious hammams , etc. while the other part comprised 
Dlvcun-i-Am, DiwcLn-i-Khds, the arsenal, the store house, etc. in their 
proper places. There were also pavilions for witnessing animal 
fights and for musical entertainments. Stables for horses, elephants, 
cows, etc. were also provided. Akbar’s palaces at Agra, Allahabad 
and Lahore may serve as good examples of Mughul conception of 
royal palaces. 23 Most of the Hindu palaces built during the 16th 
and 17th centuries, particularly in the capitals of the States in Raj- 
putana, viz., Bikaner, Jodhpur, Jaisalmer, Orchha, Datia, Udaipur 
and the city of Amber (Jaipur), are unsystematic in their composi¬ 
tions and are built more for convenience and comfort than for archi¬ 
tectural considerations. In their planning and construction, as is 
natural, Mughul style predominates. As for example, the Jahangir 
Mandir at Orchha was so designed that every part fulfilled its func¬ 
tion and expressed purpose; its rooms were devised for seclusion, 
its terraces for the cool air, its corridors for convenience; each com¬ 
partment, court hall and passage, had its specific use and was intro¬ 
duced into the scheme in accord with the requirements of its inmates. 
The houses of the nobles were luxuriously built, preferably in the 
middle of a garden, and had spacious lawns, tanks, choultries, etc. 
The house had to be so constructed as to provide for the two wings 
known as the mardana and the zenana. A drawing room where the 
nobles received visitors, and held court, a khwabagah, or the bed¬ 
room, kitchen, lavatories, besides a courtyard were the necessary 
requisites. Climatic conditions also necessitated a terrace where 
the family could sleep during summer nights. The roofs of the 
buildings were kept flat for the purpose. A ‘barsati’ or a room at 
the terrace was also provided. The European travellers praise the 
houses of the rich which, to quote Pelsaert, 24 “were noble and ele¬ 
gant, spacious and pleasant.” The houses of the merchants at Surat 


684 


SOCIAL CONDITION 


were built of brick and lime and had several storeys; the houses 
in Kashmir were built of wood due to frequent earthquakes. Ber¬ 
nier saw at Agra the mansions of nobles “interspersed with luxuriant 
and green foliage in the midst of which the lofty stone houses of 
the banias or Hindu merchants have their appearance of old castles 
buried in forests.” There were lofty and spacious houses of the 
upper classes at Delhi, Lahore and Masulipatam. In Malabar these 
houses were built of teakwood and did not possess more than two 
storeys. The houses of the traders, merchants and the petty umras 
were modest in their appearance as compared to those of the nobles. 
They lacked elaborate carvings, embellishments, and beautiful gar¬ 
dens. Some of them were built of brick, burnt tiles and lime; others 
of clay and straw. In the villages the well-to-do zamindars had seve¬ 
ral huts grouped together. These houses 243 were airy and commodi¬ 
ous. Some of them were two-storeyed and had beautiful terrace 
roofs. The main features of these buildings in the cities were the 
provision of eave or chajja above the cornice of each storey with its 
great width, its cast and shadow, which helped to keep the entire 
building cool during summer. 

The houses of the poor were thatched huts without any cellars 
or windows. The addition of a second hut and a granary was con¬ 
sidered as making a house a comfortable abode. These huts had 
only a single opening for air, light and entrance. The floors of the 
houses were of pounded earth spread over with cow-dung. In their 
huts they had only a mat to sleep upon and a pit or hole in the ground 
to keep their rice in. They had only a pot or two for cooking pur¬ 
poses. 

The houses of the rich, especially the nobles, were, however, 
luxuriously furnished. Their diwdn khands or drawing rooms were 
decorated with costly carpets from Kashmir, Lahore or even im¬ 
ported from Persia and Turkey. Jajams and shatrinjis and balu- 
chis were sometimes spread over the mattresses. Big cylindrical 
cushions were a part of the furniture and no drawing room could 
be considered complete without them. Gujarati and Banarasi cur¬ 
tains were particularly liked. The latter were embroidered with 
silk. Sind had a reputation for leather hangings. Bernier gives 
a very interesting account about the diwdn khands of a noble. 25 

The Indian mode of sitting did not necessitate chairs which were 
rightly regarded as superfluous and uncomfortable. Fryer and 
Pelsaert’s observations regarding the complete absence of chairs 
are, however, exaggerated. ‘Abdur Razzaq, the Persian Ambas¬ 
sador to Vijayanagara in 1443 A.D., and Sir Thomas Roe refer to 
their use. The seats, sometimes cushioned, were always wider than 


685 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


those of today. The legs of the chairs were sometimes carved out 
and the feet were connected by means of wooden planks. 26 Stools 
were used in those days. Usually covered with leather or cloth, 
they could be interwoven with cane also. Mundas of reed and pidis 
or seats made of suitable wood are also referred to in contempo¬ 
rary literature. Tables were not in much use except by the mer¬ 
chants of the West Coast. Khatta or bedstead, the most common 
article of furniture in those days, was used by the rich and the poor 
alike. It was used by the poor as a couch to sit, and recline upon 
during day time and served the purpose of a cot at night. These 
bedsteads woven with cords or braids of cotton or silk according 
to the owner’s means had their legs often painted or lacquered. The 
aristocracy were very particular about their bedsteads which were 
lavishly ornamented with gold, silver or even with jewels and dia¬ 
monds. 27 


Fairs and Festivals 28 

Both the communities, Hindus and Muslims, had a large num¬ 
ber of festivals which they celebrated with great enthusiasm dur¬ 
ing medieval times. There was general uniformity in their obser¬ 
vance for the most part, throughout the country. But they enjoyed 
degrees of popularity and were celebrated with certain local varia¬ 
tions. Decorations, illuminations, fire-works, splendid processions, 
abundant display of gold, silver, pearls, diamonds, and jewels, ob¬ 
served by Muslims in India in the celebrations of their festivals, were 
the natural consequence of their contact with the Hindu culture. 
The enlightened rulers like Akbar and Jahangir adopted some of 
the Hindu festivals and gave them a place in their court calendar. 
Humayun adopted tula dan or the weighing ceremony of the Hindus. 
Akbar went further and associated Holi, Dasehra, and Vasant Pan - 
chami, with court celebrations. Jahangir and, to a certain extent, 
Shah Jahan continued the tradition. Aurangzib followed a reverse 
course. He banned most of the Hindu and Persian festivals in the 
court, making it Islamic as far as he could in Hindu surroundings. 

Holi, one of the ancient festivals of the Hindus, was the most 
popular day of rejoicing, music and feast, as it is today. Colour 
throwing was a lively part of the celebrations. 29 

Akbar observed the festival of Raksha Bandhan, and had a 
mkhi tied on his wrist. It became the custom for the courtiers and 
others to adorn the emperor’s wrist with beautiful strings of silk, 
bejewelled with rubies and pearls and gems of great value. Jahan¬ 
gir, who called it ‘Nighadasht’, ordered: “Hindu amins and the head 
of the caste should fasten rakhis on my arm”. 


686 


SOCIAL CONDITION 


On the occasion of the Dasehra festival royal elephants and 
horses were washed, groomed, and caparisoned to be arrayed for 
inspection by the Emperor. Diwall or Dlpawall was observed in 
much the same manner, as it is today; fire-works were discharged 
and sweets and other presents were exchanged. Gambling was 
considered auspicious on this day and people kept awake the whole 
night trying one another’s luck at dice. Akbar was interested in 
the festive aspect of the celebrations, while Jahangir preferred gam¬ 
bling. Sometimes the latter ordered his attendants to play the 
games in his presence for two or three nights. In the time of the 
later Mughuls, it appears, the permission of the Governor was neces¬ 
sary to hold the Diw\all fair for which a poll-tax was sometimes im¬ 
posed. 30 Akbar also took part in the celebrations of Govardhan 
Pujd and several cows, properly washed and ornamented, were 
brought before him for his review. 31 Both solar and lunar eclipses 
were observed with all sanctity by the Hindus who kept a fast for 
24 hours before the actual eclipse and passed the day in prayers. 
A bath in the Ganges on this occasion was regarded as of special 
merit and large numbers resorted to Hardwar, Kashi and Prayag. 

&ivamtri 32 or the festival of Lord Siva was observed with all 
solemnity during Mughul times. Akbar participated in the meeting 
of the principal jogis of the Empire held that night and ate and 
drank with them. Jahangir also refers to this festival. Ramnavaml 
and Janmashtaml were the two other important Hindu festivals re¬ 
ferred to by Abu-’l-Fazl in the Ain-i-Akbari . 33 

Muharram, ld-i-Milad, Shab-i-Barat, Id-ul-Fitr, and ld-ul-Zuha l 
are some of the important Muslim festivals which were observed with 
all solemnity during Mughul times. The Mughul Emperors, though 
Sunni in belief, put no restrictions on the observance of Muharram. 
Aurangzlb however, stopped the practice of Muharram processions 
throughout his dominions. But though the tazia processions were 
never given up and Muharram assemblies, mourning and distribution 
of charity continued to be practised all over the country, sometimes 
Muharram celebrations were marred by riots between the Sunnis and 
Shiahs in which numerous lives were lost. 34 On the occasion of 
the festival of ld-i-Milad or the feast of Prophet’s nativity, a meet¬ 
ing of the Sayyids, scholars and saints was arranged in the Palace 
at Agra. Shah Jahan took special interest in this festival and used 
to give away large sums in charity. Equally popular was the 
festival of Shab-i-Barat or the night of the Prophet’s ascent to Hea¬ 
ven. The Muslims, during Mughul days, illuminated their houses 
and shops and displayed fire-works. Jahangir and Shiah Jahan 
were very particular about this festival and observed it regularly 


687 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


with great pomp and show. The palaces, government buildings, 
public gardens, reservoirs etc. were all illuminated on this occasion 
and the King would distribute money among the poor. The two Ids, 
Id-ul-Fitr, and the Id-ul-Zuha, were the two most important festivals 
of the Muslims. The Id-ul-Fitr which comes after the long drawn- 
out part of Ramzan was proclaimed by firing of guns and blowing of 
trumpets. Friends and relatives exchanged dainty dishes and visits 
and wished each other good luck. It was customary to call on elders 
and superiors to offer greetings. In the afternoon Muslims assembled 
in the Idgah to offer prayers. Id-ul-Zuha was observed with cere¬ 
monious display during Mughul times. Preparations were made both 
in the capital and in the provinces well in advance. The Emperor 
rode in procession and sometimes even took up his quarters at the 
Idgah. The sacrifice of a camel would be performed in his presence 
with due ceremonies. The people who could afford it performed 
the same ceremony at their homes by solemnly killing a ram or a 
goat in memory of the ram offered for Ismail. They also cooked 
stew, sweetmeats and griddle cakes and offered fatiha in the name 
of their deceased relatives. 

Some of the other Muslim festivals referred to in the contem¬ 
porary literature are Bara Wafat, Akhiri Chahar Shamba, etc. 

There were a few festivals like the Nauroz (birthday celebra¬ 
tions of the ruling monarch), Meena or Fancy Bazar and the 
Ab-i-Pashan which assumed more or less national character. IVcm- 
roz 35 was easily the greatest national festival during Mughul times 
and its celebrations lasted for full 19 days. It was borrowed from 
the Persians and was observed on the first Farwardis, the first month 
of the Persian Year (20th or 21st of March). In India, it marked 
the advent of spring. Grand preparations for the festival were 
made months ahead at the imperial cities, bazars, and porticoes; 
the public and private audience halls were profusely decorated with 
costly stuffs such as satin, velvet, clothes of gold, etc. The common 
people whitewashed their entrances and decorated the doors of their 
houses with green branches. The people from neighbouring towns 
would flock to the capital and indulge in all sorts of merry-making. 
Restrictions on gambling were also relaxed and people were allow¬ 
ed free access to the presence of the King once a week. The King 
and the court celebrated this festival in a right royal manner. Spe¬ 
cial kinds of coins called ‘ nisars ’ were struck by the Mughul Em¬ 
perors from Jahangir onwards for distribution among the people or 
for offering tribute to the King on the occasion of certain festivities 
such as New Year’s day, or the anniversary of their coronations. 
During these 19 days “wine flowed in rivulets, verse and ode flew 


688 


SOCIAL CONDITION 

in hundreds, gaiety and merriment ruled everything.” Singers and 
musicians flocked to the court from all quarters particularly from 
Persia. Newtek girls with their wonderful and attractive perform¬ 
ances thrilled the hearts of all those present. Several European tra¬ 
vellers have given a picturesque description of the lavish display 
of wealth and magnificence on this occasion. Manrique, perhaps 
copying from somewhere or depending on hearsay, gives a detailed 
account of the decorations of the Imperial Palace at Agra. 3 ^ The 
nobles, too, adorned their palaces with jewels, pearls, diamonds, 
and their richest treasures and greatest rarities, so that, to quote 
Nizam-ud-dln, the author of the Tabqat-i-Akbafi, “the spectators on 
seeing them were filled with wonder and admiration.” The main 
function usually took place in the Diiv\an-i-Am which was richly 
decorated with velvets, gold cloth, and European durtains and 
screens, and the royal tent was fixed there in the middle beautified 
with diamonds, pearls, rubies and fruits of gold. It was? surrounded 
all round by the tents of the nobles. The nobles presented the King 
with rare and precious gifts on this occasion and the King bestow¬ 
ed on them jdglrs, robes of honour, stipends and titles and promo¬ 
tion in rank. 

Birthday of the ruling monarch provided another opportunity 
for rejoicings. Akbar introduced the custom of observing both his 
lunar and solar birthdays. The royal palaces and the courts were 
decorated on this occasion as on the occasion of Nauroz , and the 
elephants and horses, bedecked in rich trappings and glittering 
robes, were brought before the Emperor for review. The King 
paid a visit to his mother to receive her blessings. Presents were 
offered, feasts were given and bonfires lighted. Humayun was the 
first Mughul ruler to adopt the custom of weighing the emperor 
against certain precious metals and commodities on this occasion. 37 
Akbar observed it twice a year both on his solar and lunar birthday 
anniversaries. The practice was continued by Jahangir and with 
slight alterations by Shah Jahan. Aurangzlb, however, reverted to 
the old custom of having himself weighed only once a year and even 
this was dispensed with in his 51st year (March, 1670). But he al¬ 
lowed it in the case of his sons on their recovery from illness on 
the specific condition that the money and articles should be distri¬ 
buted among the poor. 38 The princes and their sons were also 
weighed on their solar anniversaries. The weighing commenced at 
the age of 2 years against one commodity, and one was added each 
year, till the number reached generally 7 or 8 but in no case was it 
to exceed 12. These commodities were later on distributed among 
the Brahmans, fakirs and other deserving persons. After the cere- 

689 

M.E.—44 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


mony, the King ascended the throne and received presents which, 
according to Thevenot, were valued at millions of rupees. 39 The king 
would announce increase in the mansabs of some and bestowed gifts 
and jdgvrs. 

Humayun was the first Mughul Emperor to introduce what later 
came to be known as Meena Bazar. The first of this kind was held 
on boats near the King’s palace after the customary mystic feast. 40 
Akbar who continued the festival in a modified form exalted such 
days as Khushroz or joyful days. Shah Jahan arranged such a 
bazar on the occasion of every festival. It invariably followed the 
Nauroz celebrations. The stalls in the specially constructed bazar 
were distributed among nobles to be arranged by their wives or 
daughters who acted as traders. If we are to believe Badauni, stalls 
in the Meena Bazar were sometimes conducted by nobles them¬ 
selves. 41 The King with princesses and ladies of the royal house¬ 
hold would pay visits to the bazar to make his bargain, frequently 
disputing the value of a dam. After the women’s bazar, a bazar for 
men was held; there the merchants brought their merchandise from 
all parts of the world. 

A festival similar to Holi, called Ab-i-Pashan by Jahangir and 
Id-i-Gulabi (rose water festival) by Lahori, the author of Pddshd- 
ndma, was celebrated at the Mughul court at the commencement of 
the rainy season. The princes and the prominent nobles took part 
in the festival and sprinkled rose water on each other. 

Sports, Games and Pastimes 42 

Leaving aside twentieth century amusements like cinema-going, 
and outdoor games like hockey, cricket, football, tennis, etc. that have 
come to us through contact with the West, the pastimes in vogue 
during Mughul times were similar to those commonly found today. 
The difference, if any, lies in details only. Chess, chaupar, and 
playing cards were the most popular indoor games and were enjoyed 
by the rich and the poor alike. The various types of tiger play, 
games of gufis and the games of sheep and goats were favourites 
with the rural population. Abu-’l-Fazl has given some details about 
these games in Am-i-Akbari. 43 The Mughul pack of cards consisted 
of 12 suits of 12 cards each making a total of 144 with different 
kinds of kings and followers. The names of all the suits were in 
Sanskrit till the time of Akbar who renamed the last seven suits and 
reconstituted Dhanpati, the fifth. As distinguished from our pre¬ 
sent day cards, they were all in pictures; the highest represented the 
King, the second highest, a vazir and the rest were followers from 


690 


SOCIAL CONDITION 


one to ten. The game was quite popular with the Mughul Emperors 
many of whom were expert players. 

The game of chess 44 was equally popular with the kings, nobles 
and the commoners alike. Akbar is said to have played the game 
of living chess with slave girls as pieces moving on the chequered 
pavement of the Pachisi court at Fathpur SikrI. Sometimes inter¬ 
national matches were held and bets offered. Khan-i-Khanan was 
deputed by Jahangir to combat Shah Shafi of Persia. 

The game of chaupar was quite popular among the people, but 
no ready-made tables for the game were available in those days. 
The Mughuls, it appears, were not familiar with the game as it 
existed in India till the time of Akbar who framed special rules and 
regulations. 45 It was a favourite game of Zib-un-Nisa, the eldest 
daughter of Aurangzib, who spent most of her spare time in play¬ 
ing chaupar with her girl friends. Ain refers to another game call¬ 
ed Chandal Mahal which was, in fact, a modified chaupar, designed 
to increase the number of players to 16 with 64 pieces divided 
equally among them. Nard or backgammon was introduced into 
India by the Muslims while Pachisi was an ancient Hindu game 
enjoyed frequently by Akbar. The boards of this game were mark¬ 
ed out on a marble square in a quadrangle in the Agra Fort and 
Fathpur SikrI. The games of Gutis—do guti, tre guti, nao gu\i, and 
bdra guti —were popular with the rural as well as the urban popula¬ 
tion. Mughul pathan, lam turki , bhag chal, bhag chakar, chhabis 
guti, bhag chal and bheri bakri were its popular variations. 46 

Of the outdoor diversions, hunting, animal fights and Chaugan 
were the privilege of the few, while Ishq-bazi, wrestling, etc. were 
enjoyed by one and all. It is regrettable that no reference to 
kabaddi is traceable in contemporary records. But the game must 
have been played in the villages, as it is even today. Of all the 
Mughul Emperors Akbar liked Chaugan (Polo) most and even in¬ 
vented illuminated balls which made the playing of game on dark 
nights possible. The most famous of the chaugan playing fields 
were at Fathpur SikrI and Agra. The game of hockey, too, is re¬ 
ferred to in contemporary records. 47 Wrestling and boxing were a 
favourite pastime during the Mughul Age. In Vijayanagara even 
women took part in wrestling contests. 48 Akbar was very much 
fond of boxing and kept a large number of Persian and Turani 
boxers at the court. Horse-racing was a source of entertainment 
prevalent among the high class Mughul nobles. Martial sports like 
archery and swordsmanship had a special fascination for the people; 
matches and contests were held and rewards offered. 


691 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Hunting was one of the best means of amusement and recrea¬ 
tion during the Mughul times and was indulged in by the king, 
nobles and the commoners. The costly and dangerous expeditions 
were the privilege of the few and the quarry consisted of elephants, 
lions, tigers, buffaloes and wild goats. Lion hunting was exclusive¬ 
ly reserved for the king. Elephant hunting, too, could not be in¬ 
dulged in without the special permission of the king. Akbar in¬ 
vented a special kind of hunting called ‘qamargha hunt’ 49 which be¬ 
came very popular with the Mughul kings, who took lively interest 
in the game. Shooting of birds was a common hobby and a source 
of entertainment for the rich and the poor. 

Fishing was in vogue during the Mughul times both as a re¬ 
creation and as a profession. The use of nets for catching fish was 
not totally unknown but professional fishermen did not have re¬ 
course to it. A special type of net called safra (or bhanwar jal in 
Hindi) was used. 

Animal fight was one of the popular amusements and recrea¬ 
tions of the age. The people had to content themselves with the 
less expensive fighting of goats, rams, cocks, stags, antelopes, dogs 
and bulls to entertain their friends. Young boys favoured fight 
among bulbuls and sometimes quails. The kings and the nobles 
amused themselves with costly and dangerous combats between ele¬ 
phants, tigers, deer, cheetas, boars, leopards, bulls and other wild 
beasts. Cock-fighting was very common among the higher middle 
class. Ishq-bazi or pigeon flying was primarily a sport of common 
folk. Nobles, too, enjoyed it and brought excellent pigeons from 
foreign countries like Turan and Iran to be trained for the game. 

Among other pastimes reference may be made to mushairas , 
magic shows, acrobatics and dramatic performances. Ramlild or thea¬ 
trical representation of scenes from the Rdmdyana were common 
during the Hindu festival of Dasehra and even Muslims witnessed 
this show. 50 “The visits to periodical fairs and seats of pilgrimage”, 
to quote Sir Jadunath Sarkar, “were the sole joy of the Indian 
village population and men and women were passionately eager to 
undertake them.” 51 Mathura, Allahabad, Banaras, Nasik and 
Madura were the main religious centres of the Hindus while Ajmer, 
Gulbarga, Nizam-ud-dm Auliya and Burhanpur were the seats of 
Muslim pilgrimage. 


Customs and Ceremonies 

From the few and scattered references in the contemporary 
literature, it is evident that both the communities, Hindus and 
Muslims, observed their rites and ceremonies 52 in much the same 


692 


SOCIAL CONDITION 


manner as they do today. Of the 16 principal ceremonies pre¬ 
scribed by Hindu law-givers, only 6 important ones, viz. Jdta karma 
(birth ceremony), Ndma-karana (name-giving ceremony), Chudd- 
karana (hair-cutting ceremony), Upanayana (initiation), and 
Vivdha (marriage) and certain funeral rites were observed by 
majority of the Hindus. Abu-’l-Fazl 53 describes the birth cere¬ 
mony, when honey stirred in ghee is put into the mouth of the in¬ 
fant by means of a gold ring. Tulsidas and Surdas refer to the per¬ 
formance of Nandimukh Srdddha A 4 just after the birth when offer¬ 
ings of gold, cows, plates and jewels were made to the Brahmans. 
A cord made of durbd grass interwoven with mango leaves was 
usually hung over the main door as a mark of festivity. The Ndma- 
karana ceremony was usually performed after the period of confine¬ 
ment lasting forty days was over. 55 The ceremony of Annapvasana, 
it appears, was performed when the child was 6 months old. Khir, 
honey and ghee, according to the poet Surdas, would be placed be¬ 
fore the child whose father helped him to take it after due cere¬ 
monies. 56 The Mundan or the hair-cutting ceremony was celebrated 
with due rites not earlier than the age of three leaving one lock 
on the top of the head. The ears of the child were also bored 
usually on that day. The Upanayana or the sacred thread ceremony 
was performed before the age of eight when a special function was 
held and a large number of Brahmans were invited. 57 Being thus 
invested with the sacred thread, the boy began his studies in right 
earnest. The ceremony of Samdvartana was performed when the 
student returned home after the completion of his studies. 58 

The craving for a male child was quite intense among Muham¬ 
madans. Manucci relates in detail the rejoicings which followed the 
birth of a son in a rich family. 59 It was customary to pour honey 
into the infant’s mouth immediately after birth and to press his 
mother’s breast so that “a drop of milk comes out”. Azan , or the 
Muslim call to prayer was sounded in the ears of the infant. The 
naming ceremony was performed on the very day of his birth when 
the grandfather would give the name. Manucci refers to great cele¬ 
brations on the Chhathi day. It was customary, after bathing the 
child, to cover him with a shirt made of any article of dress worn 
by some ancient worthy. The Aqiqah rites were usually perform¬ 
ed on the seventh day which consisted of a sacrifice of two goats 
for a boy and one for a girl. The first shaving of the child was 
also done on this day. Abu-’l-Fazl specially alludes to a Turkish 
custom adopted by the Mughuls. When a child began to walk, it 
was usual for the father or the grandfather to strike it with his 
turban so that it might fall down. The Bismillah or more properly 


693 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


the Maktab ceremony was performed when a boy was four years, 
four months and four days old. Circumcision or Sunnat ceremony 
was performed with great pomp and show. Akbar prohibited this 
rite before the age of 12 and even then left it to the boy’s option. 

Early marriages were in vogue in both the communities. It is, 
however, almost certain that the actual consummation did not take 
place before the age of puberty. Inter-caste marriages were out 
of fashion among Hindus. No such restrictions existed among the 
Muslims who had complete freedom of choice barring a few closer 
relations. Akbar, however, did not like marriages between near 
and dear ones. The marriage rites and ceremonies of Hindus and 
Muslims were observed in much the same manner as today. Dowry 
system seems to have been quite harsh and many a poor father 
had not the means to procure wedding outfits for their daughters. 
Tukaram could get his daughter married only through the contri¬ 
bution of the villagers. 60 Huge dowries have been referred to by 
Muhammad Jayasi, Tulsidas and Surdas. Mughul kings, too, used 
to accept huge dowries. Akbar was, no doubt, against this custom 
but he made no effort to check this evil practice. 

Greater stress was laid upon the funeral ceremonies by the 
Hindus to whom the value of next world is higher than that of the 
present one. The most important ones were cremation, TJdakarma, 
Asaucha, Asthi Sanchayana , Sdntikarma, and Sapindtkarana. 
Abu-’l-Fazl enumerates certain classes to whom the privilege of burn¬ 
ing was denied. Inhumation (burial, preferably water burial) was, 
however, resorted to, as prescribed by the scriptures, in the case of 
small children and ascetics. Abu-’l-Fazl has referred to a curious 
custom which was sometimes followed in Bengal. A person in a 
dying condition would be carried to a nearby river where the lower 
half of his body would be immersed in water at the moment of his 
death. 61 Guru Nianak refers to the Indian custom of tearing the 
top of a letter when announcing the death of a relative. The gene¬ 
rality of the Hindus, it appears, followed the prescribed rules which 
forbid certain things during the period of defilement such as the 
cutting of the hair and beard, study of the Vedas, offering to the 
deities, etc. The positive rules which enjoin, for a period of three 
days, continence, sleeping on the ground, living on begged or pur¬ 
chased food, eating only in the day time, were also observed. 62 Gaudy 
dresses were avoided and the women covered their heads with white 
dopdttns as a sign of mourning. Sanchayana, or the ceremony of 
collection of bones and ashes took place after an interval varying 
according to different castes. The bones after being washed with 
milk were thrown into a river, preferably the Ganges. The period 


694 


SOCIAL CONDITION 


of mourning ended on the 13th day when some offerings were made 
to the heir of the deceased by the relatives. Smddha , which Abu-’l- 
Fazl describes as the charity given in the name of the deceased, 
was observed usually on the anniversary of the deceased's death. 
Its significance and mode of performance has been described at 
length in the iin. 63 

Like those of the Hindus, the Muslim funeral customs have 
not changed much since the days of the Mughuls. The Yasin chapter 
of the Qur’an was read by the sick bed of the dying person and his 
face was usually turned towards Mecca. Sharbat or holy water 
from Zamzam well at Mecca, if available, might be poured down 
his throat to “facilitate exit of the vital spark.” Death was announced 
by using certain euphemism, specially in the case of great men; 
for example, “Emperor Babur departed from the fleeting world for 
the everlasting abode in paradise”. In case of the death of a prince 
or a dear one to the Emperor, the vakil of the deceased would ap¬ 
pear before the king with a blue handkerchief tied around his arm. 64 
The body, covered with flowers and heavily perfumed, was carried 
in a befitting manner and decorum, according to the deceased’s posi¬ 
tion in life, to the burial ground. If he was a noble, his insignia of 
rank, flags, elephants, cavalry, etc. accompanied it. The period of 
mourning lasted for 40 days, according to Manucci. The Hindu cus¬ 
tom of getting oneself shaved after the death of a dear one seems 
to have been followed by Muhammadans also. Dainty dishes and 
gaudy dresses were avoided during this period. The mourning end¬ 
ed on the 40th day when the relatives visited the grave and distri¬ 
buted food, clothes and money to the poor and the needy in the 
name of the deceased. 

Social Etiquettes and Manners 65 

Hindus and Muhammadans differed in their mode of greeting 
friends, relatives and superiors. Manucci describes five kinds of 
salutations prevalent among the Hindus in Mughul days. ‘Ram 
Ram’ was the most popular form of greeting among equals. A per¬ 
son of higher status, a governor, minister, or a general was greeted 
by raising the folded hands above the head. 66 The younger would 
greet an elder by bowing down, touching his or her feet and raising 
the hand to his head. He would even prostrate himself before his 
teacher. The Raja or King was also received in the same manner 
by all classes except the Brahmans who would only raise their 
folded hands. Guru Nanak, the founder of the Sikh religion, is said 
to have advised his followers to return the salutation with the words 
“Sat Kartar ” 67 (the true Creator). 


695 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


‘Salam' was the usual salutation among all classes of Muhamma¬ 
dans, among whom it was obligatory to greet each other with the 
words ‘al-Salam alekum’ } the other responding * wa-lekum al Salam’. 
Friends would greet each other by raising the right hand to the 
forehead and would even embrace or grasp each other’s hands in 
token of love. 68 High personages were greeted by raising the right 
hand to the forehead and bending the body forward. Kurnish and 
taslim have been mentioned by Abu-’l-Fazl as the recognised modes 
of salutation to the King. Kurnish consisted in placing the palm 
of the right hand on the forehead and bending down the head. 69 
While offering taslim, the person placed the back of his right hand 
on the ground, raised it slowly till he stood erect, when he put the 
palm of his hand on the top of his head. After raising the hand 
from the ground, it was usual to place it on the breast before taking 
it to the forehead. Akbar issued orders that the taslim should be 
repeated thrice. He also introduced another salutation called 
‘Sijdah’ or prostration before the King. But as it was objected to 
by the orthodox as man-worship, he forbade it in the Darbdr-i-Am 
but allowed it in private assemblies. 70 This custom was, however, 
discontinued during the reign of Shah Jahan who introduced instead 
Zaminbos or the practice of kissing the ground. This, also, was 
given up and the customary taslim was restored with the addition 
that it had to be observed not less than four times. Aurangzlb com¬ 
pletely did away with these so-called pretensions to idolatry and 
ordered that the usual mode of salutation ‘Salam alekum ’ be ob¬ 
served. 71 

Mode of Travelling and Conveyance 72 

Modern technical devices being unknown, means of transport 
in those days were confined to human carriers, beasts of burden, 
and wheeled traffic on land and boats on rivers and small sailing 
ships in the coastal seas. The ox was the conveyance of the poor 
in villages and even in towns. Instead of a saddle, they put on a 
soft cushion. Horses, ponies, mules, and even donkeys were used 
for riding purposes. In sandy places, like Rajasthan and Sind, 
camels were employed to cover long distances. The swiftest camels 
came from Ajmer. The traditional bail gdri or the bullock-drawn 
cart was much more in use then. Drawn by 2 or 3 oxen, it could 
cover 20 miles a day. The rich used highly decorated chariots 73 
which were covered like the rooms of a house, their windows adorn¬ 
ed with gilded leather or silk hangings, their mattresses made of silk 
quilts. Sometimes a beautiful canopy was used as a protection 
against the sun. The nobles preferred to use white oxen to drive 


696 


SOCIAL CONDITION 


their carriages. Akbar preferred to drive in a two-horse chariot 
“wherein he would sit cross-legged upon a couch covered with scar¬ 
let rugs”. 74 An English couch presented to Jahangir by the East 
India Company was also used as a model by local craftsmen. Ele¬ 
phants with beautiful howdahs were quite often used as conveyance 
by kings and nobles. Princesses, too, moved about on elephants. 
Bernier refers to the trip of Roshanara Begam seated in a golden 
howdah on a Pegu elephant. During Akbar’s time there were 101 
elephants in the royal stables for King’s use. They were known as 
Khas elephants. Abu-’l-Fazl gives a detailed list of the trappings 
of the elephants and other animals in the Aln-i-Akban. 15 

Mules were particularly liked for travelling on uneven ground. 
For the poor a saddle and a rope or a chain sufficed as the equip¬ 
ment for riding a mule. The rich used a larger number of acces^ 
sories including a palan (pack saddle), a shaltang (shawl strap) 
palastang (blanket strap), a sardoz (common head stall), a curry 
comb, a hair glove etc. Horses were preferred to other beasts for 
their swiftness, impressive look and comfortable ride. Horses were 
imported from Iraq-i-Arab, Iraq-i-Ajam, Turkey, Badakhshan, Tibet 
etc. The nobles and wealthy, however, preferred to travel in palan¬ 
quins which were covered all over with cloth. In case of rain, wax 
cloth was placed all over the palanquin. 

Doli and dold were ordinary types of palanquins. The former 
was specially hired for women to cover short distances. It is still 
customary to carry home the bride in a doli which is covered with 
a red cloth. 76 In Bengal the rich used Sukhasan or Sukhpal, a cres¬ 
cent-shaped litter covered with camlet or scarlet cloth. Chandol 
was perhaps the most luxurious litter, closed or covered like the 
room of a house. The roof of the palanquin was covered with a 
piece of thick silk. It was tastefully decorated with plates of carved 
silver while others had been painted with flowers or other curiosi¬ 
ties 77 The nobles also used elephant and camel litters. In summer 
khas tatties (screens made of the fragrant khas grass) were fixed 

on all its four sides. 

Ships and boats were the principal means of water transport. 
Some of these ships could accommodate 200 persons. Each ship 
had a number of cabins which were hired out to passengers. There 
was a fleet of 300 to 400 sea-going ships plying on the eastern coast 
of Bengal and Orissa. 78 Boats and crafts were used as a means of 
conveyance on rivers. There were different kinds of boats for pur¬ 
poses of war, carriage, and swift sailing. Larger boats could even 
carry an elephant. The boats made for the royalty were highly art¬ 
istic. Abu-’l-Fazl refers to the “wonderfully fashioned boats with 


697 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


delightful quarters and decks and gardens.” In the coastal regions 
various kinds of brigantines or fustas were used for crossing rivers. 
Some people used coracles or round basket boats covered with hide 
for the same purpose. In the Coromandel Coast there was in use a 
type of boat called masala. 19 

Postal System 

Indian postal system during Mughul times did not cater to the 
needs of the common man. There was no regular provision for the 
carrying of public mail. There were, however, excellent arrange¬ 
ments for carrying king’s mail. There were two kinds of couriers, 
horse and foot, posted at regular intervals. Babur had a tower 
built at every 9th kuroh. At every 18th kuroh (13th or 14th mile) 
were kept ready 6 post-horses for carrying the mail. 80 Sher Shah’s 
sarais also served as stations of dak chaukis. Two government 
horses were kept ready in each sarai for carrying persons and des¬ 
patches. 81 Akbar improved upon Sher Shah’s system and establish¬ 
ed throughout his dominions 2 horses and several Mewars every 5th 
kuroh. Whenever a royal farman or a letter from a nobleman 
reached a chauki, it was immediately conveyed to the next chauki 
by a rider. According to Firishta, 50 kurohs were thus covered in 
24 hours. Akbar had in his employment, for an emergency, 4,000 
runners some of whom would cover a distance of 700 miles in 10 
days. Runners had been posted in the villages 4 or 5 kurohs apart 
and they took their turn of duty day and night. Aurangzib issued 
strict orders that postal runners were to cover one jarihi kuroh 82 
in one gdri. It took 12 days for a runner to reach Delhi from 
Ahmadabad. The Mughuls did not practise the ancient custom of 
sending letters through pigeons on any large scale. The Ain, how¬ 
ever, refers to a special variety of pigeons known as rath pigeons 
which were trained to carry letters to a great distance. There were 
no regular arrangements for private post. It was either entrusted 
to these agencies or in some cases despatched through special mes¬ 
sengers. Sometimes a touring acquaintance would take the letter 
for a friend or relative of the sender. Special measures were adopt¬ 
ed for the security of the royal letters sent abroad to the Emperors 
or principal ministers. Letters were enclosed in a large hollow 
cylinder of bamboo with an opening at one end and about 2 inches 
long. After putting in the letter, this opening was sealed. Thus 
the letter was; carried neat and clean unaffected by rain or dust. 83 

Position of Women 

There had been definite deterioration in the position of women 
in the centuries that followed the Vedic Age. But in all these 


698 


SOCIAL CONDITION 


periods there was no seclusion of women. With the advent of Islam 
new social forces affected Hindu society. Strict veiling of women 
was the common practice among the Muhammadans in their native 
lands. Naturally in a foreign country like India, greater stress was 
laid upon it. Even a liberal king like Akbar had to issue strict 
orders that “if a young woman was found running about the streets 
and bazars of the town and while so doing did not veil herself or 
allowed herself to be unveiled.... she was to go to the quarters 
of the prostitutes and take up the profession.” 84 Hindus adopted 
purdah as a protective measure to save the honour of their women¬ 
folk and to maintain the purity of their social order. The tendency 
to imitate the ruling class was another factor which operated in fa¬ 
vour of introducing purdah among Hindu families. Seclusion thus 
became a sign of respect and was strictly observed among the high 
class families of both the communities. Eunuchs were freely em* 
ployed as a means of communication between the male and female 
members of a royal or noble’s family. Even male doctors were not 
allowed to face the ailing ladies of the noble and princely families. 
The ladies would stir out of their houses very rarely and that, too, 
in covered palanquins, surrounded on all sides by servants and 
eunuchs. If, for any reason, a Muslim lady of rank discarded pur¬ 
dah even for a temporary period, the consequences for her were dis¬ 
astrous. Amir Khan, the Governor of Kabul, felt no scruple in 
renouncing his wife when her purdah was broken in an attempt to 
save her life by leaping from the back of the elephant who had 
run amuck. 85 

Purdah was, however, less rigorously observed in Rajput fami¬ 
lies. There the women, trained in all the arts of warfare, would 
frequently take part in hunting parties, and other expeditions. Bar¬ 
ring notable Muslim families there, South India did not adopt pur¬ 
dah. No such coercive purdah system was observed among the 
Hindu middle class, and certainly not among the Hindu masses. 
Hindu ladies could move out of doors with little or no restriction. 86 
Unlike Muslim women they did not cover themselves from head to 
foot. It was enough to have a sheet or dopatta to cover their heads. 
Women of the lower stratum of our society such as peasant and 
working classes were entirely free from the bondage of purdah. 
They were expected to help their husbands in all “external pursuits 
and internal economy.” 

The birth of a daughter was considered inauspicious. A Rajput 
was often heard to say: “accursed to the day when a woman child 
is born to me.” A wife who unfortunately happened to give birth 
to girls in succession was despised and even sometimes divorced. 87 


699 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Even in the royal family the difference was clear and well marked. 
Only women rejoiced and feasted on the birth of a daughter while 
the whole court took part in the celebrations, if a prince was born. 88 
The deplorable custom of infanticide was luckily confined to a very 
minor section of the less cultured Rajput families. The custom in 
those days did not allow, for whatever reasons, girls to remain in 
the parents’ home for more than 6 to 8 years after their birth. “A 
father”, according to Mukundarama, “who could get his daughter 
married in her ninth year was considered lucky and worthy of the 
favours of God.” 89 The rigidity of the custom, together with the 
celebration of marriage at a very tender age, left no room, whatso¬ 
ever, for either the bride or bridegroom to have time to think of a 
mate of their own choice. The custom left it solely to the discre¬ 
tion of their parents or nearest relations and friends to arrange the 
match. Dowry was demanded and sometimes parents disregarded 
the suitability of the match and cared primarily for a rich dowry. 
In some castes and localities the bridegroom had to pay money to 
the bride’s guardians. 90 Sometimes for the sake of wealth, a young 
man would marry a woman older than himself. The evil grew so 
much that Akbar issued orders that if a woman “happened to be 
older by 12 years than her husband, the marriage should be con¬ 
sidered as illegal and annulled.” 91 Akbar tried in vain to bring 
home to the people that the consent of the bride and bridegroom as 
well as the permission of the parents was essential before the con¬ 
firmation of the engagement. 92 There seems to have been greater 
liberty at least to girls belonging to high class Rajput families to 
choose a husband. Sometimes a romantic lady would fix the price 
of her hand. Tarabai, the daughter of Rao Surthan, promised to 
marry the youth who would recover her father’s domain Todah, 
from the Fathans. Jaimal, the brother of Prithvi Raj, won her, 
Karam Devi, the beautiful daughter of the Mohil chieftain, renoun¬ 
ced her betrothal with the heir of the Rao of Mandor and chose to 
be the bride of Sadhu, heir of Pugal, whose admiration she had won. 93 

Monogamy seems to have been the rule among the lower stra¬ 
tum of society in both the communities during the Mughul period. 
In spite of the decision of the 4 Ulema in the Ibddat Khana, that a 
main might marry any number of wives by mutaln but only four by 
nikah, Akbar had issued definite orders that a man of ordinary 
means should not possess more than one wife unless the first proved 
to be barren 94 He considered it highly injurious to a man’s health 
to keep more than one wife. Polygamy was the privilege of the 
rich Muhammadans most of whom kept 3 or 4 wives at a time. 
Hindus, with the exception of a small number of princes and very 


700 


SOCIAL CONDITION 


wealthy persons, strictly restricted themselves to monogamy as en¬ 
joined by their social custom. In the extreme case if a wife proved 
to be barren, they had the liberty to marry another with the consent 
of the Brahmans. 948 

The girl was brought up under parental supervision and was 
married without her consent. When married, she was under the 
control of her mother-in-law whose commands must be carried out. 
If she failed to come up to her standard, she might be divorced in a 
Muhammadan family, and her life would become miserable in a 
Hindu home. But when grown up and away from the domineering 
influence of her mother-in-law, she had a large share in the manage¬ 
ment of her household. She was to prove herself a devoted wife 
who would not take meals until her husband had dined. 94b The 
position of woman with regard to her husband was that of a depen¬ 
dent, in honourable subordination, at least as long as mutual rela¬ 
tions remained cordial. Jahangir writes in the Tuzuk: “It is a 
maxim of the Hindus that no good deed can be performed by men 
in the social state without the partnership or presence of the wife 
whom they have styled the half of men.” Both would give way to 
accommodate each other, though the last word was that of the hus¬ 
band. But with all this, the ladies belonging to high and respectable 
old families, especially Rajputanis, were reluctant to compromise 
when their self-respect was at stake. Tod relates how Raja Jai 
Singh of Amber, once cut jokes with his wife, the princess of Haroti, 
about the simplicity of her dress and contrasted it with the robes 
of the belles of his own capital. Greatly annoyed, the princess 
spoke in words which clearly bring out the true sex relations pre¬ 
valent among high Rajput families. “Mutual respect is the guardian 
not only of happiness but of virtue, and if again she was insulted he 
would find that ‘the daughter of Kotah’ could use a sword more 
effectively than the prince of Amber the scissors.” 95 It appears 
most of the Hindus led a happy domestic life. The woman adored 
her husband with passionate reverence and in return her husband 
rendered her all tenderness and protection. 

Divorce and remarriages, common among Muslims, were pro¬ 
hibited to Hindu women. Widow remarriage, except for the lower 
caste people, had completely disappeared in Hindu society during 
the medieval age. Sati was the prevalent practice in spite of the 
efforts of the Mughuls to check it. Even the betrothed girls had to 
commit sati on the funeral pyre of their would-be-husbands. Those 
widows who would not burn themselves with their husbands were 
harshly treated by the society; they were not allowed to wear their 
hair long or to put on ornaments. These unfortunate widows had 


701 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


to put up with their parents who treated them no better than ordi¬ 
nary maids, hated and despised by even their family as being afraid 
of death. 96 Whatever might have been the position of a woman as 
a girl, bride and widow, she certainly occupied a most respectable 
position in society as a mother. There are numerous instances, in 
the contemporary records, of Mughul kings who would travel some 
stages to receive their mothers. They would perform burnish, sij- 
dah and taslim when entering their presence. 97 On his birthday, 
the Mughul Emperor, accompanied by princes and nobles, would 
necessarily pay a visit to his mother to receive her felicitations. It 
is interesting to recall that the first lady of the realm was not the 
Empress (except in cases of Nur Jahan and Mumtaz Mahall) but the 
royal mother or royal sister. 98 Perhaps no people showed greater 
regard for their mothers than the Rajputs. This is best illustrated 
by the ever recurring phrase “make thy mother’s milk resplendent”. 
Rana Sangram Singh II of Mewar had made it a principle to pay 
his respects to his mother every morning before taking his meals. 983 
At the command of his mother, 16 years old Patta put the saffron 
robe and died fighting during the famous assault of Chitor by 
Akbar." 

A Muslim woman inherited a definite share of her husband’s or 
father’s property with absolute right to dispose of it. Unlike her 
Hindu sister, she retained the right after marriage. Mahr or ante¬ 
nuptial settlement was her another safeguard whereas a Hindu lady 
had no right to the property of her husband’s parents. A Hindu 
lady was entitled to maintenance besides movable property like or¬ 
naments, jewellery, costly apparel, etc. Thus from legal point of 
view, women were reduced to a position of dependency in every 
sphere of life. Caste and seclusion brought about her social, poli¬ 
tical and intellectual stultification. They confined themselves to 
household work excepting the women belonging to agricultural and 
labouring classes who helped their men-folk in their home indus¬ 
tries, agriculture, breeding of animals, spinning, weaving, tailoring, 
etc. Some of them even kept shops. Many others, especially Mu¬ 
hammadans and Bengalis, took up dancing and singing as a profes¬ 
sion. Some acted as mid wives, while the more educated adopted 
teaching as a profession. 100 

In spite of their strict seclusion, however, some Mughul ladies 
were writers of distinction and administrators of rare merit. Gul- 
badan Begam, the author of the Humayun-ntima, and Jahan Ara, 
the biographer of Shibyah and Munisal Arwah hold an enviable 
position among the literary figures of that age. Mira Bai, Salima 
Sultana, Nur Jahan, Sitn-un-Nisa, the tutoress of Jahan Ara, and 


702 


SOCIAL CONDITION 


Zlb-un-Nisa, the eldest daughter of Aurangzlb, were poetesses of 
distinction. Ramabhadramba, the author of Raghundthabhyudayam, 
MadhuravanI, translator in verse of Andhra-Rdmdyana , Tirumalam- 
ba, author of Varaddmbikdparinayam, and Mohanahgl, author of the 
love poem Marichiparinayam are well-known Sanskrit poetesses of 
the period. In Maharashtra Aka Bai and Kena Bai, disciples of 
Ramdas SvamI, were considered important literary figures. In the 
administrative sphere, we might mention the names of the Chandel 
princess of Gondwana, Rani Durgavatl, Chand Bibi of Ahmadnagar 
and Makhduma-u-Jaha<n, who ruled Deccan as a regent on behalf of 
Nizam Shah of the BahmanI family. Sahibjl, the daughter of ‘All 
Mardan, was the actual ruler of Kabul during her husband’s viceroy¬ 
alty and, after his death, ruled over the turbulent Afghans without 
any serious opposition. 101 Nur Jahan was the real power behind 
Jahangir’s throne. Tarabai Mohite was the supreme guiding force 
in Maharashtra after the death of her husband Raja Ram. She dis¬ 
played such marvellous capacity and administrative ability in en¬ 
countering the Mughul onslaught that threatened to engulf the 
Maratha State that all the efforts of the Emperor Aurangzlb failed 
miserably. Sir Jadunath Sarkar rightly observes: “Her administra¬ 
tive genius and strength of character saved the nation in that awful 
crisis.” 


Education 

The system of education in medieval times was still at a rudi¬ 
mentary stage. Primary schools in the modern sense of the word, 
probably did not exist. Tols or schools attached to temples, Hindu 
or Buddhist, and maintained by grants or endowments made for 
that specific purpose, were to be found throughout the country. The 
teachers there would not only solicit contributions to raise the build¬ 
ing but also to feed their pupils. No fee was paid as to give in¬ 
struction free is enjoined by the sacred scriptures of the Brahmans. 
John Marshall, who visited India in the later 17th century writes: 
“Hindus never teach their children for money; those they teach, 
they give them victuals, too, besides their learning which is estimated 
as a gift.” 102 Maktabs or the Muslim primary institutions, usually 
attached to a mosque, were common sight during the Mughul period. 
The traveller, Della Valle, probably refers to them when he writes 
that in Jahangir’s time there were private schools in every town 
and village. 103 

There was no printed primer, but the children were made to 
write the letters of the alphabet and figures on wooden boards or on 
the dust of the ground with their fingers. Usually the students 


703 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


had their lessons under the shade of a tree. Combined letters were 
practised and difficult words selected from a standard book like the 
Qur'an were dictated. Great importance was attached to calligra¬ 
phy and students were instructed to imitate and practise the style of 
the best calligraphists of the day. 

As soon as the boys could read and write, grammar, followed 
by the text of the Qur’an, was invariably introduced in every 
Maktdb. m Every child had to learn it by rote. There is definite 
evidence of the fact that most of the boys could read even if they 
did not understand the text. There is little evidence about the 
course of instructions in vogue in Hindu institutions. Growse, how¬ 
ever, thinks that Ramayana formed the chief text in the primary 
schools. 105 But as the Ramayana was put in Hindi by Tulsi Das at 
the end of Akbar’s reign, that could not obviously have been a text 
book till the end of the 16th century. According to Bernier, how¬ 
ever, the Puranas were taken up after learning the alphabet. The 
teaching of elementary mathematics went side by side with literacy. 
After finishing Qur'an, Muslim students took lessons in Gulistan, 
Bostan and poems of Firdausi, while the Sanskrit scholars studied 
the Puranas, Upanishads and Sastras and sometimes the Vedas. 106 
At Banaras there were in existence various colleges for specialisa¬ 
tion in different subjects such as the Vedas, grammar, poetry, 
Vedanta, logic, law and astronomy. 

The teachers were held in high respect. The pupils would 
touch their feet and speak only with permission. A teacher who 
could lecture without the help of books was very much respected 
and remembered for his knowledge. Badaum specially mentions 
one Shaikh ‘Abdullah of Badaon, who never felt the “necessity of 
referring to a book for the purpose of solving those questions and 
obscure subtleties, for whatever he had once seen, he had on the 
tip of his tongue.” 107 

The chief centres of learning or universities, if we may call 
them so, were at places where the renowned scholars had made 
their abode. Hindus preferred shrines and sacred places where pil¬ 
grim traffic supplied a subsidiary source of income to the teachers 
residing there, and thus, free from the worries of livelihood, they 
pursued their studies undisturbed. Banaras, Nadia, Mithila, Ma¬ 
thura, Tirhut, Paithan, Karhad, Thatta, Multan and Sirhind were 
the famous seats of Hindu learning. Dharmadhikarl, Sera Bhafta 
and MounI were the learned families which figured prominently 
at Banaras for more than three centuries (1500-1800). Raja Jai 
Singh also founded a college there for the education of the princes. 


704 


SOCIAL CONDITION 


There were other seminaries where famous Pandits interpreted and 
expounded the fundamentals of Hindu religion and philosophy. 
Nadia, in Bengal, was, after Banaras, the greatest centre of Hindu 
learning in the country during the Mughul days. In Navadvipa 
alone there were 4,000 pupils and 600 teachers in 1680. Vasudeva 
Sarvabhauma (1450-1525), the great scholar of the 16th century, 
was the founder of the famous Nadia school of Nyaya which even 
outrivalled Mithila. Raghunatha 6iromani was also the founder of 
a school of logic at Banaras. Raghunandana created a school of 
Smriti in the 16th century along with that of logic at Nadia. Mithila 
retained its importance as a centre of learning during the Mughul 
times. In fact a student of this university performed digvijaya at 
the instance of Akbar, who was so pleased that he gave him the 
whole town of Mithila as a gift. Madura was famous as a centre of 
studies in Indian philosophy. There were over 10,000 students in 
its several colleges which specialised in the different branches of 
Indian philosophy. Thatta had about 400 colleges according to 
Hamilton. The students there specialised in theology, philology and 
politics. 108 Multan was famous as a centre of specialisation in astro¬ 
nomy, astrology, mathematics and medicine. 109 Sirhind had a fam¬ 
ous school of medicine, most probably Ayurvedic. It supplied doc¬ 
tors to the whole Empire. 110 

Agra, Delhi, Lahore, Jaunpur, Gujarat, Sialkot and Ahmadabad 
were some of the main centres of Muslim learning. Akbar, Shah 
Jahan and Jahan Ara built madrasahs at Agra. Akbar even invited 
a scholar, Chalpi Beg, from Shiraz to teach there. 111 Some of the 
renowned scholars like Sayyid Shah Mir of Samana took their abode 
there and attracted students from far and wide. 112 The traveller 
Peter Mundy refers to a College of Jesuits at Agra. At Delhi there 
were a number of madrasahs, important among them being Huma- 
yun’s madrasah built in honour of Zain-ud-Din Khafi 113 and Maham 
Anaga’s madrasah known as Khair-ul-Manzil, opposite the western 
gate of Purana Qilah, called Madrasah-i-Begam by Badauni. 114 It 
was a residential madrasah; students resided there in the rooms of 
both the storeys and classes were held in the hall. Shah Jahan built 
a magnificent madrasah called Darul Baqa on the southern side of 
the Jami‘ Masjid. 115 Madrasah-i-Rahimiyya known after the name 
of ‘Abdur Rahim, father of Waliullah, was built during Aurangzlb’s 
time. 

Jaunpur and Gujarat were the two other centres where learned 
scholars had taken up their residence. Jaunpur, rightly called the 
‘Shiraz of India’, kept up its importance throughout the Mughul 
period and attracted students from far and wide. Mukundarama, the 

705 

M.E.—45 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


author of the poem Chandi-mangala , refers to the existence of several 
maktabs in Gujarat. 116 The Madrasah Faiz Safa in Naharwara Pat- 
tan (Gujarat) and Langar-LDuwazda Imam in Ahmadabad (now 
called Bara Imam ka Kotla) were famous centres of learning. 
Aurangzib instructed, the diwdns of Gujarat to appoint every year 
teachers at the cost of the State and to pay stipends to students, 
according to the recommendations of the Sadr of the province and 
attestation of the teacher. 117 

Lahore’s importance as a centre of learning dates from the time 
of Aurangzib when the reputation of its scholars “attracted many a 
pupil from far and wide.” 118 Kashmir, with its pleasant and re* 
freshing climate, was a place of retreat for scholars, some of whom 
such as Abu Talib Kamil, Mulla Shah Badakshi completed their 
works there. Among other centres of learning, Gwalior, Sialkot, 
Ambala and Thaneswar may be mentioned. 

Duration of courses, texts and certificates 

The courses of study usually varied from 10-16 years for gra¬ 
duation. Some more years were required for doctorate after study¬ 
ing under a renowned scholar. No regular examinations were held 
in those days. A good mastery of certain specified courses, of which 
the teacher was the sole judge, was sufficient for promotion to the 
next standard. It was not surprising to see a pupil being promoted 
to the next standard within 6 months. No regular degrees were 
awarded. To have studied in a reputed institution or under a re¬ 
nowned teacher was the greatest qualification one could have. There 
are, however, instances of diplomas being awarded by great scholars 
of theology to the pupils conferring upon them the authority to give 
instructions therein. 

Some sort of diploma or degree was awarded in some of the 
Hindu institutions, as for example, in the University of Mithila. 
Eaghunatha, a student of the Nadia University was deputed to 
“exact from Mithila, a charter to confer degrees”. An unusual type 
of examination called Salakd-pariksha marked the termination of 
the graduation course in Mithila. A candidate was expected to 
explain correctly that page of the manuscript which was pierced 
last by a needle run through it. 119 Chhurikd-bandhanam resembled 
our present day convocation which was marked by the tying of a 
dagger to the dress of the pupil as a token of his graduation. 120 Some 
renowned scholars earned the titles of Sarvabhauma, Akbariya Kali - 
das, Pratyagra Patanjali, etc. The post-collegiate studies were in¬ 
variably completed under a specialist. It was not easy to get one- 


706 


SOCIAL CONDITION 


self admitted as the scholars were reluctant to have more than a 
limited number of students. It was with great difficulty that Mul¬ 
lah Shah Badakhshi agreed to take Jahan Ara as his pupil. Badauni 
was proud to have had the privilege to study under Mir Sayyid 
Jalal, the saint. For still higher studies eager scholars visited the 
chief places of Muslim learning in Western and Central Asia such 
as Mecca, Medina, Basra, Kofa, Yemen, Cairo, Nishapur (Iran), 
Baghdad, Hijaz, Khurasan, etc. 

Courses of Study 

Very little information about the curriculum then in vogue is 
available. The courses of study in Muslim institutions usually com¬ 
prised grammar, rhetoric, logic, theology, metaphysics, literature and 
jurisprudence. Astronomy, mathematics and medicine were in¬ 
cluded under Hindu influence. The Arabic curriculum included be¬ 
sides grammar, syntax, rhetoric, philosophy, logic, scholasticism, 
tafsir, fich, Hadis, etc. The Persian texts included Ruqqat-i-Abu- 
’l-Fazl, Letters of Chandra Bhan Brahman, and Mulla Munir, Insha- 
i-Yusufi, Insha-i-Madho Ram, Lilavati translated by Faizi, Shaikh 
Nasr-i-Zahuri’s work, Zafar-riama-i-Kangra by Raja Husain, Akbar- 
nama of Abu-’l-Fazl, Iqbal-nama-i-Jahangirl, Zafar-nama of Shara- 
fuddin ‘All Yazdi, Tarikh-i-Firuz Shahl, Razm-nama, Firdausi’s 
Shah-nama, Poems of Amir Khusrav, Mulla Jami’s works, Nizami’s 
works, Dlwians of Hafiz, Khaqani, Anwari, Shams-i-Tabriz, Qasaid 
of Badr-i-Chach, Urfi and Faizi, Bahar-i-Danish of Inayatullah, 
Anwar-i-Suhaili of Husain Waiz, etc. 121 

The subjects of study in Hindu institutions included grammar, 
logic, philosophy, history, poetry, mathematics, astronomy, astro¬ 
logy, medicine, and veterinary science. Physics and Chemistry 
were studied but were regarded as a part of the science of Mathe¬ 
matics. Hindus, especially Brahmans, were interested in philosophy 
and mathematics which were in vogue in India from ancient times. 

Very little attention was however paid to geography in schools 
and colleges. Aurangzlb heaped abuses on his tutor for wasting 
time on the subtleties of Arabic metaphysics to the neglect of prac¬ 
tical subjects such as geography and politics. People Were igno¬ 
rant of the geographical position of the neighbouring countries. A 
map of the globe was so rare a thing that Sir Thomas Roe included 
it among the presents he offered to the Governor of Surat. 

Women's Education 

Women’s education was not completely ignored, though no re¬ 
gular separate school seems to have existed for imparting education 


707 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


to girls who had their lessons usually from their parents. Girls 
in their childhood attended schools along with boys and learnt the 
Qur’an (if they were Muhammadans) and one or two other lessons 
by rote. The rich appointed tutors to teach their daughters at home. 
The daughters of Rajput chiefs and some Bengali zaminddrs were 
usually able to read and write. Special care was taken for the 
education of Mughul princesses, almost all of whom daily read the 
Qur’an and occasionally corresponded with their relatives. Some 
of them even composed verses. The average Mughul princess re¬ 
ceived but a limited education. 122 Her regular studies came to an 
end with her marriage which usually took place at an early age. 
Gulbadan Begam’s Humayun-nama, too, abounds with spelling mis¬ 
takes and clumsy sentences. Even the poems of Zib-un-Nisa and 
Zinat-un-Nisa do not rise so high in poetic excellence as those of 
contemporary male authors. 

There is, however, little doubt about the literacy of the average 
middle class woman who had sufficient knowledge of either Hindi, 
Persian or the native provincial language to enable her to study 
the religious scriptures. 122a The knowledge of Sanskrit was wide¬ 
spread in the South. A Malayalam work Chandrotsavan gives us 
an idea about the general reading of educated women in the South 
and this includes, gakuntalam, Mdlavikagnimitram and other Sans¬ 
krit dramas. A well-known work of the period entitled Mahildmri - 
duvani gives us a list of no less than 35 women all of importance, 
“not minor poets but poetesses who have left their mark on the 
literary sphere”. Special stress was laid on the education of widows, 
some of whom, as for example Hatl Vidyalankara became teachers, 
We may well concur with Mukundarama’s view that “there is evi¬ 
dence to show that women belonging to the lower ranks of society, 
such as house-maids, were illiterate, but there is nothing to discoun¬ 
tenance female education.” 123 


Libraries 

Quite a large number of libraries existed during the Mughul 
times. Every madrasah usually possessed a library, big or small, at w 
tached to it. We might refer here to the libraries attached to’the 
madrasah called Shams-i-Burhani at Ahmadabad, Madrasah Faiz 
Safa, Shaikh Ibrahim’s madrasah at Kutiana in Kathiawar (1689) 
and Sultan Ahmad Khatwi’s madrasah at Sarkahaiz (Ahmadabad). 
The biggest was, however, the Imperial Library which contained 
the King’s collection of books. All the Mughul Emperors 124 from 
Babur to Aurangzib were men of literary taste; they were eager to 
collect and preserve rare books and valued presents of scholarly 

708 


SOCIAL CONDITION 


books from learned authors. As in every other sphere, Akbar in¬ 
troduced reforms in the management, classification and storage of 
books which had by that time increased enormously. 125 The Mughul 
princesses Salima Sultana, and Zlb-un-Nisa, possessed libraries of 
their own. 126 

The example of the royalty was followed by nobles and cour¬ 
tiers who had their own libraries. ‘Abdur-Rahlm Khan Khanan 
kept a staff of 95 persons to look after his huge collection of books. 127 
Shaikh FaizI had about 4,600 books in his library. Mahmud Gawan, 
Vazlr of Muhammad Shah Bahmani, left a huge library containing 
35,000 volumes. 

Maharaja Chhika Deva, Raja of Mysore (1672-1704), collected in 
his library very rare Sanskrit and historical works which were un¬ 
fortunately subsequently destroyed by Tipu Sultan. 128 Maharaja 
Sawai Jai Singh possessed an unrivalled library containing all the 
astronomical treatises available in India. He procured books even 
from Europe. 129 There were big libraries at the famous seats of 
Hindu learning such as Banaras, Tirhut, Mithila, Nadia, etc. These 
libraries stocked huge collection of rare, authentic and ancient works 
on philosophy, medicine, religion, history and many other sciences. 
Bernier saw a large hall at Banaras entirely filled with these manu¬ 
scripts. 130 The Brahmans of Kashmir had a sufficient stock of 
books which they regularly studied. 131 Many of these libraries were 
later on destroyed by the Muhammadans. 

1. This chapter is mainly based on the author’s Society and Culture during the^ 
Mughal Age, Second Edition, Agra, 1963, and Social Life Under the Mughals, 
Agra, 1963. (The picture is only a broad and general outline, as it is not 
possible to give details of local variations in a vast country like India—Editor). 

2. Bdburnama (trans. Beveridge), p. 519. For details refer to Chopra, Society 
and Culture during the Mughal Age, op.cit., pp. 1-3. 

3. Ain, I, trans. Blochmann (1873), pp. 88-90. 

4. Monserrate, S.J., The Commentary of, Trans, from Latin by J. S. Hoyland, 
annotated by S.N. Banerji, 1922, p. 198. 

4a. Turbans were not used by the Hindus in Eastern and Southern India, though 
some put them on in imitation of the Muslims—Editor. 

5. Ain, I, (1873), op. cit., pp. 75-77. 

6. Saletore, B.A., Social and Political Life in Vijayanagar Empire , Vol. II, 
p. 302. 

7. Padumavati of Malik Muhammad Jayasi, translation by Grierson, p. 569. 

7a. For ornaments refer to Ovington, J., A Voyage in the Year 1689, London, 
1696, p. 320; Manucci, op. cit., Ill; p. 40; Ain, III (ed. J.N. Sarkar), p. 
343; Ain, II, pp. 314-16; Mandelslo, op cit., p. 50; Thevenot, Monsieur de, 
Travels of, Into the Levant, Trans. English, 1686, pt. Ill, chapter XX, quoted 
in Chopra, Society and Culture during the Mughal Age, op. cit., pp. 25-31. 

8. For details refer to Chopra, op. cit., Society and Culture during the Mughal 
Age, pp. 32-54. 

9. Mandelslo Albert, Book III, by Adam Olearious, Second Edition, London, 
1669, p. 64. Della Valle, Pietro, The Travels of a Noble Roman into 
East Indies and Arbian Deserta, London, 1664, p. 409; Tavernier, John Ba- 
ptista, The Six Voyages of, through Turkey Into Persia and the East Indies, 
London, 1678, p. 124. 

10. Iqbalnama-i-Jahangiri, trans. Urdu by Maulavi Abalswala Muhammad Zak- 
riya, Osmania, 1928, p. 105. 


709 



THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


22 

23. 


11. Tuzuk-i-Babari, trans. Rogers and Beveridge, I, p. 419. 

12. Ain I, (1873), op. cit., p. 59. 

13. A.N. (trans.), op. cit., I, p. 208. Faluda is “a jelly strained from boiled 
wheat, and eaten with the expressed juice of fruits and ice to which cream 
is also sometimes added.” 

14. Purchas, ‘Hakluyt Posthumus’ or Purchas and His Pilgrims, Vol. IV, p. 41. 

15. Mandelslo, op. cit., p. 69. 

16. Dasgupta, J.N., Bengal in the 16th Century, p. 181. Many other Bengali 
texts refer to Bengali food in great detail. Cl. History of Medieval Bengal (in 
Bengali) by R. C. Majumdar, pp. 318-23. 

17. Ain, I, trans. Blochmann (1873), p. 58. 

18. Ibid., pp. 58-59. 

19. Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri, trans. Rogers & Beveridge, I, p. 374. 

20. Manucci, I, p. 175. 

21. Storey, C.A., Persian Literature—A Biographical Survey, London, 1927-39, 

II, Fasc. Ill, p. 460. 

For a detailed treatment of the subject refer to P.N. Chopra, Social Life 
Under the Mughals, pp. 86-122. 

Havell, E.B., Indian Architecture, London, 1913, pp. 153, 171; Percy Brown, 
Indian Architecture — The Islamic Period, Bombay, pp. 100, 127-130, 132; 
Fergusson, James, History of Indian and Eastern Architecture, n, p. 170, etc. 

24. Pelsaert, Francisco, The Remonstrantie of, translated from the Dutch by 
W H. Moreland & P. Geyl, Cambridge, 1925, prp. 66-67. 

24a For a contemporary account of the houses of the various classes of people 
refer to Bernier, Travels in the Mughal Empire , English trans. by A. Con¬ 
stable, revised by V.S. Smith, Oxford, 1934, pp. 247, 285; Mandelslo, op. cit. y 
p. 54; Pelsaert, op. cit, pp. 66-67; Sen, S. N., Indian Travels of Thevenot & 
Careri, published by National Archives of India, 1949, pp. 22, 163; Khulasat, 
India of Aurangzib bv J N. Sarkar, p. 34; Tavernier, J. Baptista, The Sirr) 
Voyages of, through Turkey Into Persia and the East Indies, London, 1)678, 
pt. I; Ain (Sarkar) in, p. 352; Manucci, III, p. 41. 

25. Bernier, op. cit., p. 247. Also see Chopra, Social Life under the Muahals , 
po. 117-19; and Mahalingam, Administration and Social Life Under 
Viiayanaqar, p. 268; Roe, Sir Thomas, The Embassy to the Court of the Great 
Mogul (1615-19) edited by William Foster, London, 1899, p. 65. 

26. Abdul Aziz, Thrones, Chairs and Seats used by the Indian Mughals , p. 182. 

27. Dasgupta, op. cit., p. 298; Mahalingam, op. cit., pp. 289-90. 

28. For a detailed account of these festivals refer to Chopra, Society and Culture 
durina the Mughal Age, pp. 83-107. 

29. Ain, III ( Sarkar), p. 319; Tuzuk-i-Jahangir! (R & B), I, p. 246. 

30 Macauliffe, M. A., The Sikh Religion, Introduction, pp. lxxi-lxxvi. 

31. Ain , I, (1873), p. 216. 

.32 .Ibid., p. 210; Tuzuk (R & B), I, p. 367, 

33. Ain, III, (Sarkar), pp. 350-52. ., 

34. Khafi Khan, Muntakhab-ul-Lubab, n, p. 214; Sarkar, History of Aurangzib, 

35 For ^details about Nauroz refer to Roe’s Embassy, pp. 142-44: Mandelslo, 
op. cit, p. 41; Bernier, op. cit., pp. 272-73; Monserrate, S.J., The Commen¬ 
tary of, Trans, by J.S. Hoyland, Oxford University Press, 1922, pp. 175-76. 

36. Manrique, F.S., Travels of, ed. by Luard & Hosten, Vol II, pp. 195-200. 

37. Qanun-i-Humayuni by Khwandamir trans. into English by Beni Prasad, 

38. Sarkar, J.N., History of Aurangzib , m, pp. 85-86. . . _ 

39 Thevenot, Monsieur de, Travels of, into the Levant, in three parts, trans- 

' fated into English, 1686, pt. Ill, chapter XXVI, p. 47 A _ ^ .. 

40. Humayunvdma by Gulbadan Begum, trans. into English by A.S. Beveridge, 

London, 1902, p. 126. 

42* Fo^ctetailed treatment * of^*the subject and sources refer to P.N. Chopra, 

. Mandelslo 7 op. p. 66; g Manucci, H, op. cit., p 460; Badaum, Muntakhab- 

uUTawarikh , trans. Vol. II by W.H. Lowe, pp. 18, 324, etc. 

45 A N. II, p. 368, Tr. II, p. 534. 

46! For details see Chopra, op. cit., pp. 62-65. 

710 


43. 

44. 


SOCIAL CONDITION 


47. Majumdar, A.K., The Chaulukyas of Guj'arat, p. 359; Mazumdar, B.P., Socio- 
Economic History of Northern India, p. 254. 

48. Sale tore, op. cit., II, p. 420. 

49. Qamargha is a Turkish word denoting a great battle in which a large num¬ 
ber of wild animals are driven into enclosure and killed. Being a Turkish 
game, it must have been in vogue during the regimes of Babur and Huma- 
yun but no documentary evidence is traceable. 

50. Quoted from Chaitanya Bhagavata in “Indian Culture”, Vol. X, 1943, p. 121. 

51. Sarkar, J.N., Aurangzih, Vol. V, pp. 471-73. 

52. For a detailed treatment of this subject refer to P.N. Chopra, Social Life 
During the Mughal Age, op. cit., pp. 1-51. 

53. Abu-’l-Fazl. Ain-i-Akbari, Vol. Ill, trans. by H.S. Jarrett, revised by Sir 
Jadunath Sarkar, 1948, p. 317. 

54. Nandimukh Sraddha is a commemorative offering to the Manes preliminary 
to any joyous occasion such as initiation, marriage, etc. in which nine balls 
of meat are offered to the deceased father, grandfather, great grandfather, to 
the maternal grandfather and to the mother, paternal grandmother and pa¬ 
ternal great grandmother. Pandey, R.B., Hindu Samskaras, Banaras, 1949, 
p. 123. Also see Atkins, A.G., The Ramayana of Tulsidas, English trans¬ 
lation, Vol. I, p. 246. 

55. Macauliffe, M.A., The Sikh Religion, Oxford, 1909, Vol. I, p. 242. 

56. Dass, Shyam Sunder, Hindi Shabd Sagar, Vol. I, Prayag, 1916, p. 291. 

57. Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri, trans. Rogers & H. Beveridge, Vol. I, p. 357. 

58. Majumdar, R.C., History of Bengal, Vol. I, p. 600. 

59. Manucci, N.V., Storia Do Mogor or Mughal India, trans. William Irvine, 
Vol. Ill, p, 150. 

60. ', J.R.A.S. (Bombay), III, p. 15.. Also see Macauliffe, op. cit., I, p. 145, 

Jayasi’s Padumavati (Urdu), pp. 148-49; Growse, Ramayana of Tulsidas, p. 
159, etc. 

61. Ain, III (Sarkar), op. cit., p. 354. 

62. Ibid., p. 356. 

63. Ibid., p. 307. 

64. Maasir ul Urnra, I, trans. Beveridge, p. 123. 

65. Refer to P. N. Chopra, Social Life Under the Mughals, pp. 52-69 for 
details. 

66. Manucci, op. cit., Ill, p. 38. 

67. Macauliffe, op. cit., I, p. 49. 

68. Mandelslo, op. cit. 

69. Ain, I, trans. Blochmann, revised by D.C. Philliott, 1939, p. 166. 

70. Ibid., p. 167 and f.n. 1. 

71. Maasir-i-Alamgiri, p. 98. 

72. For details refer to Chopra, Social Life Under the Mughals, op. cit., pp. 
123-40. 

73. Sen, S.N., Travels of Thevenot & Careri, p. 73. 

74. Hoyland, J.S., The Commentary of Father Monserrate, translated by S.N. 
Banerji, Oxford University Press, 1922, p. 199. 

75. Ain, op. cit., I. pp. 161-62. 

76. Sen, op. cit., p. 72; Das, H.H. Norris Embassy to Aurangzib, Calcutta, 1902, 

p. 162. 

77. For details refer to Chopra, Social Life Under the Mughals, pp. 132-33. 

78. Balakrishna, Commercial Relations between England and India (1600-1757), 
pp. 279-81. 

79. Mahalingam, T.V., Economic Life in Vijayanagar, op. cit., p. 148. 

80. B.N. (Beveridge), p. 626. 

81. Qanungo, K.R., Sher Shah, p. 392. 

82. One Jaribi equalled 25 dhara and one dhara amounted to 42 fingers. 

83. Ovington, op. cit., p. 250. 

84. Badauni, II, pp. 391-92, Tr. II, pp. 404-6. 

85. Sarkar, J.N., Studies in Mughal India, p. 118. 

86. Della Valle, Pietro— The Travels of a Noble Roman into East Indies andh 
Arabian Deserta, London, 1664, p. 434; Mandelslo, op. cit., p. 51. 

87. Akbamama III, p. 58 & 260; Tr. Ill, pp. 83 & 378. 

88. Manucci, op. cit., p. 348. 

89. Author of the poem Chandi composed in the 16th century. Translated into 
English by J.N. Dasgupta under the title “Bengal in the 16th century”, Cal¬ 
cutta, 1914, p. 178. 


711 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


90. Manucci, op. cit., HI, p. 55. 

91. Badauni, II, p. 39, Tr. II, p. 405. 

92. Ain , I, (1873), p. 227. 

93. Tod, Col. James, Annals & Antiquities of Rajasthan, edited by W. Crookes, 
Vol. II, pp. 731-32. 

94. Badauni, op. cit., H, p. 356; Tr. II, p. 367. Also Ain, I, (1873), p. 277. 

94a. But in Bengal, a section of Brahmans, called Kulins, had normally many 
wives, whose number sometimes exceeded even fifty (Editor). 

94b. Manucci, op. cit.. Ill, p. 155. 

95. Tod, op. cit., II, pp. 728-30. 

96. Manucci, op. cit., II, p. 60; Thevenot, op. cit., chapter XLIX, p. 84. 

97. A.N., I, p. 90, Tr. I, p. 231, Tuzuk (trans. R & B), I, p. 78. 

98. Sarkar, J.N., Aurangzib, op. cit., Ill, p. 57. 

98a. Tod, op. cit., I, p. 479. 

99. Ibid., p. 326. 

100. Badauni, II, pp. 301-2, Tr. II, p. 311; Manucci, II, pp. 330-31. 

101. Sarkar, J.N., Studies in Mughal India, pp. 114-17. 

102. John Marshall in India, notes and observations in Bengal (1668-72), edited 
by Sir Shafaat Ahmad Khan, Oxford, 1927, p. 386. 

103. Della Valle (ed. Edward Grey), II, pp. 227-28. 

104. Badauni, III, p. 28, Tr. Ill, p. 48. 

105. Growse, F.S., Prologue to the Ramayana of Tulsi Das, ASB (1876), pp. 22-23. 

106. Bernier (1891), pp. 335-36. 

107. Badauni, III, p. 56, Tr. Ill, p. 73. 

108. Hamilton, Alexander, A New Account of East Indies (1688-1723), Vol. I, 
p. 127. 

109. Maasir-i-Alamgiri, E & D. Vol. VII, p. 184. 

110. Monserrate, op. cit., p. 102. 

111. Nadvi, Abul Hasan, Hindostan ki Qadimi Islami Darsgahan, p. 29. 

112. Badauni, III, p. 119; Tr. Ill, pp. 174-75. 

113. Ibid., I, p. 471, Tr. I, p. 471. 

114. Ibid., II, p. 60, Tr. II, p. 62. 

115. Nadvi, op. cit., p. 22. 

116. Dasgupta, op. cit., p. 91. 

117 Mirat-i-Ahmadi, Calcutta Review, October 1940, p. 311. 

118. Manucci, op. cit., II, p. 424. 

119. Mookerji, R.K., Ancient Indian Education, p. 598. 

120. Altekar, A S., Education in Ancient India, pp. 292-93. 

121. Refer to Appendix A, in Chopra, Society and Culture During the Mughal 
Age, pp. 172-73 for details. This list has been compiled from Chahar Cha- 
man, Shibli Numani, Shir ul Ajam, III, (1922), pp. 149-50, Latif, Dr. Sayyid 
Abdulla, Adliat-i-Farsi Main Hinduon ka Hissa, Anj aman-i-Taraqqi- 
i-Urdu Delhi, 1924, pp. 239-42, Nadvi, A.H., Hindostan ki Qadimi Islami 
Darsgahan, pp. 120-24. 

122. Tuzuk (R & B), II, p. 277; E D. VII, p. 162. 

122a. This seems to be very doubtful (Editor). 

123. Daseupta, op. cit., p. 180. So far as Bengal is concerned we have positive 
evidence that female education was at its lowest ebb in the eighteenth and the 
first half of the 19th century and there was a superstitious belief that a 
woman who reads or writes becomes a widow (Editor). 

124. For sources refer to Chopra, Society & Culture in Mughal Age, p. 168, 
f.n. 1 & 2. 

125. Ain, op. cit. I, p. 110. 

126. Maasir-i-Alamgiri, trans. Urdu by Talab, pp. 387, 394. Also see Magan Lall, 
Dewan of Zeb un Nisa, BORS, Jan. 1927. 

127. Maasir-i-Rahimi, III, pp. 1680, 1696. 

128. Margaret, Macricol, edited, Poems by Indian Women, Heritage of India Series, 

p. 26. 

129. Kaye, G., Astronomical Observatories of Jai Singh. 

130. Bernier, Travels, op. cit., p. 335. 

131. Iqbalnama-i-Jahangir! translated in Urdu by Maulavi Abalswala Muhammad 
Zakriya, Osmania, 1928, p. 107. 


712 


CHAPTER XXII 


ECONOMIC CONDITION 

India’s economy during the Mughul Period (1526-1803), as in 
the ages before, was predominantly agricultural. More than se¬ 
venty-five per cent of the population lived in the villages and were 
directly or indirectly connected with land. Arable land was enough 
and to spare, and very often the government had to resort to per¬ 
suasion to make the peasantry extend the area under cultivation. 
The country, “full of men and full of products,” 1 was divided into 
villages which were surrounded by cultivable fields, and had also 
land for pasture and forests, for fuel and other purposes. The vil¬ 
lage known as gdon was called mauza in official records. There was 
a wide range of variation in the area of the villages, and these were 
divided into fields or plots which were marked by raised borders. 
The peasants gave each plot , or field a name. There were two types 
of villages, viz., asli (one having its habitation intact) and dakhili 
(the deserted village) the area of which was incorporated in the 
neighbouring villages but its name continued to be on the govern¬ 
ment record. Another classification was into the raiyati villages and 
talluqa villages. The raiyati village belonged to the Khalsa land, 
but the talluqa village was under a zaminddr, who paid land reve¬ 
nue to the government. The cultivators were called asdmi or raaya 
or mazara. These terms were used for unprivileged peasantry, who 
were not zamindars 2 The cultivators followed the traditional me¬ 
thods of cultivation and irrigation. Babur says that there were no 
canals, that fields were irrigated with river, tank or well water, and 
describes how irrigation was done by means of buckets or wheels. 
“At the well-edge,” he writes, “they set up a fork of wood, having 
a roller adjusted between the forks, tie a rope to a large bucket, 
put the rope over the roller, and tie its other end to the bullock. 
One person must drive the bullock, another empty the bucket. 
Every time the bullock turns after having drawn the bucket out 
of the well, that rope lies on the bullock-track in pollution of urine 
and dung, before it descends again into the well. To some crops 
needing water, men and women carry it by repeated efforts in pit¬ 
chers.” 3 This method was followed in Agra, Chandwar, Bayana 
and the neighbouring districts. The thirty kos long canal from 
Khizrabad to Safidun built by Firuz Tughlaq which had fallen into 
disrepair was, in the time of Akbar, re-excavated by Shaha-ud-dln 


713 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Ahmad Khan to irrigate his jdgfir land. It was repaired and a new 
channel from Safidun to Delhi, 30 kos long, was excavated during 
the reign of Shah Jahan. 3a In the Punjab and some other parts irriga¬ 
tion was done by means of what is called the Persian wheel. This 
too has been described in the Babur-ndma 4 The fields were ma¬ 
nured with animal dung, and intensive ploughing was done. The 
people were familiar with the principle of rotation of crops, and in 
many fields they raised two crops— Kharif and Rabi —in a year. 
Not only were the ordinary crops raised, but in some parts special 
crops, such as cotton, sugarcane and indigo were grown. 

Agricultural Products 

The agricultural raw-materials grown may be considered under 
five heads, i.e., (i) grains, (ii) fibres, (iii) indigo, (iv) sugarcane, 
and (v) poppy. The foodgrains produced were wheat, barley, gram, 
rice, millets, linseeds and pulses. Wheat was commonly grown in 
the provinces of Agra, Allahabad, Awadh, Delhi, Lahore, Multan, 
Malwa and Ajmer. 5 It was grown in the district of Qandahar also. 
The Qandahar wheat, a spring crop, was extremely white. The wheat 
crop depended on rainfall, and irrigation wherever possible. Barley 
was produced in almost all parts of the country, but not much in 
Bengal and Orissa. 6 Gram too was produced practically every¬ 
where. Rice, a tropical commodity, required plenty of water and 
high temperature, and water-logging areas were suitable for its 
growth. Bengal, Orissa, Bihar, Agra, Allahabad, Awadh, Delhi, 
Lahore, Khandesh, Berar and Kashmir produced good quality rice. 
Bengal produced plenty of rice of various kinds and raised some¬ 
times three crops a year, and supplied it to deficient areas, such as 
Cochin. 7 It was of several kinds, and Kar, Sukhdas and Shall , 
were superior qualities. Next to Bengal, Bihar produced quality 
rice in large quantities. Awadh produced large quantities of sukhdas , 
Madhkar and Jhanwdr rice “which for whiteness, delicacy, frag¬ 
rance and wholesomeness are scarcely to be matched.” 8 Abu-T-Fazl 
remarks that the Bihar rice “for its quality and quantity is rarely to 
be equalled.” 9 Fine quality rice was produced in Khandesh and 
Kashmir. Sukhdas rice was prized for its flavour and high quality. 
Millets consisted of cheaper grains, like jowar, bajra, kodon, siawan, 
mandua, etc; and formed the Kharif crops. These were grown on 
poorer soils of deficient rain-fall. Jowar and bajra were cultivated in 
Malwa, Gujarat, Ajmer, Khandesh, Delhi, Lahore, Agra, Allahabad, 
Awadh and Multan. 10 

* Pulses were mostly grown in Bihar, Allahabad, Awadh, Delhi, 
Lahore, Multan and Malwa. The chief pulses were moong, moth, 


714 


ECONOMIC CONDITION 


mash, arhar, lubia, peas, etc., and these were grown in the autumn 
harvest. 11 These formed a great source of providing vitaminous 
substances in the construction of the human body and were a very 
important item in the diet of vegetarian population. Linseed, like 
mustard and alsi, were grown mostly in the subas of Agra, Allahabad, 
Awadh, Delhi, Lahore, Malwa, Ajmer and Multan. 12 

Fibres: Cotton 

The chief fibre products consisted of cotton, wool, silk, hemp 
and jute. The last two furnished raw materials for some of the 
local industries. Cotton, wool, and silk were essential raw mate¬ 
rials for the textile industry. Cotton required volcanic and black 
soil, such as that of Malwa and Peninsular India, for its growth. 
Khandesh and Berar were the chief centres of fibre and cotton. 
But these were also produced in large quantities in the provinces of 
Agra, Allahabad, Delhi, Awadh, Multan and Ajmer. 13 Cotton 
goods were much in demand in Ahmadabad and Surat for embarka¬ 
tion to Persian Gulf and Arabia and also for some parts of Europe. 
Important centres of cotton and fine cotton cloths in the 16th cen¬ 
tury were Ujjain, Sironj, Tanda, Sonargaon (Dacca), etc., in Ben¬ 
gal, Ahmadabad, Navasari and Pattan in Gujarat, many places in 
Orissa, modern U.P. and the Deccan. 14 Fine cotton cloths manu¬ 
factured at Pattan in Gujarat were “taken to distant parts as gifts 
of value.” 15 

During the Mughul age cotton was “more widely grown than 
is now the case, though the aggregate of production was probably 
less, and it is reasonable to infer that most parts of the country 
were nearly self-sufficient in the matter of cotton as well as of food 
and other requisites.” 16 In almost every village there were looms 
for manufacturing cloth. The production of cotton cloth not only 
sufficed for the needs of the people, but it was exported to Burma, 
Malacca, Arabia and the east coast of Africa. In the time of Jahan¬ 
gir (1605-1627) the prices of the finer quality of yarn varied from 
rupees 6 to 7 (12 to 14 shillings) per pound. 17 During the reign of 
Shah Jahan (1628-1658) raw cotton was in demand for candle 
wicks and fustians (cloths which have flaxen warps with cotton 
wefts). So much cotton yarn was produced that a good part of it 
had to be exported, and it was difficult for other countries to com¬ 
pete with India in charkha spinning. 18 The chief spinning and ma¬ 
nufacturing centres were Navapura (104 miles from Surat), Lahore, 
Sialkot, Sonargaon (Dacca), Satgaon and many other places in Bengal, 
Gujarat, Awadh, Allahabad, Agra and Khandesh. Other important 
centres of cotton manufacture were Cambay, Broach, Sironj, Cali- 


715 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


cut and Ahmadabad. Lahore was famous for manufacturing fine 
cloths, Sialkot for tray-covers, Gujarat for Chtm and coloured tur¬ 
bans and Dacca for very fine muslin. 19 Agra and Fathpur Slkri 
were notable centres for the manufacture of carpets and fine stuffs. 20 
Banaras was celebrated for fine cotton and silk cloths of many kinds. 
In the 17th century manufactured cotton goods were, in substantial 
quantities, exported to Persia, Tartary, Turkey, Syria, Barbary, 
Arabia, Ethiopia and some other countries. 21 

Wool 

Wool, though not produced in all parts of India, was neverthe¬ 
less a fairly important industry in Akbar’s time. Kashmir and the 
western parts of Rajasthan were wool-producing areas. It was 
obtained from different animals, such as sheep, camels, goats and 
angoras. It was from the fleece of domestic sheep that commer¬ 
cial supply of wool was obtained. Abu-’l-Fazl speaks of the keen 
interest that Akbar showed in promoting the wool industry, parti¬ 
cularly the manufacture of shawls, and carpets of different varieties 
and colours. He says that the ‘Tus’ animal supplied fine wool of red, 
black and white colours. Shawls made of it were famous for their 
lightness, warmth and softness. 22 In the early days of Akbar’s 
reign shawls and some other costly woollens came mostly from 
Kashmir, but on account of Akbar’s patronage these began to be 
manufactured in the Punjab and some other parts, and in the city 
of Lahore alone were established more than a thousand workshops. 23 
A Lahore speciality was maydn, a light shawl of mixed silk and 
wool, and was used for turbans ( chirds) and loin bands (fotas). 24 
Most of the woollens, such as shawls, blankets, loin bands, turbans, 
etc. manufactured in the country came from Lahore, Gujarat and 
Kashmir. 25 Exquisite carpets, takya-masnads or woollen coverlets, 
formerly imported from Persia began to be manufactured in Agra, 
Fathpur Slkri, Lahore, Jaunpur and Zafarwal. 26 According to Ber¬ 
nier the shawls made of Tus cost Rs. 50/- to Rs. 150/ each, in the 
time of Shah Jahan. In the 17th century shawls continued to be 
manufactured not only in Kashmir but also in Lahore, Agra, Patna 
and some other places 27 The industry continued in a flourishing 
state till the end of the 17th century. Rough woollens were manu¬ 
factured at Agra and Fathpur Slkr! and in Bengal. These were 
used for clothing by the upper class and also to a limited extent 
by the middle class people. Woollen blankets, too, were manufac¬ 
tured at many places, and an ordinary blanket cost 10 dams or one- 
fourth of a rupee in the time of Akbar. It seems that wool produced 
in the country was neither enough nor of a superior quality, and 


716 


ECONOMIC CONDITION 


therefore, fine quality wool was imported from Tibet and some other 
parts in the Himalayan regions. On account of a limited supply wool¬ 
len goods were rather costly. We do not know much about the 
wool industry of Jaisalmer, Mar war and Bikaner. It is, however, 
certain that a good quantity of wool was produced in several parts 
of Rajasthan. For fine wool, the country seems to have depended 
upon its supply from foreign countries. 28 

Silk 

Sericulture has been known in India from remote ages. In 
the 16th century, though a minor industry, considering the size 
of the country, it was so flourishing that a good deal of silk was ex¬ 
ported to foreign countries. During Akbar’s reign Ahmadabad, 
Kashmir and some parts of Bengal and Bihar, including the city of 
Patna, were important centres of this industry. 29 Akbar encouraged 
silk industry and, contrary to the usual orthodox Muslim practice in 
other countries, large quantities of silk cloth were required for the 
royal workshops and wardrobe, and by the nobles and other up¬ 
per class people throughout the country. Moreland is of the opi¬ 
nion that “a substantial proportion of raw silk was utilised for 
manufacturing mixed-goods, which are still a feature of the hand¬ 
weaving industry.” 30 Silk industry progressed greatly in the time 
of Jahangir and Shah Jahan. Many thousand bales of silk yarn 
were sent out every year from Cossimbazar in Bengal. 31 We are 
told by Tavernier that “the Hollanders usually carry away six or 
seven thousand bales, and would carry away more, if the merchants 
of Tart ary and the Mughal Empire did not oppose them; for they 
buy up as much as Hollanders, the rest the natives keep to make 
their stuffs.” 32 Silk was very much in demand in Surat and Ahmada¬ 
bad for the manufacture of carpets and satins, mixed with silk and 
gold threads. “Patoles, a sort of silk stuff, very thin and painted 
with all sorts of flowers were also manufactured, each piece costing 
Rs. 8 to Rs. 40.” 33 Veetapur, some eighteen leagues from Agra, 
was a flourishing centre of silk industry. The manufactured pieces 
from this place were exported by the Dutch to Philippines, Borneo, 
Java, Sumatra and other neighbouring islands. 34 The silk produced 
in Cossimbazar in Bengal was yellowish in colour like the silk of 
Persia and Sicily. The manufacturers whitened it with a dye 
made of the ashes of a tree called “Adam’s Fig Tree.” 35 This silk 
was like that of Palestine. The Dutch transported silk goods from 
Bengal through Hooghly. 36 Barbosa tells us that the Gujarat silk 
was sent to East Africa and to Pegu. 37 


717 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


The chief centres of the production of raw silk in the 17th 
century were Allahabad, Delhi, Sialkot, Banaras and many places 
in Gujarat, Bengal and Kashmir. 38 Silk thread and manufactured 
articles were found in abundance in Kashmir and Punjab. Through¬ 
out the Mughul age Banaras was an important centre for the manu¬ 
facture of beautiful, costly silk cloths. 39 Quite a good portion of 
silk was produced by domestic worms fed on cultivated mulberry. 

Indigo 

Indigo used for dying cloth, washing it crystal white and for 
paints was grown in large quantities in several parts of central Hin¬ 
dustan in the subas of Awadh, Allahabad, Agra, Lahore, Multan, 
Malwa, Delhi and Ajmer. 40 The best indigo, however, was grown 
at Bayana, an important town in the present Bharatpur district and 
second best at Sarkhej in Gujarat. The price of the best Bayana 
indigo in Akbar’s time was rupees ten to twelve per maund, and it 
was exported to Turkey and other European countries. 41 William 
Finch, a European traveller, who visited India during 1608-1611, 
gives a good description of how the indigo plants were grown and 
how indigo was collected and manufactured into the dye. 42. It was 
a costly article in the time of Akbar, but in the 17th century it be¬ 
came an important article of commerce. According to Sir Thomas 
Roe indigo in the time of Jahangir was “the prime commodity/' 
and was grown in Sind, Gujarat, and the Deccan besides Hindaun, 
Bayana, and other places already mentioned. The Bengal indigio be¬ 
gan to come into prominence in the 17th century. The Dutch and the 
English exported large quantities of Bayana indigo, which was con¬ 
sidered the best, to Europe. 43 As for the reign of Shah Jahan, 
commerce in indigo became much more extensive and profitable. 
It began to be cultivated on a large scale in the district round Ahma- 
dabad and Sarkhej. 44 Aligarh, Khurja, and Itimadpur near Agra 
also became important centres of indigo cultivation. The area of 
indigo cultivation in Bayana now extended to comprise several vil¬ 
lages and constituted five more centres. 45 The Dutch transported 
Bengal indigo from Masulipatam. Indigo was largely exported 
from Bengal during the reign of Aurangzib. But the best quality 
even in that age continued to come from Bayana and the second 
best from Sarkhej and Golconda. The historian J. N. Sarkar writes: 
“Biana indigo sold at prices 50 per cent higher than varieties 
grown in other parts of India.... In addition to what was exported, 
there was a large internal consumption of indigo because it formed 
the basic material for washing and bleaching ordinary cotton cloths 
to a pure white colour. The cotton cloths were sent from their places 


718 


ECONOMIC CONDITION 


of origin to central spots for washing, such as, Agra, Ahmadabad, 
Masulipatam, and certain places in Bengal, probably Dacca and 
Cossimbazar. . . . ’ ,46 Trade in indigo declined after the reign of 
Aurangzlb on account of accidents of season and uncertain political 
conditions. 47 There were two more shrubs— dl and safflower—which 
produced dyes and were cultivated more or less on a large scale and 
taxed by the government, probably throughout the Mughul age. 
Safflower was cultivated during the reign of Akbar in the provinces 
of Agra, Allahabad, Awadh, Delhi, Malwa, Lahore and Multan. 48 

Sugarcane 

During the reign of Akbar, Bengal occupied the first place in 
sugar production from sugarcane and also probably from palm trees. 
Abu-’l-Fazl mentions three kinds of sugarcane, viz. paunda, black and 
ordinary. These were grown in the provinces of Agra, Allahabad, 
Awadh, Lahore, Multan, Malwa and Ajmer. 49 It was a superior and 
costly crop and sold at double the price of wheat. Abu-’l-Fazl, gives 
the prices of ordinary sugarcane and paunda in the provinces men¬ 
tioned above. He says that the cost of sugarcane of the paunda 
quality was the highest in Ajmer. The reason seems to be that on 
account of dry climate a very good quality of paunda was grown in 
Ajmer. He speaks highly of the sugar of extreme whiteness manu¬ 
factured at Bayana and sugar candy of Kalpi. 50 In Kota the price of 
sugarcane was at the rate of 100 per rupee. In the 17th century 
sugarcane cultivation extended to other places, such as Aurangabad 
and several places in Bihar. Speaking of the years 1656-1668, 
Bernier says that “Bengal sugar in large quantity is supplied to 
Golkunda and Karnatik where very little is grown, to Arabia and 
Mesopotamia through the towns of Mecca and Basara, and even to 
Persia by Bandar Abbas. Bengal is famous for sweetmeats, special¬ 
ly in places inhabited by the Portuguese, who are skilful in the art 
of preparing them and these are articles of considerable trade.” 51 
De Laet writes that “the whole of the country between Agra and 
Lahore is well cultivated. .. .too much sugar is produced.” He re¬ 
fers to Bengal as a sugar producing area. 52 Chhatarman adds that 
in the Aurangabad province juicy black canes were grown, each 
yielding five seers of juice. 53 


Poppy 

The cultivation of poppy, from which opium was extracted, 
was another important superior crop, and was taxed highly in the 
time of Akbar. It was used as an intoxicant 54 and was produced in the 
provinces of Agra, Awadh, Allahabad, Delhi, Lahore, Multan, Malwa 


719 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


and Ajmer. 55 It was also most probably grown in the table-land 
of the Deccan and in Ahmadnagar, Bijapur and Golconda. It was 
in demand in Bengal and other parts of eastern India, and was des¬ 
patched there in large quantities, by water. 56 It was exported to 
Pegu also. 57 Malwa opium was considered very good and in some 
parts of that province children belonging to all classes were given 
it upto the age of three. 58 

Vegetable and Fruit 

The Ain-i-Akbairi mentions the cultivation of numerous kinds of 
vegetables, such as, spinach, turnip, cabbage, kachnar, chaulai, be - 
thuwa, ginger, boi , peas, garlic, onion, carrot, radish, lettuce, sweet 
potato, lemon, and numerous other varieties, too many to be men¬ 
tioned. 59 These were grown in all parts of the country, especially 
in Agra, Allahabad, Delhi, Lahore, Malwa, Bengal, Bihar, Multan, 
Khandesh, etc. We also get an account of the cultivation of Pan 60 
(betel leaves) in most parts of the country, especially in Bengal, 
Bihar, Agra, Awadh, Allahabad, Malwa, Khandesh and Berar. Fruits 
of numerous varieties were cultivated. Musk-melon, water-melon, 
apple, grape, orange, guava, pomegranate, mango, date, fig, apricot, 
banana, pine-apple, pear, and various kinds of berries and singha - 
ras were grown in many parts of the country particularly in Kash¬ 
mir and in the subas of Lahore, Delhi, Agra, Allahabad, Awadh, 
Bengal, Bihar, Malwa, Multan and Ajmer. 61 Diverse animals and 
fowl for meat were available very cheap in all parts of the country. 
All kinds of deer, antelopes, hares and “varieties of fish and fowl”, 
geese, ducks, pigeons, partridges, quails, etc. were found in abund¬ 
ance. Edward Terry writes that all these could be bought “at such 
easy rates as that I have seen a good mutton (i.e. a sheep) sold for 
the value of one shilling, four couple of hens at the same price, 
one hare for the value of a penny, three partridges for as little, and 
so in proportion all the rest.”* 2 The country liquor, called Tddi f or 
juice of palm-date, mahua and some other trees was found every¬ 
where. 63 Fish formed an important element of people’s food in Ben¬ 
gal, Bihar and Orissa 64 and some parts of Sind 65 and southern India. 
Abu-1-Fazl tells us that fish-oil extracted in some parts of Sind, 
was used in boat-building and was in demand, as also fish-manure, 
at least in Gujarat as Thevenot 66 noticed it in 1666. 

Forest Produce 

There were extensive forests covering most parts of the coun¬ 
try. Babur tells us that in many places the country was 
“covered by a thorny bush-wood to such a degree that the 


720 


ECONOMIC CONDITION 


people of the pargana relying on these forests took shelter in them, 
and trusting to their inaccessible situation often continued in a 
state of revolt refusing to pay their taxes.” 67 There were extensive 
forests in the North-West Frontier province, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, 
Bihar, Bengal, Orissa, modern Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Gujarat, 
and southern India, full of trees and ferocious animals like tigers 
and in some parts even lions. Ralph Fitch (1583-1591) in his travels 
through Bengal noticed large forests infested by wild animals, in¬ 
cluding very many tigers. 68 Abu-l-Fazl says that one had to tra¬ 
verse a thick forest during a journey along the southern bank of 
the Ghagra. William Finch (1608-11) found the road from Jaun- 
pur to Allahabad through a continuous forest. He says that there 
were lions and tigers on the road to Jalaur. 69 Akbar shot a tiger 
near the village of Midhakur, 7 or 8 miles from Agra. 70 In the 16th 
century some parts of East Bengal were swamps and wilderness. 
A large portion of the districts of Jessore, Faridpur, Noakhali and 
Bakarganj were full of forest inhabited by wild buffaloes, rhino¬ 
ceros and tigers. Many other parts of Bengal too had large forests. 
Sujan Rai ?1 writes that wild elephants roamed in the forests of 
Bengal in the 17th century. 

During the Mughul age there was no such problem as afforest¬ 
ation except that of planting trees on both sides of the roads. In 
fact, the problem was one of deforestation. Forests provided hiding 
places not only to ferocious animals but also to unsocial elements,— 
rebels, criminals and dacoits. Akbar therefore followed the policy 
of reclamation of forest land for the purpose of cultivation. Neither 
he nor his successors realised the importance of the role that forests 
played in the general economic prosperity of the country, and their 
conservation and scientific exploitation. Nevertheless the forests in 
the Mughul age did provide employment to a large number of wood¬ 
cutters, sawyers, carters, carriers, raftsmen, and other working peo¬ 
ple who cut wood, cleared the forest and provided numerous variety 
of timber for building conveyances, residential houses, furniture, 
boats, 72 etc. Akbar abolished duties on the leaves of Dhak trees 
and on barks of babul trees, brought from jungles for sale. The 
duties on grass and fuel-wood too were also abolished. 73 The produce 
from the forest, such as timber, fuel, bamboos, leaves, fibres, grass,' 
gum, sandal and other fragrant wood and drugs formed cheap raw 
material from this source. Wood was essential for the manufacture 
of bedsteads, chess-boards, stools, inkstands, ornamental boxes, and 
other things of ordinary use, besides being used on a large scale 
in buildings, such as doors, windows, carved ceilings, etc. For these, 
teak, sesame, babul and mango trees were the chief material. From 

721 

M.E_46 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


sandalwood costly articles were manufactured. People in the Mu- 
ghul age did not make use of modern furniture, like chairs, tables, 
sofas, etc.; nevertheless a good deal of timber was needed as mate¬ 
rial for the manufacture of carts and boats, and for ship-building. 
In those days travelling by boats, particularly in Bengal, Bihar, 
Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Sind and Gujarat, was common. Abu-’L 
Fazl says that in Bengal ‘‘travelling is by boats, especially in the 
rains, and they make them (boats) of different kinds for purposes 
of war, carriage or swift-sailing. For attacking a fort, they are so 
constructed that when run ashore, their prow overtops the fort 
and facilitates its capture.” 74 About the boats of Gujarat he says: 
“Vessels sail from and trade to Ghogah. The cargoes are put into 
small ships called Tawari which transport them to Kambhayat.” 75 
Speaking about the district of Thatta in Sind, Abu-’l-Fazl writes: 
“The means of locomotion is by boats of which there are many kinds, 
large and small, to the number of 40,000. ” 76 Akbar built many boats 
some of which were large enough to carry a few elephants. 77 The 
Portuguese, who monopolised commerce on the west coast of India, 
had their ships built in India. As Moreland admits: “the great bulk 
of the commerce in the Indian seas was carried in ships built in 
India, and that most of these, and certainly all the large ones, were 
constructed on the west coast, not at any one centre, but at various 
ports or inlets within easy reach of the forests. It is practically 
certain that India also built all the small boats required for the 
coasting trade from Bengal as far as Sind, and the aggregate volume 
of shipping was, therefore, very great when measured by contem¬ 
porary standards.” 78 Boat and ship-building from timber produced 
in Indian forests continued to be in progress in the country in the 
17th century. We are told by Sujan Rai, author of Khulasdt-ul~ 
Tawdrtkh, that ships and boats were constructed in the province 
of Thatta. 79 Another 17th century writer says that 4,200 big boats 
and 4,400 small boats were used for navigation in Bengal. 80 To¬ 
wards the end of the 16th century, the English traveller, Ralph 
Fitch, travelled from Agra to Bengal with a fleet of 180 boats. 81 
There were similar fleets of boats for traffic in the Indus, the Ganga 
and other rivers. Moreland, therefore, rightly emphasises the suffi¬ 
ciency and utility of the forest wealth of the country. 

Paper 

Paper, which was required for official work on a large scale, 
and also by private individuals, was manufactured from wood-pulp 
obtained from trees in the forests. In Akbar’s time a good deal of 
paper was manufactured from wood-pulp in Lahore, and in other 


722 


ECONOMIC CONDITION 


places, particularly Rajgir, in Bihar. 82 There was a considerable pro¬ 
gress in the production of paper in the 17th century. 83 During the 
reign of Aurangzib paper was manufactured in Awadh also. 84 

Gum Lac 

Gum Lac is a kind of wax found on the barks of certain stand¬ 
ing trees. It was an indispensable material for manufacturing 
bangles and toys. “The lac was extracted from the trees, and, besides 
being used for manufacturing women’s bangles it was also utilised 
in varnishing furniture, doors, windows and toys.” 85 “The Dutch 
exported it to Persia for red colour. The lac bangle and toy in¬ 
dustry flourished most in Gujarat (specially at Surat), but it must 
have been diffused in other parts of India more or less.” 86 A good 
deal of lac was found in Malwa, particularly in the jungles of Dhar. 
During the reign of Shah Jahan lac sold at 7 h Mahmudi (dam) per 
maund. The price of gum lac in sticks of wax varied from 40 to 60 
Mahmudis per maund. We are told by Bernier that high-priced 
gum lac came from Bengal and Pegu. The people prepared from it 
lively scarlet colour and painted their cloth with it. The Dutch 
purchased large quantities of gum lac, and exported it to Persia 
for use in painting cloth. The English and the Dutch “carried 
away every year 150 chests at 10 pence per pound.” 87 

Miscellaneous Products 

At least as early as 14th century leaves, barks and exudations 
of some of the Indian trees in the forest were exported to foreign 
countries. Some of the other forest products such as, cloves, spike¬ 
nard, aloe-wood, sandal, amber, camphor and other fragrant woods 
and drugs were considered important articles for internal consump¬ 
tion and for exporting to foreign countries. Red bakham-wood 
was used for cosmetics and some were used as medicine and hair 
dyes during the Mughul age. Wood products of the forest were 
also made to yield perfumes. The Western Ghat forests and the 
Mysore forests yielded black wood and sandal wood. Malabar pro¬ 
duced coconut and areca trees. Sandal wood of white and yellow 
colour was found in some forest areas. White sandal came into 
prominence for fragrance during the reign of Jahangir. It was 
supplied by the Portuguese to the gentry in Agra and other places. 
The Portuguese brought sandal wood from the Dutch East Indies 
and transported it to Malacca, Goa and Cambay. Babul bark used 
for tanning leather came from the provinces of Lahore, Agra and 
Rajasthan. 88 


723 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Minerals 

There was no scientific exploration of the mineral wealth of the 
country during the Mughul age, and therefore, in spite of high po¬ 
tentiality indigenous mineral products were far from satisfactory. 
Bengal, Bihar and the Kolar mines of gold did not yield a good 
quantity of that precious metal. We have no record to show what 
the mineral productions in the country were during the time of 
Babur and Humayun. Abu-T-Fazl was one of the earliest writers to 
throw some light upon the development of mineral industry in Ak- 
bar’s time. He says that gold was found in abundance in the north¬ 
ern mountains of the country. In the hills of Kumaun there “are 
mines of gold, silver, lead, iron, copper, orpiment and borax.” 89 In 
some parts of the Punjab and Kashmir (Pakli and Gilgit) people 
washed the soil “whence gold, silver, copper, rui (a mixed metal) 
zinc, brass and lead are obtained.” 90 “Gold may also be obtained 
by the Saloni process from the Ganges and the Indus, and several 
other rivers, as most of the waters of this country are mixed with 
gold; however the labour and expense greatly exceed the profit.” 91 
For silver, too, people washed river sand in some parts of northern 
India. Abu-T-FazTs remark that “mines of diamond, ruby, gold, 
silver, copper, lead and iron abound” seems to be an exaggeration. 92 
At Jalaur in Rajasthan there was a mine of pewter (Jast)P Accord¬ 
ing to Sujan Rai there was mining of gold in the provinces of Delhi, 
Awadh, and Bengal and on the banks of some rivers of the Punjab 
especially the Beas 94 It seems that there was some progress in 
reclaiming gold in the 17th century. Chhatarman confirms Sujan 
Rai and adds Allahabad, Agra and Kashmir to the list of gold min¬ 
ing centres. 95 De Laet writes that there were gold mines in the 
neighbourhood of Patna. 96 Gold and silver were much in demand 
for minting coins and for the manufacture of ornaments for men, 
women and children of all classes of people, and for producing 
thread for embroidery. Ruling houses and many an upper class 
family had utensils and furniture of gold and silver. There were 
diamond mines in Golconda. Diamonds were also found in the east¬ 
ern extremity of Bengal, at Harpah in Mandaran district of that 
province, in Berar and in Panna in modern Madhya Pradesh. 97 De 
Laet writes that during the reign of Jahangir “very rich diamond 
mines were discovered a few years ago quite by accident at the foot 
of a great mountain, not far from the river Krishna where the land 
is very rough and barren; they lie about 108 English miles from 
the fort of Masulipatam. The king of Golconda let out the mines 
at the annual sum of 30 lakhs Pagodas.” 98 

Tavernier says that there were diamond mines in Golconda, 

724 


ECONOMIC CONDITION 


Kolar, Soumelpur (Bengal), Wairagiri, and some other places. He 
adds that “two per cent on all purchases of diamonds is paid to the 
king who receives also a royalty from the merchants for permis¬ 
sion to mine.” 99 He tells us that there was a mill with iron machi¬ 
nery at Golconda and many prosperous merchants did successful 
business there. A labourer received three pagodas a day. One 
who found a diamond piece of 14 to 16 carats was given a special 
reward of one pagoda. The Kolar mine also employed a large 
number of labourers. Sometimes their number reached 60,000. A 
diamond weighing more than 60 carats became the property of the 
king. There was a considerable diamond trade in Goa, Chail, 
Surat and Bombay. During the early years of Jahangir’s reign 
there was a diamond mine at Gokra desh in the modern Purnea 
district of Bihar, but it came into disuse after 1612. 100 Coal was 
not mined during the Mughul period. The supply of iron and steel, 
though found in many places in the provinces of Multan, Delhi, 
Allahabad, Bengal (Bazuha), Gwalior, Kalinjar, Kumaun, Indore 
and Nirmal (in Berar), the village of Khriu (Kashmir), and the 
Kingdom of Golconda, 101 was limited, and its production depended 
on the quantity of wood in the vicinity of copper and iron-ore mines. 
The ‘Ain’ mentions the mines of copper, naphtha and sulphur, be¬ 
sides those of gold, silver, diamonds and rubies in the region be¬ 
tween Pegu and Arakan. 102 There were unprofitable mines of cop¬ 
per and turquoise in Toda Bhim. 103 Copper mines existed at Pe- 
rath, Udaipur, Singhana, Kotputli, and Bairat (near Alwar). 104 
There were silver mines at Perath and Bairat. 105 In the province 
of Allahabad lead was available, and there were copper mines in 
Ajmer, Kamaun, and Bengal, Awadh and Delhi subas. Pearls 106 
were found in Kazor in the Machhukhanta pavgana of Gujarat. 
Diverse other minerals were found here and there in the country. 
Lonar in Berar contained essential materials for the manufacture 
of glass and soap. Orpiment and borax were found in Kumaun, 
sulphur at Sohra, 15 miles south of Gurgaon city, naphtha and 
sulphur near Tippera in Bengal. 107 Gilded glass was manufac¬ 
tured at Patna. 107a 


Salt 

There were three kinds of salt industry. First, it was obtained 
by evaporation of sea water; second, it came mostly from the Sam- 
bhar lake in Rajasthan and the Ran of Cutch; and third, the Punjab 
rock-salt supplied large quantities of salt . The Sambhar lake was 
8 miles in length and 2 miles in breadth, and divided into many plots. 
It took fifteen to sixteen days to absorb water, and thereafter the 


725 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


entire tract of land became full of salt. During the Mughul period 
salt was exchanged for corn by the traders, and it was sold by 
heaps, not by weight. The Lahori salt came from near the town of 
Shamsabad and the shrine of Balnath Jogi (in the Gurdaspur dis¬ 
trict) at the foot of the salt-range in the Punjab. Abu-’l-Fazl calls 
it Koh-i-Juda. It was 40 miles long, and salt was excavated from 
it. The Mughul government charged a custom duty of one rupee 
for every 17 maunds. 108 Sujan Rai, author of Khulasat-ul-Tawarikh, 
refers to the existence of salt mines at Thatta, Ayodhya and Mul¬ 
tan. 109 But salt produced there could not have been in substantial 
quantities. Taking into consideration the requirements of the 
country as a whole there was enough salt, 110 and it was in those days 
cheaper than it is now. The salt from the Punjab, which was con¬ 
sidered of superior quality, cost a little less than 5 dams per maund 
on an average during the reign of Akbar. 111 

Saltpetre 

Large quantities of saltpetre came from Agra and Patna. But 
the largest supply in the 16th century came from Lonar in Berar 
where it yielded “a considerable revenue.” 112 The Dutch had a con¬ 
siderable trade in the commodity, and set up a ware-house near 
Patna. After refining it they transported it to Hooghly. The price 
of saltpetre was 7 mahmudis per maund. Saltpetre was prepared 
from three kinds of earth—black, yellow and white—by an ingeni¬ 
ous method. It was produced at Agra and its vicinity where five 
to six thousand maunds of saltpetre was obtained. 113 It was much 
in demand by the Portuguese, the Dutch and the English for ex¬ 
portation to Europe. Saltpetre was developed considerably in the 
17th century. It was required for the manufacture of gun-powder, 
and Shergarh near Agra, Thatta, Patna, Ahmadabad and Lonar 
(Berar) had developed into large centres of this commodity. The 
emperor had monopolised saltpetre and had a store house of many 
thousands of maunds in Ahmadabad. 114 

Saffron 

Saffron was cultivated in Kashmir. The ground was carefully 
prepared before planting the seed in March or April and then it 
was irrigated with rain-water. At the close of September the plants 
reached their full growth. The saffron plant was about a quarter 
of a yard in height. The “flower stands on the top of the stalk, 
and consists of six petals and six stamens. Three of the six petals 
have a fresh lilac colour, and stand round about the remaining three 
petals. The stamens are similarly placed, three of a yellow colour 


726 



ECONOMIC CONDITION 


standing round about the other three, which are red. The latter 
yield the saffron.” 115 The flowers were picked up laboriously. The 
plants yielded flowers for six years continuously. 

Saffron was cultivated in two villages, Pampur in the district 
of Mararaj, to the south of Srinagar, and Paraspur near Indrakot. 
The fields at Pampur extended over about 24 miles 116 and those at 
Paraspur comprised an area of two square miles. 117 Saffron was a 
fragrant and costly article; it was used for colouring and flavouring 
good quality rice. It was also used for imparting fragrance and 
agreeable yellow colour to some other rich dishes 118 and dyeinjg 
cloth. Saffron was a very superior crop and was taxed heavily. 
Four hundred maunds of saffron were produced every year in the 
time of Akbar, 119 Jahangir 120 and Shah Jahan. Jahangir was en¬ 
chanted by the sight of the saffron fields. He says that one-half of 
the produce of saffron belonged to the government and the other half 
to the cultivators. A seer of saffron sold for Rs. 10/-. The labour¬ 
ers who picked up the flowers were paid half the weight of flowers 
in salt, as the latter article was not produced in Kashmir and was 
difficult to procure in those days. 121 

Spices 

India, particularly its Malabar region, was famous for its spices, 
and it was because of these that the Portuguese had tried hard to 
discover a sea route to this country. The chief spices were carda¬ 
mom, ginger, pepper, nutmegs, cloves and cinnamon. Cardamom 
was grown in Bijapur and ginger in all parts of India. Cardamom 
was an excellent but costly spice. Its price varied from 52 to 80 
dams per seer and it was used by rich nobles and princes in India 
and other countries of Asia. Ginger was produced in great quanti¬ 
ties all over India. Pepper grew in Bijapur, Malabar, Cochin and 
many other places in southern India, in Champaran district in Bihar, 
and in the forests of Mahmudabad district in Bengal. 122 Tavernier 
tells us that the Dutch purchased large quantities of pepper from 
Malabar, in exchange for cotton, opium, vermillion and quick silver, 
and transported it to Europe. 123 Pepper was grown in Assam and 
Bantum also and was sent to Surat from where it was exported 
to Ormuz, Basra and the Red Sea. Cloves and nutmegs, too, were 
collected at Surat by the Dutch and exported to Europe. Abu-’l- 
Fazl gives the prices of the spices in the time of Akbar which were 
as follows:— 124 


727 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Siyahdana (Kalaunji) 

1J dams per 

■ seer 

Cloves 

60 

>> 

>> 

Cardamoms 

52 



Round Pepper 

17 

j? 

3> 

Long Pepper 

16 

?? 

33 

Dry Ginger 

4 

5 3 

33 

Fresh Ginger 

21 

33 

33 

Cuminseed 

2 

33 

33 

Aniseed 

2 

33 

33 

Turmeric 

10 

3 3 

33 

Coriander 

3 

33 

33 

Cinnamon 

40 

33 

33 

Ajwain 

70- 

-90 dams 

per maund 


Many ship-loads of pepper were exported by the Portuguese 
annually from the ports of Goa and Cochin, 125 and also from Masu- 
lipatam. 126 The Portuguese collected huge quantities of pepper and 
other spices from Sumatra and brought them to the Indian ports 
for export to Pegu, the Red Sea and other countries. 127 They had 
a great store of pepper at Quilon whence they exported it to 
Europe. 128 Ralph Fitch writes that at Cochin “groweth the pepper, 
and it springs up by a tree or a pole and is. .. .like the wheat-ear; 
and at the first the bunches are green, and as they wax ripe they 
cut them off and dry them. The leaf is much lesser than the ivy 
leaf and thinner.... All the pepper of Calicut and coarse Cinna¬ 
mon too grows here in this country. The best Cinnamon does 
come from Ceylon.” 129 Fitch says that pepper grew in many parts 
of India, specially about Cochin and that much of it grew in the 
fields among bushes without any labour. When ripe, it was picked 
up and gathered. It was green when picked up, but when laid in 
the sun to dry, it turned black. The ginger was found in many 
parts of India. The clove came from the islands of Moluccas and 
the nutmegs and maces from the Isle of Banda; the white sandal¬ 
wood from the Isle of Timor; camphor from China and Borneo; 
lignum aloes from Cochin-China; benjamin from Siam and Jan- 
gomes; the long pepper from Bengal, Pegu and Java. 130 

Tobacco 

Tobacco was unknown in India till the last quarter of the 16th 
century. It was brought to Gujarat by the Portuguese in the clos¬ 
ing years of that century, and introduced at Akbar’s court in 1604 


728 


ECONOMIC CONDITION 


or 1605. 131 It soon became so popular that Jahangir forbade smok¬ 
ing in 1617. 132 But in spite of the royal orders, people in Gujarat, 
in the Deccan and in Northern India took a fancy for it, and it seems 
that in the later years of his reign, Jahangir withdrew the ban. 
Within a few years tobacco began to be cultivated on an exten¬ 
sive 133 scale, and by 1623 it became an article of export from the 
port of Surat. 134 It soon reached the Coromandel Coast whence 
it was exported to Mocha, Arakan and Pegu. Not long after, Bengal 
came to have a demand for it. 135 We are told by Manucci that in 
the early years of Aurangzlb’s reign a farmer at Delhi paid a duty 
of Rs. 5000/- a day on tobacco. It was possibly an exaggerated 
statement. Nevertheless, it shows the wide extension of the culti¬ 
vation of, and trade in, tobacco, within the space of less than half 
a century. 136 Burhanpur and parts of Bengal also produced large 
quantities of tobacco. 


Trade 

The nature of India’s trade, inland and foreign, has practically 
been the same in the ancient and medieval ages. During the Mu- 
ghul period, as in the earlier days of her history, she imported costly 
luxury goods and novelties, such as, woollen cloth, silks, velvets, 
glass and mirrors, wine and spirit, precious metals, particularly 
gold and silver, other metals like copper, lead, tin, zinc and quick¬ 
silver, and coral, and horses. Among the exports the largest share 
was that of cotton cloths. Large quantities of manufactured cotton 
goods divided principally into three groups—calicoes, muslins and 
fancy goods—formed the foundation of the export trade. The 
second largest commodity exported was the spices, mostly pepper. 
Minor spices exported were ginger, cardamoms, turmeric and 
various drugs. Gum-lac, pearls and diamonds too were sent out. 
Indigo was the third important item of export. Bengal sent out 
rice and sugar, and from the Coromandel Coast dyed yarn went to 
Pegu where it was much in demand. Brocades and embroideries 
were also exported. India traded with China, Persia, Arabia, Cen¬ 
tral Asia, Egypt and the countries of South-East Asia, such as 
Ceylon, Burma, Indo-China, Java, Sumatra, Borneo, and the Indian 
Archipelago. She had had commercial relations with some of the 
countries of Europe before the land routes to that continent were 
blocked by the Turkish conquest of Constantinople. When the 
Portuguese discovered the sea-route to India by rounding the Cape 
of Good Hope, and Vasco da Gama landed at Calicut in 1498, trade 
with Europe was resumed. The English, the Dutch, and the French 
followed the Portuguese, and the commercial relations with Europe 


729 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


bceame intimate. They collected not only spices but also manu¬ 
factured cotton cloth, indigo and other articles and transported them 
to Europe. The already existing trade between India and the coun¬ 
tries of Central Asia, including Farghana, Turkistan, Samarqand, 
Balkh, Bokhara, Hisar and Badakhshan received a great fillip. 
Babur tells us that 7,000 horses and 11,000 camels laden with cloths, 
black and white, rugs, sugar, candy and medical herbs were sent 
every year to Kabul and from there to other countries of Central 
Asia. Rich Indian merchants, many of whom were Muslims, were 
responsible for organising and conducting commerce. Babur says: 
“There are many merchants who are not willing to hire less than 
300 to 400 caravans (meaning perhaps horses)”. Kabul seems to 
have been a great exchange market. Indian goods were despatch¬ 
ed through Kabul and the commodities from Khurasan, Iraq and 
China were available in Kabul. Oranges, lemons and sugarcanes 
came from Lammet, honey came from the mountainous tracts of 
Ghazni, and grapes, apricots, peaches and many other fruits were 
imported into India from Central Asian countries. 137 

Commerce with foreign countries developed greatly under 
Akbar and Jahangir. Indigo, cotton cloths and wool, besides the 
spices, were the principal articles of export. Chinese porcelain, 
glasses, objects of curiosity and luxury, costly woollen cloths, gold 
and silver, were the principal articles of import. Gold and silver 
were not allowed to be exported and foreign traders who purchased 
Indian goods had to pay in cash. “The amount of bullion,” writes 
Dr. Radha Kamal Mookerji, “imported into India steadily increased 
in the Mughal period.” In 1601 the English East India Company 
alone imported bullion valued at £22,000; by 1616 it rose to £52,000, 
and at the end of the 17th century it totalled annually to about 
£800,000. 138 An idea of the foreign curios and costly stuffs patro¬ 
nised by the Mughuls could be had from the fact that, besides some 
artistic porcelain and coloured glass utensils, Akbar left behind 
crockery worth rupees twenty-five lakhs. 139 

It is necessary to say a word about the Indian exports and 
the sea-ports from where these were sent out to foreign lands, 
Moreland has given a conspectus of the Indian export trade at the 
opening of the 17th century in a tabular form. Lahari Bandar was 
the chief sea-port of Sind from where cotton cloths of various 
types, known collectively as Calico, were exported to Persian Gulf. 
Cambay, Gogha, Diu and Surat, the sea-ports of the province of 
Gujarat, transported cotton goods, yarn and indigo to Red Sea, 
Persian Gulf and Achin. In the Konkan region the ports were 
Chaul, Dabhol and Rajapur, whence Calicos and cotton cloth of 


730 


ECONOMIC CONDITION 


painted and superior quality and pepper were exported to Red 
Sea and Persian Gulf. From these ports, the above-mentioned 
goods were sent coastwise to Goa by sea to be transported onward. 
From Goa too goods of the above variety were exported to Persian 
Gulf, East Africa, Lisbon, Malacca, and beyond, and also to Ceylon. 
The main ports in the Malabar region were Calicut and Cochin 
from where pepper was exported to Lisbon, Ceylon and Malacca. 
Quilon, Tuticorin and Negapatam on the south coast sent out calico 
and pepper coastwise and to Malacca and beyond. San Thome and 
Pulicat on the Coromandel Coast exported fancy goods, calico, 
muslin and fine yarn to Malacca and beyond, to Achin, Pegu, and 
Tenasserim, besides coastwise to Goa and Malabar. From Masuli- 
patam, another sea-port on the Coromandel Coast, calico, muslin and 
fancy goods and yarn were transported to Malacca and beyond, to 
Achin, Pegu and Tenasserim, and to Persian Gulf, besides coastwise 
north and south. There were two other ports in the south, viz., 
Vizagapatam and Bimlipatam which sent out rice and oil seeds to 
various ports on the eastern and v/estern coasts of India for ex¬ 
port to foreign countries. In Bengal, the sea-ports were Hooghly, 
Pipli, Balasore and Chittagong. These exported rice, sugar and 
muslin to various ports on the east and west coasts of India, to 
Pegu and Tenasserim, to Malacca and Achin. All these goods were 
further exported to the countries of Central Asia, to Egypt and be¬ 
yond, and to Europe. The countries of South-East Asia too re¬ 
ceived Indian cotton and other goods which were in demand there. 
Quite a good amount of Indian goods was exported to foreign coun¬ 
tries by land routes through Kabul and Qandahar and early in the 
17th century three thousand of camel-loads of Indian goods passed 
annually through this route to Central Asian countries. Since the 
advent of Europeans the importance of the land route was lessened. 
Throughout the Mughul period the volume of Indian export through 
the north-western land routes fluctuated according to amity or hosti¬ 
lity between India and Persia on the question of the possession of 
Qandahar, and sometimes on the relations between the Mughul go¬ 
vernment and the Portuguese. 140 “India maintained a balance of 
trade in her favour” during the Mughul age. 141 

Labour supply: Industrial Specialisation 

The description of agricultural and industrial activity shows 
that there was adequate human material and labour supply in the 
country. Babur noted that “the country of Hindustan is extensive, 
full of land and full of produce.” 142 Most of those who were en¬ 
gaged in agriculture and industry were Hindus. About the end 
of the 16th century only a nominal fraction of the Musalmans, 

731 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


about .08 per cent of the entire population, or one Muslim per 
every thousand Hindus was connected with land. 143 Most of these 
were zamindars and the number of Muslim cultivators was in¬ 
significant. Similarly a very small number of Muslims was en¬ 
gaged in trade and industry. Some wealthy Muslim merchants, 
mostly foreign, were engaged in large-scale inland and maritime 
commerce on Indian soil. Babur observed in the first quarter of the 
16th century that “most of the inhabitants of Hindustan are pagans: 

they call a pagan, a Hindu.all artisans, wage-earners and 

officials are Hindus.” 144 The labour supply was not only more than 
adequate, but it was also fairly efficient. Although we cannot say 
that during the period there existed all those conditions, such as, 
good health, nutritious food, adequate clothing and favourable condi¬ 
tions of work that go to make labour efficient, yet Indian labour was 
sufficiently good. People got enough to eat except during drought 
or a famine; they did not need much clothing except in winter; there 
was little interference with the labourers, artisans and agriculturists 
except during the later days of Shah Jahan’s reign and in the time 
of Aurangzib on account of inefficiency and weakness of government. 
An important aspect of Indian life was the firm belief in fate, that 
is, people were born in a particular situation on account of their 
deeds in the past life, and they must make the best of their pre¬ 
sent situation. This saved them from a life of frustration and from 
running away from it. Moreover, people in general were sober, 
abstemious, thrifty and diligent. Though themselves poor, they made 
the country as a whole rich and flourishing. It is sometimes thought 
that there was no specialisation of labour and industry during the 
Mughul age. This is not wholly correct. Every industrial activity 
and trade was meant for a particular class of people, and for genera¬ 
tions each caste or group followed the same industrial activity 
through the ages. As Babur writes: “again every artisan follows 
the trade that has come down to him from forefather to forefather.” 145 
Each caste of artisans was a trade guild, a mutual assurance society 
and a religious brotherhood. As a trade union the caste insisted 
upon the proper training of the youth in the crafts and the regula¬ 
tion of wages of its members, fixing the prices of the commodities, 
punishing the delinquents and promoting the general welfare of the 
group. There was thus some kind of training and discipline for 
the artisans. There were such trade guilds in the towns, cities 
and the villages throughout the country. Sometimes an important 
industry registered a commendable improvement on account of bet¬ 
ter training and output brought by foreign craftsmen. “Skilful 
masses and craftsmen,” writes Abu-’l-Fazl, “have settled in the coun- 


732 



ECONOMIC CONDITION 


try to teach people an improved system of manufacture.” 146 In the 
17th century too the system continued, and Francisco Palsaert des¬ 
cribing the condition of labour and industry in the time of Jahangir 

says: “.workmen’s children could follow no occupation other 

than that of their fathers, nor can any marry with any other 

caste.” 147 “The embroiderer brings up his son as embroiderer,” 

says Bernier, “a goldsmith’s son becomes a goldsmith and a physi¬ 
cian of the city educates his son for a physician.” 148 Sir Jadunath 
Sarkar tells us how an improvement took place in the manufacture 
of industrial articles. He writes: “Skilled artisans trained in the im¬ 
perial workshops, specially apprentices, after completing their tech¬ 
nical education, found employment with the nobles and Rajahs, as 
all of them were not required by the Mughal government. In this 
way their skill was transplanted all over the country. The most 
notable instance of this diffusion of talent and elevation of the cul¬ 
tural level of the country by the action of the court is supplied by 
the schools of the Mughal painters and musicians.” 149 It is an un¬ 
doubted fact that the quality of manufactured articles in the royal 
and noble men’s workshops had improved greatly during the age, 
and that the higher technical skill had diffused to some of the in¬ 
dustrial centres in the country. The rank and file among the arti¬ 
sans, however, continued to produce stereotyped articles in their 
cottages. 


Abundance and Prosperity 

The first quarter of the 16th century was marked by abundance 
of wheat, barley, gram and other food grains. Prices of all articles 
of food and other daily necessaries of life were so low that during 
the reigns of Sikandar (1489-1517) and Ibrahim Lodi (1517-1526), 
one Bahloli or dam, a copper coin (equivalent to one-fortieth of 
a rupee), sufficed for the expenses of one soldier and his horse for 
a few days. 150 Almost all the cities both in the north and the south 
were stocked with the necessaries of life. The Persian ambassador 
‘Abdul-Razzaq was astonished at the prosperity of the city of Vijaya- 
nagara. 151 Paes says the same thing with regard to the other cities, 
towns and villages of sduth India. 152 At least seven cities, viz., 
Agra, Fathpur Sikri, Delhi, Lahore, Ahmadabad, Gauda and 
Vijayanagara were extraordinarily prosperous and had a population 
of two lakhs or more each. Father Monserrate who stayed in India 
for a few years speaks of the great wealth and prosperity of Agra 
and Fathpur Sikri. “All the necessities and conveniences of human 
life can be obtained here (Agra), if desired. This is even true 
of the articles that have to be imported from distant corners of 


733 




THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Europe. There are great numbers of artisans, iron-workers and 
goldsmiths. Gems and pearls abound in large number. Gold and 
silver are plentiful, as also are horses from Persia and Tartary. In¬ 
deed the city is flooded with vast quantity of every type of com¬ 
modity. Hence Agra is seldom visited by dearth of food sup¬ 
plies.” 153 He says practically the same thing about Delhi which 
he praised for its public buildings, its remarkable Fort, its walls 
and a number of mosques. He says that “Delhi is inhabited by 

substantially wealthy Brachmane (Hindus).rich men here 

constructed for themselves well-built, lofty and handsomely deco¬ 
rated residences.” 154 It was full of parks and gardens and “filled 

with a rich profusion of fruits and flowers.” 155 During his 

journey from Fathpur Sikri to Lahore, Monserrate came across 
prosperous towns and villages. Writing about Lahore he says that 
“this city is next to none, either in Asia or in Europe with regard 
to size, population and wealth. It is crowded with merchants, who 
foregather here from all over Asia. In all these respects it excels 
other cities, as also in the huge quantity of every kind of merchan¬ 
dise, which is imported. Moreover, there is no art or craft useful 
to human life which is not practised there.” 156 In fact this careful 
observer was filled with amazement at the prosperity in Northern 
India. The cheapness of grains in Akbar’s camp in his journey to 
Lahore surprised him. 157 Ralph Fitch, who visited several parts of 
India, found in the course of his journey (1583-1591) all kinds of 
food grains and other eatables, cotton cloth and other necessaries of 
life in plenty from Diu to Agra, from Agra to Satgaon and Chitta¬ 
gong in Bengal and to Pegu, and from there to Southern India and 
to Ceylon. Everywhere his eye met with plenty. 158 Another 
European traveller, named William Finch, who visited India during 
1608-1611, also bore testimony to the prosperous condition of the 
country. 159 

Famines 

In spite of plenty, there were sometimes scarcity and famine 
on account of failure of seasonal rains, excessive floods or devasta¬ 
tions caused by war. But fortunately these areas of drought and 
scarcity were localised, and did not involve the whole country. 
Taking the country as a whole, it seems that the main difficulty 
was that of transport of foodstuffs to the affected areas. The first 
famine recorded was that of 1555-56, the year of Akbar’s accession. 
Delhi, Agra and the adjacent regions suffered from high mortality, 
caused not only by drought but also by an epidemic. The histo¬ 
rian Badauni, an eye-witness, writes, that “men ate their own 


734 




ECONOMIC CONDITION 


kind and the appearance of the famine sufferers was so hideous 
that one could scarcely look at them. The whole country was a 
desert and no man lived to till the ground.” 160 Though BadaunI’s 
description is highly exaggerated, the calamity was nevertheless 
great. Five famines occurred between 1573 and 1595. In 1573 
Gujarat was affected and it suffered for six months. Many inha¬ 
bitants, rich and poor, left the country for fear of starvation. 161 In 
1583-84 prices rose high on account of a famine in North-Western 
Hindustan, and many people died of starvation. 162 The famine of 
1595 lasted for three or four years till 1598. The Jesuit mission¬ 
aries described the horror of the famine and pestilence in Lahore 
and Kashmir, and the alleviation of suffering by Akbar. 163 Bengal 
was visited by plague in 1575. 164 In 1584-85 there was a great inun¬ 
dation and the Meghna Delta was washed away. 165 

There was a severe famine in Gujarat and the Deccan in 1630 
on account of the failure of rains that year, and unfavourable crops 
during the previous three years. The country suffered greatly and 
even the bare necessities of life were scarcely available. 166 In 1683 
when Aurangzlb was conducting an expedition in the Deccan, there 
occurred a famine in the Konkan. It was not possible to procure 
grain in the region. 167 In 1686, there was again a famine in the 
Deccan caused by the devastation of warfare and the failure of 
annual rains. 168 Gujarat once again suffered from drought. More¬ 
land has shown that between 1614 and 1660 there were as many as 
thirteen famines and that of 1630-31 was very severe. 169 In spite of 
recurring famines the Mughul government did not take adequate 
steps to provide relief. A comprehensive policy of the prevention of 
drought was unthinkable in that age. The adverse effect of most 
of these famines was fortunately confined to local areas, and at most 
to a province or two, and the growth of the population was not 
affected to any considerable extent. 

Despite recurring famines here and there, there was, taking 
the entire country in view, no dearth of food grains and other 
necessities of life. India was, generally speaking, prosperous dur¬ 
ing the Mughul age. The ruling class rolled in wealth and luxury. 
The middle class people, consisting of zaminddrs (to use the word 
in the modern sense), merchants and the lower rank of the official 
staff and other employees of the same category, were fairly well-to- 
do. The masses and the inferior artisans were, on the other hand, 
poor; but they did not starve except in times of drought and scar¬ 
city. We have a fairly accurate statement of the salaries of troops 
and skilled and unskilled labourers and also of the prices of food- 
grains and other commodities in the Am-i-Akban, written at about 


735 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


the end of the 16th century. The daily wages of ordinary labour¬ 
ers were 2 to 3 dams, i.e., 3 to 4 pice or 5 to 1\ paise in terms of 
the present decimal currency. The payment made to a slave per 
day was one dam, i.e. 2\ paise of the current decimal currency. The 
beldar or ordinary labourer, got two dams a day; a bamboo-cutter, 
too, was paid 2 dams daily; a thatcher was paid 3 dams a day; a 
water-carrier 3 dams; a water-carrier of inferior capacity 2 dams; 
a varnisher of reeds with lac 2 dams a day; a brick-layer of first 
class 3J dams and of second class 3 dams. 170 In Jahangir’s time, 
the monthly wages of servants were 2J to 3 rupees. The wages paid 
by the Dutch factory at Agra in 1636 were 3^ rupees per month for 
servants, porters, and sdis (horsemen) and Rs. 5/- for the sweepers 
and the watermen. 171 In South India, at the Masulipatam factory, 
servants received Rs. 2/- monthly in 1602, and at Bombay the daily 
wages of labourers in 1674 were 3 pice (5 paise in the modern 
decimal currency). 172 The daily wages of skilled labourers and 
workers in Akbar’s time ranged from 6 ta 7 dams (15 to 17J paise). 
A mason of the first class, for example, was paid 7 dams a day; of 
second class 6 dams, and of third class 5 dams . A carpenter of 
the first class got 7 dams, of second class 6 dams, of third class 4 
dams, of fourth class 3J dams and of fifth class 3 dams daily. 173 
During the reign of Jahangir there was hardly any increase in the 
wages. The average prices of principal food grains towards the end 
of Akbar’s reign calculated on the basis of 82.3 lbs equivalent to 
one maund (instead of that of 55J lbs a maund which was the weight 
in Akbar’s time) were as follows: Wheat sold at 133.3 seers a 
rupee; barley 200 seers, rice 54.2 seers, gram 135.6 seers, bajra 
182.8 seers and joimr 108.5 seers. 174 Taking the maund as equi¬ 
valent to 55J lbs (which was the ratio in Akbar’s time) a maund 
of ghee was available for 105 dams, oil for 80 dams, milk for 25 
dams, and brown sugar for 53 dams. 175 The prices of ordinary cloth 
of different variety were:— 

1. Chhint 2 dams per yard. 

2. Ghazina i.e., Gazzi, \ to 1J dams per piece. 

3. Dupatta Re. 1/- per piece. 

4. Silahati 2 to 4 dams per yard. 176 

Taking into consideration the prices of things at the end of the 16th 
century, the wages paid to all kinds of workers and labourers were 
adequate to maintain them. Dr. Radha Kamal Mookherji rightly 
observes that although “adequate and accurate data for comparison 
of real and money wages between Akbar’s time and today in Nor¬ 
thern India are not available,” yet we know from the Am-i-Akbari 


736 


ECONOMIC CONDITION 


and from the European factors in Gujarat, Madras, and Bengal that 
lj dams (3| paise of 1971) were sufficient for a worker to lead a 
hand-to-mouth existence. But he cannot feed himself today at less 
than Rs. 2\. “Thus the real wages have actually declined. In the 
19th century (and much more in the 20th century) agricultural 
wages rose, but the real wages were reduced appreciably.” 177 Dur¬ 
ing the Mughul age people’s wants were few and the standard of 
living of the common people was very low. They lived in mud 
houses, thatched with straw; they had very few utensils, and clothes, 
and their furniture consisted of bedsteads. There was little medical 
aid in the rural areas, and the economic condition of the masses 
throughout the age was very unsatisfactory. For this one cannot 
find fault with the lack of industry and thrift of the teeming millions 
or blame them for inadequate production. The faults were those 
of faulty distribution and governmental extortion. In spite of 
these drawbacks it could hardly be said that the people in that age 
were unhappy. 

1. Babur, Tuzuk-i-Bdburi, alias Memoirs (Beveridge), p. 450. 

2. Noman Ahmad Siddiqi, Land Revenue Administration under the Mughals, 
Asia Publishing House, Bombay, 1970, pp. 8-9. 

3. Tuzuk-i-Bdburi or Memoirs, Sec. Ill, 478. 

3a. Elliot & Dowson, VIII, 86. 

4. The Memoirs, 496. 

5. Ain., Vol. II, vide tables of harvests of the subas. 

6. Ibid. 

7. Ibid., 134, 353; Ralph Fitch, vide Foster, Early Travels in India, 43. 

8. Ain., II, 181. 

9. Ibid., 164. 

10. Ibid., II, 98-117. 

11., Ibid., II, 98-117. 

12. Ibid. 

13. Ibid. 

14. De Laet, The Empire of the Great Mogal, 17. 

15. Ain., II, 249. 

16. Moreland, India at the Death of Akbar, 105. 

17. Calendars of Court Minutes of the East India Company, Vol. II, 179. 

18. Pant, The Commercial Policy of the Mughals, 210. 

19. Abu-’l-Fazl mentions various kinds of fine cotton cloths, vide, Ain . I, 100, 685. 

20. Ain., II, 191. 

21. Varthema, Ludovico di, Travels, tr. for the Hakluyt Society, 1863, Vide 
Moreland, op. cit., 172. 

22. Ain., I, 97. 

23. Ibid., 98, Vol. II, 356. 

24. Ibid., 98. 

25. Ibid., 90-97. 

26. Ibid., 57, Vol. II, 169. 

27. Bernier, Travels, Vol. I, 402-403. 

28. For Shawl industry under Aurangzlb, see Sujan Rai, Khulasat, 49b-50a. 

29. Ain., II, 247. 

30. Moreland, op. cit., 172. 

31. Travels of Tavernier, 126. 

32 Ibid 

33 S S. Kulshrestha, Development of Trade and Industry under the Mughals, 
97-98. 

34. Travels of Tavernier, Chapter X. 

35. Ibid. 

36. Ibid. 

737 


M.E.—47 






THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


37. Moreland, op. cit., 172. 

38. Chhattarman, Chhahar Gulshan, 27, 39; Sujan Rai, Khulasat, 22, 30, 34. 

39. Ain., II, 169; Manucci, Vol. II. 

40. Ain., II, 76-117. 

41. Ain., II, 192, 248; De Laet, 21, 23, 45-46. 

42. Foster, Early Travels in India, 151-154. 

43. Foster, op. cit., 148, 190-192. 

44. De Laet, 26. 

45. Ibid., 45-46, 62. 

46. Sarkar, Studies in Aurangzib’s Reign, 275. 

47. Pant, op. cit., 195. 

48. Ain., II, 76-93, 105-106, 114, 117, 119-120, 121-122. 

49. Ain., II, 78-117. 

50. Ibid., 192. 

51. Bernier, Travels, 435. 

52. De Laet, 54-55, 71. 

53. Chhattarman, Chhahar Gulshan, 53. 

54. Ain., I, 410, 417; Hawkins, vide Early Travels in India, ed. Foster, 71, 116, 142. 

55. Ain., II, 78-117. 

56. Fitch, vide, Early Travels in India, ed., by Foster, 18, 24. 

57. Ibid., 34. 

58. Ain., II, 207. 

59. Ain., I, 62, 66; Vol. II, pessim (vide description of the subas ); E. Tarry, vide 
Foster, op. cit., 297. 

60. Ain. I, 77-78. 

61. Ibid., 68-78; Vol. II, 135, 138, 164, 169, 190, 192, 246, 249; 283. 

62. Edward Terry, Vide Foster, op. cit., 296-297. 

63. Ibid., 297; Ain., I, 75; De Laet, 24. 

64. Ain., II, 134, 138, 339. 

65. Ain., II, 339. 

66. Ain., II, 339; Moreland, op. cit., 147. 

67. Babur, op. cit., 490-491. 

68. Foster, op. cit., 25. 

69. Ibid., 174. 

70. A.N., II, 80. 

71. Ain., II, 135, 136; Foster, op. cit., 24-28. 

72. Ain., I, 137, 233, 237. 

73. Sarkar, Mughal Administration, 94. 

74. Ain., II, 134. 

75. Ibid., 248. 

76. Ain., II, 339. 

77. Akbar the Great, Vol. I, p. 159. 

78. Moreland, op. cit., 170. 

79. Khulasat, 36. 

80. Chhattarman, op. cit., 40. 

81. Foster, op. cit., 18. 

82. Ain., II, 164. 

83. Pant, op. cit., 92. 

84. Khulasat, 26. 

85. / Ain., I, 236, 237. 

86. Sarkar, Studies in Aurangzib’s Reign, 281. 

87. Bernier, Travels, II, 63. 

88. Ain., I, 83-87; Tavernier, Vol. II, op. cit., 182; Pinkerton, Travels, Vol. VHI 
(Capt. Alexander Hamilton’s account), 307, 308, 310, 365; Vol. VII (Goez 

89. Ain., II,’235.* See also De Laet, 75-76. 

90. Ibid., 317, 365. The metal called rui was “composed of four seers of copper 
to i of lead, and in India called Changar.” 

91. Ain., I, (Blochmann), 38-39. 

92. Ain., Ill, (Jarrett and Sarkar), 10. 

93. Ain., I, 41-42. 

94. Khulasat, 22, 26, 30, 496. 

95. Chhahar Gulshan, 11, 27, 37, 39. 

96. De Laet, 77. 

97. Ain., II, 138. 

98. De Laet, 75. 


738 


ECONOMIC CONDITION 


99. Travels in India by Tavernier, ed., by Ball, Vol. II, 59. 

100. Tavernier, op. cit., 135-138; Sarkar, Studies in Aurangzib* s Reign , 280. 

101. Ain., II, 136, 170, 172, 182, 235, 359; De Laet, 76; 78. 

102. Ibid., 132. 

103. Ibid., 192. 

104. Ibid., 192-193. 

105. Ibid., 192. 

106. Ain., II, 215, 319. 

107. Ain., II, 132, 239, 285. 

107a. Ibid., 164. 

108. Ain., II, 249. 

109. Khulasat, 26, 34, 56. 

110. Edward Terry, op. cit., 297. 

111. Ain., I, 525, 526; Sarkar, India of Aurangzib, LXXVII. 

112. Ain., II, 239. 

113. Moreland and Geyl, The Remonstrantie (Jahangir’s India) of Francisco Pel- 
saert, 46. 

114. Ain., I, 58. 

115. Ain., Vol. I, 89-90. Jahangir Tuzuk, Vol. II, 117) says the flower had four 
petals. 

116. At another place Abu-’l-Fazl says 10 or 12 thousand bighaS. See Ain., Vol. 
II, 358. 

117. Ain., II, 364, Jahangir (Vide Tuzuk, Vol. I, 92, Vols. II, 77) says saffron 
grows only at Pampur. 

118. Ibid., Vol. II, 358-359. 

119. Tuzuk, Vol. I, 92. 

120. Ibid., 177. 

121. Ibid., 178. 

122. Ain., II, 135, 165. 

123. Travels of Tavernier, II, 129. 

124. Ain., Vol. I, 67; Vol. II, 76. (for Ajwain). 

125. Ralph Fitch, vide Foster, op. cit., 14. 

126. Ibid., 16. 

127. Ibid., 41. 

128., Ibid., 44. 

129. Ibid., 45. 

130. Ibid., 46. 

131. V.A. Smith, Akbar the Great Mogul, 407. 

132. Ibid., 409. 

133. Edward Terry, Vide Foster, op. cit., 299 

134. Moreland, From Akbar to Aurangzib, 80. 

135. Ibid., 81. 


136. Ibid., 189. 

137. The Memoirs, Vide Kulshrestha, 214-215. 

138. R.K. Mookerji, op. cit., 69. 

139. De Laet and Manrique, The Treasures of Akbar, J.R.A.S. , 1915, p. 

140. Moreland, From Akbar to Aurangzib, 57-58. 

141. R.JC. Mookerji, op. cit., 68. 

142. The Memoirs, 408. 

143. Srivastava, A.L., Akbar the Great, Vol. Ill, Chapter II, 30-60. 

144. The Memoirs, 518. 

145. Ibid. 

146. Ain., Vol. I, (Blochmann), 93-94. 

147. Moreland and Geyl, Remonstrantie, 61. 


242. 


148. Bernier’s Travels, Vol. I, 259. 

149. Studies in Aurangzib’s Reign, 270-71. 

150. T.A.I., 335; T. Daudi, 75, 224. 

151. Abdul Razzaq, vide Major, R.JL, op. cit., 32. 

152. Paes, Vide Moreland, India at the Death of Akbar, II. 

153. Commentarius, 34-36. 


154. Ibid., 96-97. 

155. Ibid., 98. 

156. Ibid, 159-160. 


157. Ibid, 79. „ . _ . . T c An 

158. Ralph Fitch, vide Foster, Early Travels in India, 8-47. 

159. Foster, op cit., 186-87. 


739 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


160. M.T.I., 428-29; Srivastava, Akbar the Great, I, 21. 

161. M.A.Q., 319-21; T.A. II, 301; Akbar the Great, I, 169-170. 

162., A.N. Ill, 420. 

163. Akbar the Great, I, 408-409. 

164. V.A. Smith, Akbar the Great Mogul, 399. 

165. Ibid. 

166. Moreland, From Akbar to Aurangzlb, 210-213. 

167.i C.H.I. IV, 283. 

168. Ibid., 285. 

169. Moreland, From Akbar to Aurangzlb, 207-213. 

170. Ain., Vol. I, 235, 236. 

171. R.K. Mookerji, Economic History of India, 1600-1800, Vide Journal of U-P. 
Historical Society, Vol. XIV, Pt. II, 63. 

172. Ibid., 63-64. 

173. Ain., I, 235. 

174. Ain., I, 65; R.K. Mookerji, op. cit., 86. 

175. A in., I, 67. 

176. Ain., I, 101. 

177. R.K. Mookerji, op. cit., 67. 


740 


CHAPTER XXIII 


I. MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 

1. Beginnings 

With the advent of the Mughuls Indo-Muslim architecture 
reaches a unity and completeness which make the story of the archi¬ 
tectural style that developed under their august patronage parti¬ 
cularly fascinating and instructive. The Mughul emperors were 
keen lovers of nature and art, and their personality was, to a cer¬ 
tain extent, reflected in the art and culture of their time. 

The state of uncertainty in the days of Babur and Humayun 
was not, however, favourable, for any outstanding contribution to 
the development of art and culture. Babur himself was a remark¬ 
ably dynamic personality—a fearless soldier undaunted by adver¬ 
sity, an accomplished writer and a born aesthete with a keen sense 
of perception for the beauties of nature and art. He is said to have 
undertaken several building projects of ambitious character in India 
that involved the employment of numerous workmen at Agra, Dhol- 
pur, Gwalior and other places. In his Memoirs he says that “680 
workmen worked daily on my buildings at Agra . . . while 1491 
stone-cutters worked daily on my buildings at Agra, Slkri, Biana, 
Dholpur, Gwalior and Kiul.” 1 The number of workmen employed 
would indicate the extensiveness of his schemes. Hardly any 
monument definitely attributable to him has, however, survived to¬ 
day and it is not possible to determine the style and character of his 
buildings. It is said that his schemes, mostly consisting of the lay¬ 
ing out and construction of pleasure gardens, pavilions, etc. had no 
sacramental or sentimental association and the consequent neglect 
through centuries had been responsible for their disintegration. Of 
one of the mosques that Babur built within the Lodi fort at Agra he 
complains that “it is not well done” and that it “is in Hindustani 
fashion”. 2 It has to be borne in mind that Babur had a strong dislike 
for the country that destiny had allotted to him. Indian architec¬ 
ture of the time had hardly anything to commend to his innate 
artistic taste. He praises, no doubt, the remarkable skill and dex¬ 
terity of the Indian workmen and was particularly impressed by 
the palaces of Man Singh and Vikramjit within the fort at Gwalior 
which, he 3 says, “were singularly beautiful, though built in patches 
without any regular plan”. It is this lack of regularity and sym- 


741 



THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


metry in the design of Indian buildings that strongly reacted on his 
orderly and sensitive mind and he expresses his dissatisfaction in no 
uncertain terms. With the Mughuls, strict formality and balance 
represented the essential qualities of a good composition and any 
deviation would readily offend their inherent aesthetic taste. 
Though admiring the manipulative skill of the Indian builders and 
their excellent workmanship Babur was not moved by what he 
saw of Indian architecture of the time. He strongly expressed 
dislike of the state of building art in India and is reported 
to have invited from Constantinople several pupils of the celebrated 
Albanian architect, Sinan, to help him in his building projects. 
It is unlikely, however, that such an enterprise ever materialised. 
Nevertheless, the report truly reflects the working of the mind of 
Babur with regard to the state of architecture in India and is a clear 
proof of his attitude of preference for foreign ideas and inspiration 
to those of the country of his adoption. With such a super¬ 
cilious attitude for the country and for the people and their culture 
it is difficult to initiate any creative and significant art movement. 
Hence, in spite of his high aesthetic tastes, Babur’s supreme con¬ 
tempt for everything Indian was not conducive to the growth of an 
Indian art movement under his patronage. He depended too much 
on imported ideas and inspiration and it is significant that what¬ 
ever he might have transplanted on the Indian soil has been swept 
away. Objectively, it may be truly said that Babur left no impres¬ 
sion whatsoever on the Indian building tradition. 

The adverse political circumstances also did not afford much 
scope and opportunity for any significant architectural activity dur¬ 
ing the reign of Babur’s unfortunate son and successor Humayun. 
Son of an aesthete father and himself aesthetically inclined, Huma¬ 
yun undertook, in the early years of his reign, the building of a new 
city at Delhi, to be called the Dinpanah (‘World Refuge’) as the 
“asylum of the wise and intelligent persons”. It was to consist of 
“a magnificent palace of seven storeys, surrounded by delightful 
gardens and orchards of such elegance and beauty that its fame 
might draw the people from the remotest corners of the world”. 
The Humayun-namdh of Khondamir 4 gives a graphic account of the 
laying of the foundation stone of this imperial city, the first of the 
Mughul capitals, so to say. “The walls, bastions, rampart and the 
gates of the city” are also reported to have been nearly finished 
within a year of the laying of the foundation stone. But it is doubt¬ 
ful whether the city, as it was planned to be, was ever completed. 
Even if completed, it appears to have been hastily put up without any 
attention towards stability or architectural beauty. The troubled 
reign of Humayun would hardly afford scope for anything better. 


742 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


No remains are extant of this first Mughul city, and it is likely that 
whatever of it was finished was destroyed by Sher Shah. The two 
mosques that have survived of Humayun’s reign exhibit no original 
or outstanding features. 

With regard to the achievements of the first two Mughul empe¬ 
rors in the field of architecture Percy Brown aptly sums them up 
as follows: 

“The material records which have survived of both Babur’s 
and Humayun’s contributions to the building art of the country are 
therefore almost negligible. On the other hand, the indirect influence 
of their personalities and experiences on the subsequent art of the 
country cannot be overlooked. Babur’s marked aesthetic sense, 
communicated to his successors, inspired them under more favour¬ 
able conditions to the production of their finest achievements, while 
Humayun’s forced contact with the culture of the Safavids is re¬ 
flected in that Persian influence noticeable in many of the Mughul 
buildings which followed .” 5 

There was an interruption in the Mughul regime by the inter¬ 
vention of the reigns of Sher Shah Sur and his successors. 
Sher Shah, as Percy Brown says, was “a man of marked con¬ 
structional propensities and architectural ideals”. At the time of 
his death he is said to have regretted that he was not spared to erect 
buildings “with such architectural embellishments that friend 
and foe might render tribute of applause ”* 6 The few buildings that 
he has left are each of an exceptional character and clearly exem¬ 
plify his ideals of, and attitude towards, building art. He arrived 
on the scene at a time when Islamic architecture in India, parti¬ 
cularly the Imperial style of Delhi, was already in a state of disin¬ 
tegration. An intelligent patronage and an aesthetic vision only 
could save this style from utter dissolution. Sher Shah, gifted with 
the imagination and outlook of a man of culture and vision, was 
fully aware of the needs of the time and supplied the necessary con¬ 
ditions, as his building projects amply testify. These projects fall 
into two groups of monuments situated widely apart, one at Sasa- 
ram in Bihar, the scene of his earlier activities, and the other at 
Delhi, the seat of his imperial government. Both these groups are 
important, one as the brilliant finale of an earlier tradition and the 
other as anticipating notable future developments. In the history 
of Indo-Muslim architecture Sher Shah’s buildings are important as 
supplying a link between the earlier Indo-Muslim style, as practised 
under the aegis of the Delhi Sultans, and the later, i.e. the Mughul 
style. 


743 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


At Sasaram and in its neighbourhood there is a series of five 
monuments, the majority being erected, in all probability, during his 
lifetime. Each of these is a building of noble proportions and has 
marked architectural character. They are octagonal in plan, in con¬ 
tinuation of the type of tomb that was initiated at Delhi in the mauso¬ 
leum of Khan-i-Jahan Tilangani during the reign of FIruz Shah 
Tughluq and so greatly favoured by the Sayyid and the Lodi rulers. 
Of all these tombs, the mausoleum of Sher Shah stands out pre- 
eminently as the magnum opus —a supreme conception of extra¬ 
ordinary architectural interest. The octagonal type of funerary 
monument was initiated at Delhi and was characteristic of the Im¬ 
perial style of Delhi. It is not a little surprising therefore that its 
supreme expression should be produced in a remote corner of Bihar, 
far away from the capital. Sher Shah’s tomb far excels the Delhi 
compositions of this order in its bold and imaginative conception. 
The Delhi tombs belonged to a ruling authority already approaching 
disintegration and, in spite of their good qualities, they are expres¬ 
sive of the forces of dissolution. The tomb of Sher Shah, though based 
on the Delhi models, was a production of much higher aesthetic 
plane and a fitting tribute to the power and imagination of his 
vigorous and dynamic personality. 

Not a little of the romantic beauty of this grand mausoleum 
depends on its picturesque situation. It stands in the middle of a 
large quadrangular tank, 1400 feet in length, and rises from a lofty 
square terrace, over 300 feet on each side, with flights of steps des¬ 
cending to the edge of the water. The monument was connected 
with the mainland by an elegant bridge, now ruined. The square 
terrace forms an ample court with a substantial domed pavilion at 
each corner. From the centre of the court rises the octagonal tomb 
building in three gracefully diminishing stages ultimately crowned 
by a low and wide dome. The lowest stage forms an arcaded cor¬ 
ridor round the funerary hall and has a pleasing effect with the 
graceful shape of the arches, three on each of its eight sides, pro¬ 
jecting eave supported on brackets and the high crenellated para¬ 
pet. The two upper stages are each relieved by means of pillared 
kiosks, one at each corner of the octagon, alternating with effective 
oriel windows. From the third stage which actually forms the drum 
rises the semi-spherical dome, the series of kiosks at its base “carry¬ 
ing the eye along its spreading curves to the massive lotus finial 
which crowns the whole”. 7 The total height from the base to the 
finial is 150 feet and offers a splendid harmony with the dimen¬ 
sions of the base. 


744 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


The tomb of Sher Shah has been described as thoroughly 
expressive of Indian genius in building art. In its pyramidal ele¬ 
vation Havell has recognised the stamp of the earlier Hindu tradi¬ 
tion. While there might be differences of opinion in this regard, 
nobody can deny the boldness of its conception, the majesty of its 
proportions and the magnificence of its execution. The transition 
from the square to the octagon and from the octagon to the sphere 
is smooth and harmonious; and the manner in which the mass has 
been broken up by the appropriate application of architectural de¬ 
tails is admirable. Few buildings of the like order can surpass it 
in the chaste beauty of its lines, in the dignified harmony of its 
dimensions and in the effective distribution of its huge mass. It 
represents a great architectural conception and a supreme build¬ 
ing achievement of sober and massive splendour of which any coun¬ 
try might feel proud. It is now a grey and sombre pile, but ori¬ 
ginally it was covered with glowing colour, blue, red and yellow, 
boldly and finely worked into elegant and effective patterns. Traces 
of such patterns still remain. 

Sher Shah occupied the throne of Delhi at a time when, after 
a long period of inertia, the architectural activities at Delhi had 
been showing signs of revival. A few buildings erected during 
the first half of the sixteenth century furnish indications of a re¬ 
turn to the ornate architectural tradition of the Khaljls. In the 
Moth-ki-Masjid, built about the beginning of the sixteenth century, 
the ‘beam and bracket’ of the Tughluq style was replaced by the 
recessed archway, characteristic of the Khaljl buildings. The 
Jamali mosque, built about 1530, indicates a further advance in 
the new direction. Among other innovations, the white marble 
lacing in ashlar masonry and the double-recessed arch with ‘spear¬ 
heads’ fringes in the outer one signify definite attempts to revive 
the modes of the older style of the Khaljls. In these examples there 
may be recognised a new awakening which required a ruler with 
vision and imagination to direct the activities into a strong and 
virile movement. This the architectural predilections of Sher Shah 
did, and the buildings that he erected at Delhi represent notable 
and purposeful creations full of import for the styles that followed. 

With the assumption of imperial authority Sher Shah initiated 
at the capital a forceful architectural movement that is strongly 
expressive of his own versatile nature. He laid out a new citadel, 
called the Purana Quil‘a (old fort), on the site of Indrapat (Indra- 
prastha) and around it he planned his city. The Purana QuiTa, as 
the extant remains indicate, was intended to be a composition of 
considerable size and magnitude; but it is now a mere shell bereft 


745 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


of the palace buildings, pavilions and other edifices that it once 
contained. Two gateways and a part of the rampart walls now 
remain, together with a notable mosque building—one of the many 
such elegant ones that once adorned the citadel. The massive ram¬ 
part walls of rough and rugged masonry, along with substantial bas¬ 
tions, bold battlements, machicolations, etc. are expressive of robust 
strength to which the gateways of dressed sandstone, picked out in 
white marble and occasionally inset with blue glaze, offer a most 
significant contrast. The main entrance through the western gate¬ 
way exhibits an exceptionally elegant treatment, illustrative at once 
of massive vigour and refined grace. It is a prelude to the style of 
buildings that once adorned this highly purposeful citadel. The 
Quira-i-Kuhna Masjid, the chapel royal of Sher Shah Sur, which is 
the only monument that has survived, possibly on account of its sa¬ 
crosanct character, offers a most significant key to the admirable 
qualities of the various buildings that Sher Shah erected within his 
citadel. 

The Quika-i-Kuhna Masjid represents the crystallisation of the 
awakened tendencies that we have already recognised in the Moth- 
ki-Masjid and the Jamali mosque built in the early decades of the 
sixteenth century. The accumulated experience of about half a 
century, under the able guidance of a monarch of liberal and aesthe¬ 
tic bent of mind, resulted in the production of this mosque, “a gem 
of architectural design”, as Percy Brown aptly describes it. 

The Quika-i-Kuhna mosque does not represent a large or ambi¬ 
tious composition. It has no cloisters and consists simply of the 
sanctuary chamber, an oblong of 138 feet by 55 feet with a height 
of about 60 feet, and a courtyard in front with an octagonal reser¬ 
voir of water in the centre for the ablution of the worshippers. The 
Jamali mosque, about fifteen years earlier, was the prototype on 
which Sher Shah’s mosque was modelled. A comparison of the two 
will, however, reveal what a great advance was made in architec¬ 
tural form and design within a comparatively short period. The 
design and arrangements of the two, including the scheme of the 
facade, the division of the interior, the structural procedures, etc. 
are practically the same. But whereas in the Jamali mosque the 
various elements and arrangements are in the rough, they appear 
in refined and finished forms in Sher Shah’s production. “Each 
architectural feature crudely fashioned in the Jamali mosque has 
been refined, improved, or amplified in order to fit it for its place 
in the finished production of the Quika-i-Kuhna. Sher Shah’s Chapel 
Royal in the Purana Quika represents the culmination of its type.” 8 


746 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


In the Quil‘a-i-Kuhna mosque all the elements and details have 
been carefully disposed and harmoniously balanced so as to form 
one of the outstanding creations of building art. Its supreme ex¬ 
cellence lies in the treatment of its facade which consists of five 
arched entrances of elegant proportions, each within a larger arch¬ 
way enclosed by a bold rectangular frame. The central archway 
is larger than the two flanking it on either side, and behind it rises 
the single dome of the flat Lodi type crowned by a fluted finial. 
The sandstone fabric is enriched with white marble inlay and inset 
patterns in coloured glaze and is further relieved by mouldings, 
carvings and bracketted openings, all disposed over the frontage in 
good taste. The facade represents a singularly fine achievement in 
its pleasing scheme and finished execution. Apart from its aesthe¬ 
tic character, it has also several features which are of some historical 
interest. The narrow turrets on two sides of the central bay 
of the fronton with their fluted mouldings remind one of the stel¬ 
late flanges of the Qutb Minar, while a similar pair at the corners 
of the back wall retain the characteristic taper of the Tughluq build¬ 
ings. Apart from such associations with the past, a link with the 
future may also be recognised in the slight drop or flatness in the 
curves of the arches towards the top, thus anticipating the so-called 
‘Tudor’ arch of the Mughuls. 

The interior arrangement of the mosque building is also equally 
pleasing. It is divided into five bays corresponding to five arched 
openings in front. The simple broad mouldings of the interior 
arches, the plastic treatment of the mihmb wall and the effective 
proportions of the bays recall the elegant treatment of the frontage; 
and the various expedients for the support of the roof illustrate 
the inventive skill and technical assurance of the builders. In the 
centre the dome is supported on the usual squinch arch, while the 
intermediate bays with vaulted ceilings have a rare variety of stal¬ 
actite with ornamental arches in between. The bays at the extreme 
ends exhibit novel and original features in the arrangement of a 
kind of cross-rib and semi-vault that have been used for the sup¬ 
port of the roof. The technique is evidently of an experimental 
nature. Besides being a creation of high artistic standard, the 
Quil‘a-i-Kuhna mosque is “pregnant with ideas, some of the past, 
others original” and contains “many elements of tradition” and 
“promises of future development”. 9 In this connection mention may 
be made of the treatment of the central mihmb enclosing a half¬ 
dome behind, which anticipates the semi-domed entrance used with 
so admirable an effect in Mughul buildings. The Quila‘a-i-Kuhna 
offers a clue as to the character of other buildings erected by Sher 


747 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Shah within his citadel. Such buildings have been swept away, per¬ 
haps in the frenzy of restoration of the Mughuls. The Mughul 
architectural style began as a definitive movement under Humayun’s 
son and successor, the great Akbar, and it has been affirmed, pos¬ 
sibly with some amount of truth, that Akbar received the inspira¬ 
tion for his own architectural projects from the group of buildings 
produced under the intelligent and enlightened patronage of Sher 
Shah, and that the style of his buildings was influenced, to a certain 
extent at least, by the strong and revivified architectural tradition 
that flourished at the imperial capital during Sher Shah’s regime. 

Akbar’s victory in the second battle of Panipat (1556) planted 
the Mughul dominion firmly on the Indian soil. It was with this 
victory that the Mughul empire in India really began. Within 
fifteen years Akbar became the undisputed master of a far-flung 
empire, much larger than what his father had inherited, and had 
done more to consolidate the various heterogeneous racial and reli¬ 
gious elements of Hindustan. 

It was with Akbar that the Mughul architectural style, as an 
individual and distinctive tradition, may be said to have begun. He 
undertook various building projects in different parts of his empire 
and was responsible for the initiation and direction of a vigorous 
programme of building activity that was assiduously continued by 
his successors. 

The mausoleum of Humayun at Delhi supplies an important 
landmark in the history of the building art of the Mughuls as herald¬ 
ing the new movement. Erected by his widow, Haji Begam, dur¬ 
ing the early years of Akbar’s reign, it is one of the most striking 
monuments of Indo-Muslim architecture. The work was begun in 
1564, eight years after the death of Humayun, and took eight years 
to be completed. The building itself is supported on a wide square 
platform, 22 feet in height, with gracefully arcaded sides. The 
arches recall the Persian design and form and the piers are orna¬ 
mented with inlays of white marble emphasising their graceful 
lines. Each archway opens into a small room for the accommoda¬ 
tion of visitors. The mausoleum building occupies the centre of 
this arcaded platform and represents a square of 356 feet side with 
each corner chamfered and the middle of each side deeply set back. 
This arrangement lends to the building a pleasing effect of contrast¬ 
ing planes and deep shadows, further variegated by white marble 
lacings to pick out each and every lineament of the noble structure. 
The design and elevation of all the four sides are essentially identi¬ 
cal; the dominating feature on each face consists of an enormous 


748 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


fronton, set back in the middle, accommodating a recessed archway, 
and with similar archways in the embowed wings on either side. 
Above rises the white marble dome of a very graceful contour, rais¬ 
ed upon a substantial drum, with a number of pillared kiosks, roof¬ 
ed by small cupolas. Slender turrets surround the dome at its base 
and all these arrangements effectively break the skyline. 

The interior arrangements of the structure are equally pleasing. 
Instead of consisting of a single chamber, as has been the practice 
hitherto, we have here a combination of rooms on a regular plan— 
the largest one in the centre with a vaulted roof containing the 
cenotaph of the emperor, and a smaller one at each angle intended 
for those of his family, all connected with one another by galleries 
and corridors. Every element in this complex design is balanced 
and seems to fit in organically with the other. 

The entire building is laid within an enclosed quadrangle de¬ 
signed as a formal garden and approached by an imposing gateway 
in the middle of each of the perimeter walls. The idea of placing a 
tomb building within a walled-in space is nothing new. But the 
credit of expanding the enclosure into a formal garden ( chtirbagh ) 
with paved walks, flowered parterres variously patterned, orna¬ 
mental water-courses, avenues of trees, etc. was entirely that of the 
Mughuls, possibly under inspiration from Timurid architecture, and 
the scheme first makes its appearance in Humayun’s tomb at Delhi. 

The white marble dome of Humayun’s tomb shows also certain 
new features in its shape as well as in its structural conception. In 
shape it offers a significant contrast to the low-pitched and broad- 
based domes of the earlier styles. Its slightly constricted neck and 
high pitch with the finial rising directly from the apex without any 
intervening member have parallels in fifteenth century Timurid 
architecture from which this new type of dome in India appears to 
have been derived, though not exactly copied. On the structural 
side we find here for the first time the correct and logical applica¬ 
tion of the double dome, an expedient that is known to have been 
in use in Western Asia for a considerable length of time. The prin¬ 
ciple was, no doubt, known in India, as may be noticed in the crude 
attempts in this direction in the tomb of Sikandar Lodi at Delhi. 
The Hindu builders also appear to have been familiar with the idea 
and we may refer to the double vault used in the construction of 
the sikhara of the brick temple at Bhitargaon (Kanpur district, 
Uttar Pradesh), referable to about the fifth century A.D. In the 
tomb of Humayun the principle appears as a fully mature and ra¬ 
tionalised structural expedient and was evidently inspired by the 


749 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


technique and methods of the West Asiatic architectural tradition. 
A dome constructed on this principle consists of an inner and an 
outer shell of masonry with a hollow space in between, the inner 
forming the vaulted ceiling over the main chamber. It represents 
an effective structural expedient; not only does it reduce the load 
of masonry, but it also enables the ceiling to be placed in better 
relation to the interior dimension of the hall to be covered, without 
any disturbance of the proportions and aspiring elevation of the 
exterior. 

The tomb of Humayun strikes a new note in the order of funer¬ 
ary monuments in India. Though built during the reign of Akbar, 
it stands apart from the architectural conceptions of that emperor, 
and in spite of its notable qualities and ushering in of new princi¬ 
ples and wider possibilities, it failed to set a fashion immediately. 
The Persian inspiration is evident in the plan and elevation of the 
building. This is not surprising as Humayun, apart from his inherit¬ 
ed Persian predilections, strongly imbibed Persian culture due to 
his forced contact with the Safavid court of Persia. It is also re¬ 
corded that the architect entrusted with the building of this monu¬ 
ment was one Mirak Mirza Ghiyas, who was almost certainly of 
Persian extraction. The name Arab Sarai of a nearby locality is 
said to be a reminder of the settlement of the foreign workmen em¬ 
ployed in the building. 


We may quote Percy Brown for an assessment of the various 
elements that contributed to the making of this noble monument: 
“Perhaps the nearest definition of the architectural style of this 
monument is that it represents an Indian interpretation of a Persian 
conception, as while there is much in its structure that is indigen¬ 
ous, there is at the same time much that can only be of Persian in¬ 
spiration. Until now nowhere but in Persia had there appeared a 
dome of this shape and construction; solely in the buildings of that 
country had there figured the great arched alcove which gives such 
a character to the facade; and nowhere else but in the royal tombs 
of that region had there been devised that complex of rooms and 
corridors forming the interior arrangements. On the other hand 
only India could have created such fanciful kiosks with their ele¬ 
gant cupolas, and above all only the skilled masons of that country 
could have produced such excellent stone masonry and combined 
it so artistically with the finer marble. In spirit and in structure 
Humayun’s tomb stands as an example of the synthesis of two of 
the great building traditions of Asia—the Persian and the Indian.” 10 


750 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


And the full efflorescence of Mughul architecture depends on 
this happy synthesis. 

Outside the main stream of the Mughul architectural style, 
which started its definitive course in the building activities of Akbar, 
several monuments erected in the early years of the Mughul regime 
may also be found to be of some interest. The octagonal tomb style 
of the previous epoch, that had its brilliant expression in the tomb 
of Sher Shah at Sasaram, reached its finale in two Delhi tombs. 
The first, the tomb of ‘Isa Khan built in 1547, is a composition of 
no mean merit. The octagonal tomb building stands in the middle 
of an octagonal court, enclosed by a balustrade of the same plan 
and including a mosque on the western side. The verandah, with 
three arches on each of its eight sides, terminates in a wide eave 
with crenellated battlements behind, the roof being relieved by 
eight pillared kiosks, one in the middle of each side surmounted 
by a dome. The octagonal mortuary chamber inside the arcaded 
verandah is covered by a low-pitched dome of the Lodi type with 
the usual finials crowning the whole. Each angle of the verandah 
is strengthened by a sloping buttress with a miniature turret as 
cresting. Similar crestings appear also at the angles of the drum 
surrounding the dome at its base. All the elements of the com¬ 
position are in balanced relationship with one another and though 
it lacks the superb grandeur of Sher Shah’s tomb at Sasaram, the 
tomb of ‘Isa Khan may be considered to be one of the most pleas¬ 
ing creations of the octagonal tomb style. Compared to this, the 
tomb of Adham Khan at Meharauli (Delhi) fails to be convincing 
because of its apparent lack of balance and in spite of the embowed 
recesses, some with openings in the second stage of the structure. 
Built about twenty years later this is the last in the series of octa¬ 
gonal tombs. It marks the end of an imperial tradition, as Humayun’s 
tomb which is approximately contemporary, heralds the birth of 
another. 

Nearly contemporary to the tomb of Humayun at Delhi is the 
tomb of Muhammad Ghaus at Gwalior. It is a square structure of 
about 100 feet side with hexagonal towers attached to the four 
angles. The middle of each side is projected forward to form a 
portico for entrance into the gallery around the mortuary chamber. 
This gallery is enclosed by perforated screens of finely chiselled pat¬ 
terns set between pillars. The square of the tomb chamber is cut 
off by arches at the corners and on the octagon thus formed at the 
upper level is supported a broad flat dome. Wide eaves surround 
the building and in the upper stages appear pillared kiosks covered 
by cupolas. But for the ill-fitting hexagonal towers at the corners 

751 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


the composition may be said to be well balanced and singularly 
pleasing and reminds one of a type of tomb characteristic of Gujarat 
Muslim architecture. The use of perforated screens may also have 
been derived from the same source. The pyramidal cupolas over 
the pavilions above the porticos have affinities with similar elements 
in Malwa Muslim architecture. The builder responsible for this 
monument seems to have been inspired by the vision of a synthesis 
of two forceful architectural traditions. 

It appears that during the early part of the Mughul regime 
several forces had been at work for an attempt at a revivification 
of the moribund building art of the previous epoch. What was 
necessary was an intelligent direction to guide these forces into a 
strong and vigorous architectural movement. 

2. Foundation 

Akbar was resolved wholly to identify himself with India and 
to rule as an Indian sovereign, not as a foreign conqueror. He was 
the first of the Mughul emperors to be born in India and he sincere¬ 
ly considered himself to be an Indian, not a stranger like his grand¬ 
father with the eyes and heart turned toward the west. Moreover, 
he had neither the fanaticism, nor the intolerance for other faiths 
and creeds that this desert religion engendered among its followers. 
His liberal and enlightened mind was discerning enough to recog¬ 
nise and appreciate the good qualities in other faiths and he had the 
courage to honour and patronise merits irrespective of race or re¬ 
ligion. The catholicity of his mind and views is reflected in all his 
works, political, administrative, as well as cultural. There was 
a new direction in the policy of the State, and that direction was 
an emphasis on the Indian point of view which the emperor him¬ 
self strongly advocated. This new policy was responsible for the 
phenomenal expansion of the Mughul empire and for its consolida¬ 
tion and ultimate cohesion. The Mughul empire had its real be¬ 
ginning in the regime of this enlightened ruler, and so also a com 
posite type of culture, known as the Mughul culture. Akbar 
was inspired by the ideal of a united India and this he strove to rea¬ 
lise throughout his life. The splendid pageant of the Grand Mughuls 
retained its substance and reality so long as this liberal policy was 
maintained. The disintegration of the grand empire began as a 
result of the narrow and bigoted policy of Aurangzib who wanted 
to impose the Islamic point of view. The great Akbar fostered a 
forceful architectural style on a correct understanding and assimi¬ 
lation of the various traditions and ideals, indigenous as well as 
foreign. This style also languished when, as a result of the pres- 


752 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 

sure of Islamic ideals, there became manifest a gradual isolation 
from the traditions of the soil and a greater dependence on import¬ 
ed, i.e. foreign, ideas. 

Perhaps an unlettered person, Akbar was a man of profound 
culture, with a fine literary taste, a keen intellectual curiosity and a 
high aesthetic discernment. During his long reign he initiated 
many ambitious architectural projects, and his creations in this field 
bear the impress of his own remarkable personality and character. 
He was planning his structural projects simultaneously with the 
building of his father’s tomb at Delhi. It is significant that this 
tomb stands alone among all other architectural creations of his 
reign; and this fact would indicate that his policy and ideas in 
respect of building art were fundamentally different from those re¬ 
flected in the tomb of Humayun. From his buildings it is clear that 
he did not intend to import a ready-made style from Persia or any 
other country. In conformity with his policy, he wanted the style 
that he sought to create to have an independent and Indian charac¬ 
ter. He found the Indian artists still maintaining the living tradi¬ 
tions of their craft and was inspired with the idea of encouraging 
the indigenous systems in art and culture. Only when these proved 
to be wanting or deficient, did he turn to the traditions of other 
countries in order to compensate for the shortcomings of the indige¬ 
nous mode. 

In spite of his strong distaste for India, Babur, as has been noted 
above, was highly impressed by the excellence of Indian workman¬ 
ship in building art. Akbar also recognised and appreciated the 
technical skill and dexterity of the Indian workmen and fully ex¬ 
ploited them in his own architectural undertakings. It is this policy 
that lent to the Akbari monuments a specifically Indian character, 
as contrasted to the rather exotic appearance of Humayun’s tomb 
at Delhi. 

It is necessary to discuss briefly the palace of Man Singh in 
Gwalior fort which attracted the admiration of an inborn aesthete 
like Babur. This will help us, we think, in understanding the cha¬ 
racter of the secular buildings erected by Akbar. 

Man Singh, a Tomara chieftain ruling at Gwalior (1486-1516), 
was one of the most enlightened among the Hindu rulers of his day 
and a munificent patron of music and architecture. His interest in 
the latter sphere is still evident in two beautiful palaces, of which 
the one, known after his name, has been recognised to be “one of 
the finest pieces of architecture in Northern India”. Built at a time 
slightly prior to the advent of the Mughuls, it illustrates a purely 

753 

M.E.—48 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


indigenous style in palace architecture, and as one proceeds it will 
be apparent that from this style Akbar derived many useful ideas 
when building his own palaces within his fortified citadels. 

This remarkable and interesting example of an early Hindu 
palace is situated on the eastern scarp of the rock on which the fort 
stands. Externally the dimensions are 300 feet by 150 feet, with 
a height of more than 80 feet on the eastern side. It is set against 
the eastern rampart of the fortress and the flat surface is relieved on 
each face by tall round bastions of a singularly pleasing design crown¬ 
ed by pavilions with domes of gilt copper flashing in bright sun, 
as Babur once saw them. Between the bastions and breaking up 
the skyline of the parapet there appear again elegantly designed 
balconied kiosks. The facades are gracefully embellished with bold 
patterns, plastic as well as coloured. An effective plastic design, 
occupying the central division of the facade, consists of a range of 
arcades with foliated struts. The coloured ornament in blue, yel¬ 
low and green enamel takes the shape of elegant bands of patterns 
with figures of men, elephants, tigers, birds, makaras, plantain trees, 
etc. and lends a charming and picturesque effect to the massive 
composition of the facades. “Nowhere”, says Fergusson, “do I re¬ 
member any architectural design capable of imparting a similar 
lightness to a massive wall.” Much of this ornament has decayed 
and peeled off. Yet, it represents a grand and beautiful conception, 
immensely effective in treatment and execution. 

The Hathiya Pol or the ‘Elephant Gate’, attached to the sou¬ 
thern end of the eastern facade, is itself a product of high artistic 
merit and is in keeping with the pleasing design of the palace. It 
consists of a handsome domed building with a massive bracket and 
rich corbels, the bracket shape being, to a certain extent, concealed 
behind two semi-circular bands of floral patterns. The sides are 
effectively diversified by projecting balconies, perforated screen- 
works, and particularly by two boldly projecting circular bastions, 
each roofed by a dome on a cluster of pillars. 

The interior of the palace complex consists of two highly artistic 
open courts, each with a suite of rooms on its four sides. The 
courts are rather small in size, but in their exquisite designs and 
rich and graceful embellishments they are perhaps unsurpassed. The 
smallness of the scale and the wealth of decorative detail stand in 
significant contrast to the bold and massive conception of the exterior 
walls. It appears that these interior courts lacked the able guid^ 
ance and supervision of the master architect who might have planned 
and executed them in conformity with the noble and dignified con- 


754 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


ception of the outside. They are more the work of an artist and 
decorator than that of a builder endowed with the breadth of vision 
required for the creation of effective and purposeful habitations. 
Yet, it contains many interesting features that are of distinctly in¬ 
novatory and ingenious character. The main body of the palace 
is divided into two storeys, with additional underground floors along 
the eastern wall for providing cool comfort in hot weather. The open 
pillared balconies in the uppermost floors overlook the courts below 
and add relief to the harsh four-square shape of the courts. The 
ingenuity of the builders is shown in the different structural expe¬ 
dients for support of the roofs, and the vault over a room in the 
south-east angle with ribs at the groins lends a charming effect to 
the interior. The different shapes and designs of the corbelled 
struts and their execution, the variegated shapes and the rich mould¬ 
ings of the piers and pillars, the perforated screens of various patterns, 
the round and foliated arches, and the variously designed projecting 
eaves, including one of corrugated shape, are each a marvel of stone 
carving. The entire surfaces are covered with minute ornamenta¬ 
tion in low relief and coloured glaze lending a most picturesque 
effect to the view of the interior. In spite of the smallness of scale, 
which had long been a deficiency in respect of the interior planning 
of a secular building, Man Singh’s palace furnishes us with a singu¬ 
larly pleasing conception, noble and dignified and, at the same time, 
romantic and picturesque. It has many distinctive elements and 
features that can very well be emulated under intelligent patronage 
and guidance. 

We may now turn to the architectural projects of Akbar. The 
regulations regarding buildings, which Abu-’l-Fazl describes in de¬ 
tail in the Aln-i-Akbari, 11 may serve as an effective prelude in order 
to understand the ideas of Akbar in this respect. 

“Regulations for house-building in general are necessary; they 
are required for the comfort of the army, and are a source of splend¬ 
our for the government. People that are attached to the world will 
collect in towns, without which there would be no progress. Hence 
His Majesty plans splendid edifices, and dresses the work of his mind 
and art in the garment of stone and clay. Thus mighty fortresses 
have been raised, which protect the timid, frighten the rebellious and 
please the obedient. Delightful villas and imposing towers have 
also been built. They afford excellent protection against cold and 
rain, provide for the comforts of the princesses of the Harem, and 
are conducive to that dignity which are so necessary for worldly 
power.” 


755 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


“Everywhere also sarals have been built which are for the 
comfort of travellers and the asylum of poor strangers. Many tanks 
and wells have been dug for the benefit of men and the improvement 
of the soil. Schools and places of worship are being founded and 
the triumphal arch of knowledge is newly adorned.” 

The above observations clearly illustrate the practical nature 
of Akbar’s architectural undertakings. All his projects were in¬ 
tended as much to serve utilitarian purposes as to display and em¬ 
phasise the might and splendour of the government. He was the 
founder of several fortified royal residences, each of which served 
as his capital during the period that the emperor was in residence 
there. They have been designed, hence, in such a manner and scale 
as to accommodate the royal entourage. 

The first of such royal residences to be erected was the fortress 
palace at Agra which was completed in eight years (1565-1573). 
It was built “under the superintendence of Muhammad Qasim Khan, 
the overseer of the buildings and ships”. 13 In plan the fort takes 
the shape of an irregular semi-circle lined along the right bank of 
the river Jumna. The massive enclosure wall consists of a solid red 
sandstone rampart, nearly seventy feet high and one and a half miles 
in circuit, and represents the first application of sized and dressed 
stone on such a huge scale. Contemporary records consider the con¬ 
struction of this enormous mass as a remarkable feat of achieve¬ 
ment and it is stated that “from the top to the bottom fire-red hewn 
stones, linked by iron rings, are joined so closely that even a hair 
cannot find its way into the joints.” 14 This massive fabric, with its 
embattled parapets, machicolations, string-courses, etc. has a solemn 
artistic grandeur, beautiful as well as effective for its purpose. 

The Delhi Gate, also known as the Hathi Pol, stands on the 
western side and forms the principal entrance to the citadel. One 
of the earliest of Akbar’s buildings (it is said to have been com¬ 
pleted in 1566), its noble conception, at once fresh and virile 
indicates the inauguration of a new era in the art of building. It 
is a massive structure designed on the usual scheme of an arched 
entrance flanked by two substantial bastions projecting from the ram¬ 
part. The bastions are octagonal in shape and rise up boldly, each 
with an octagonal domed kiosk at the top. The interior of the gate¬ 
way building consists of several commodious rooms for the accommo¬ 
dation of the guard, while the back has a charming facade with 
arcaded terraces surmounted by domed pavilions and pinnacles. This 
imposing portal is disposed in several storeys, each bastion being 
divided transversely by a surrounding balcony on brackets that 


756 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


serves as the most effective line of interruption to the solid mass of 
the facade. The solids and voids are also disposed very skilfully; 
the lower storey has no opening, except for the arched entrance, in 
keeping with its character requiring strength and stability, while the 
upper has arched recesses, one on each side of the octagon, thus im¬ 
parting to the building the necessary appearance of depth. The entire 
surface is richly decorated by inlay as well as by coloured glaze. The 
patterns in white marble inlay on the arcades and panels, both in¬ 
side and outside, are the most effective against the warm red tex¬ 
ture of sandstone fabric. The patterns in coloured glaze consist 
of winged dragons, elephants and birds, in defiance of the Islamic 
injunction against the representation of living forms, and strik¬ 
ingly illustrate the liberal spirit of toleration that marked all the 
activities of this enlightened emperor. 

There is no doubt that the creator of this impressive gateway 
was imbued with a fresh spirit, free and unrestrained. Its noble 
and dignified character is universally admitted. It has been aptly 
put: “The buildings of the Akbari period are remarkable for their 
animation which reflect the spirit of the time, but few are so vibrant 
in their character as this monumental gateway at Agra fort.” 15 

Abu-’l-Fazl relates in the Am-i-Akbari that within the fort the 
emperor built “upwards of five hundred edifices of red stone in the 
fine styles of Bengal and Gujarat”. 16 This statement is significant. 
We are familar with Akbar’s versatility and his desire to build up 
a great architecture, distinctively Indian in character. For this he 
wanted gifted artists from all parts of Northern India to share in 
his own architectural undertakings, and assembled them together 
to work with his master builders who, under his enlightened leader¬ 
ship, were inspired by the same spirit of catholicity. Thus was de¬ 
veloped a unified and national style of building art in which each 
distinctive tradition, imperial as well as provincial, played an im¬ 
portant part. Even the distant regions were not overlooked if they 
had some contributions to make. The impress of Gujarati tradition 
is clear and explicit in the predominantly prevailing system of tra- 
beate construction and also in the exquisite stone carvings. The 
contribution of Bengal is not so emphatic, at least in the extant monu¬ 
ments. From Abu-’l-Fazl’s categorical statement this province also 
seems to have played not an insignificant part in Akbar’s architec¬ 
tural undertakings within the Agra fort. Only a fragment of Akbar’s 
numerous buildings at Agra has survived today, and the contribu¬ 
tion of the Bengali workmen might have been swept away along 
with the obliteration of many of Akbar’s buildings to make room 
for Shah Jahan’s pretty creations in marble. The name Bengali 

757 



THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


bastion still persists, but the building is in ruins and it is difficult to 
ascertain its real character. It appears more than probable that the 
Bengali hut-shaped roof with elegantly curved eaves, which forms a 
prominent feature in later Mughul monuments, made its first appear¬ 
ance at the imperial capital during Akbar’s regime and established 
itself throughout the western regions as a distinctive element in 
architectural design and decoration. 

Akbar’s buildings at Agra occupied the southern angle of the 
fort and were lined along the parapet of the eastern wall overlooking 
the river. Most of these, as has already been stated, no longer 
exist. Among those that have escaped destruction, mention may 
be made of two palace buildings, known, respectively, as Akbar! 
Mahal and Jahangiri Mahal. The first was probably completed in 
1571, while the second, from its character and design, appears to 
be a later erection, also during the emperor’s long regime, for the 
residence of the heir-apparent, the future emperor Jahangir. Each 
of these palaces was designed on the usual scheme of ranges of 
double-storeyed chambers around an open courtyard. The Akbarl 
Mahal is now mostly in ruins; from the vestiges that remain, its 
treatment appears to have been a little coarser, though bolder, when 
compared to the finer and more ornate workmanship of the Jahangiri 
Mahal. A part of the Akbarl Mahal was later demolished 
in order to accommodate the Jahangiri Mahal. The latter is 
approximately 261 feet by 288 feet externally and is provided 
with substantial bastions, crowned by domed cupolas, at the four 
corners. The exterior is relieved by low relief carvings as well as 
by white marble inlays. The palace is entered by a gateway leading 
by a vestibule to an entrance hall whence galleries with sumptuous 
colonnades run round the courtyard. The view of this interior court 
with the colonnades on its four sides, richly ornamented as they are, 
is one of impressive grandeur. Behind the galleries are the ranges 
of rooms the distribution of which cannot be said to be always re¬ 
gular. The system of construction is trabeate, the pillar, the beam 
and bracket and the flat ceiling forming the principal features of 
construction. On the upper storey the gallery on each side is faced 
by an arcade; but the arches have no structural purpose being em¬ 
ployed merely in an ornamental capacity. These arcades supply an 
appearance of lightness to the upper storey, in contrast to the solid 
effect of the lower with its heavy columns and massive brackets and 
corbels. There is a profusion of exquisite carving all over, the plastic 
quality recalling the indigenous stone-carver’s art. The quaint shape 
and design of the brackets, the inclined struts supporting the beam 
of the roof, the pillars with their expanding bases and capitals are 

758 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


more appropriate in wooden architecture from which certainly they 
have been derived in the ultimate analysis. The indigenous crafts¬ 
men translated these in stone with ingenious dexterity and the stamp 
of their work seems undeniable in the methods as well as the decor 
of the palace. To sum up, one may quote Percy Brown who says: 
“in the general character of the fort at Agra there is a resemblance 
to the fortress at Gwalior, with its palaces of Man Singh built early 
in the century, which cannot be accidental. The elephant gateway, 
the cupolas of Amar Singh’s gateway, the palaces rising out of the 
fort-walls, the planning of these palaces, and also some of the carv¬ 
ed details, all indicate that the Rajput citadel, which had moved 
Babur to admiration some forty years before, was used freely as 
a model by his more fortunately placed grandson.” 17 

The forts that Akbar started at Lahore almost at the same time 
and at Allahabad some twenty years later appear to have been 
carried out on the same grand scale. The former is considerably 
smaller, but the plan is more regular and the buildings are more 
symmetrically disposed. In spite of subsequent alterations, what 
is left of Akbar’s buildings resembles those of Agra and agree with 
them in general style and character. There is, however, a greater 
picturesque effect added to the Lahore palaces, perhaps due to the 
aesthetic predilections of Akbar’s son Jahangir. The Allahabad 
fort has been shorn much of its architectural interest. His build¬ 
ings at this place apparently conformed to those at Agra, Lahore 
and other places. But all, except one, are gone. This surviving 
monument represents an elegant structure and indicates a fashion 
for peristylar arrangement, the grouping of pillars in pairs and in 
fours forming a novel and effective scheme. 

But the most ambitious and magnificent of the emperor’s archi¬ 
tectural undertakings is the new capital city that he built on the ridge 
at Slkrl, 26 miles west of Agra. This city was subsequently named 
Fathpur (city of victory) after Akbar’s conquest of Gujarat in 1572. 
The conception of the new imperial headquarters, it is recorded, is 
connected with the circumstances that attended the birth of Prince 
Salim, the future emperor Jahangir. At Slkrl lived a saint, Shaikh 
Salim ChishtI, who foretold the birth of a son to Akbar who would 
survive the emperor. One of the queens having become enciente 
soon after, Akbar took her to Slkrl and built for her a magnificent 
palace, now known as Rang Mahal, near the residence of the saint. 
There, in 1569, the queen gave birth to a son who was named Salim 
in reverent gratitude to the holy saint. The place was thought to 
be auspicious and Akbar conceived the idea of building an entirely 
new capital city at the place on a rocky eminence by the side of an 


759 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


extensive artificial lake. The scheme matured into the greatest of 
all his architectural projects, and this splendid city with its grand 
mosque, its delightful palaces and pavilions, its spacious official 
buildings and other edifices, bears witness to Akbar’s magnificent 
achievements as a patron of the building arts. Here we have one 
of the finest groups of Mughul buildings, the majority of them still 
intact; and they illustrate in a singularly forceful manner the em¬ 
peror’s artistic ideals and his genius in this respect. Conceived and 
built as a single unit the work was pushed on with such phenomenal 
speed that, as if by magic, palaces, public buildings, mosques and 
tombs, gardens and baths, pavilions and water-courses were called 
into being beneath the barren sandstone ridge of Sikrl. In his auto¬ 
biography Jahangir writes that ‘‘in the course of fourteen or fif¬ 
teen years that hill full of wild beasts became a city containing all 
kinds of gardens and buildings, lofty edifices and pleasant places 
attractive to the heart.” 18 The splendour and prosperity of this capi¬ 
tal city also evoked high praise from Europeans like Father Monser- 
rate and Ralph Fitch, the latter describing it as greater than London 
with a teeming population and full of merchandise from many 
countries. 

Among the Mughul miniatures we have more than one paint¬ 
ing representing the building of Fathpur Sikrl. It is a scene of 
bustling activity, directed by the emperor himself whom we find 
in one of the pictures questioning a mason and urging him on, in 
another taking a hand in the work itself, and so on. It is this per¬ 
sonal supervision of the emperor, possessed of an imperious and 
untiring energy, that was responsible for the lightning rapidity with 
which the work was pushed on, and it is his own artistic taste and 
ideals that endowed the city with so great an amount of charm and, 
magnificence. Even before the city was completed, it became a 
busy and bustling centre where poets and musicians, historians and 
theologians, artists and craftsmen all flocked together under the 
benevolent patronage and inspiring leadership of the emperor. 
Unfortunately, the city was completed only to be abandoned for no 
apparent reason that we can guess. Many scholars ascribe the 
creation and desertion of the city to the passing whim of a des¬ 
potic ruler. But a mere passing whim rarely calls into being such 
an architectural magnificence, and though the court was shifted, 
possibly for reasons of State policy, the city was not really aban¬ 
doned. Akbar, and later on Jahangir, used to visit it on occasions. 
Akbar had a reverent love for the place and it was here that as 
late as 1601 he thought of erecting the triumphal archway, the 
Buland Darwaza, to commemorate his conquests in the Deccan. 


760 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


The city of Fathpur Sikri occupies a rectangular area, running 
roughly north-east to south-west according to the configuration of 
the ridge on which it is situated. It is enclosed by bastioned walls 
round its three sides, the fourth being protected by the lake. The 
walls, not very substantially built, were of little military value and 
stand in definite contrast to the sturdy and solid appearance of the 
walls either at the Agra or the Lahore fort. Nine gateways pierced 
the fortress walls and of these, the Agra gate formed the principal 
entrance to the city. From this gate a road led straight to the Dlwan- 
i-‘Am (hall of public audience) and further on to the great congre¬ 
gational mosque, the Jami‘ Masjid, that stands apart from the official 
and residential buildings situated on the flattened crest of the ridge. 
The other buildings of more or less utilitarian character, such as the 
caravanserais, gardens, etc. are ranged round and principally down 
the slope of the ridge to the north. Apart from such a rough group¬ 
ing of the buildings according to their purposes and uses, there is 
little indication of any regular system of town-planning being fol¬ 
lowed in the lay-out and composition of the city. The main buildings, 
again, are aligned diagonally to the city walls, an arrangement that 
was necessitated to ensure regularity and conformity with the fixed 
orientation of the grand mosque which, with its lofty Buland Dar- 
waza, supplies the most impressive landmark in the city. 

The monuments of Fathpur Sikri may be divided into two clas¬ 
ses, one religious and the other secular. The secular monuments, 
such as palaces, office buildings, sarais, pavilions, etc. are by far the 
most numerous, and they exemplify the various designs and shapes. 
It is from these buildings of the secular order that one can form an 
idea of the general style of architecture that was developed during 
this august emperor’s reign. The religious buildings, because of 
the needs of ritualistic conventions, were differently treated and con¬ 
form to the general shape and design of the monuments of this 
order. 

Undoubtedly the most impressive creation of this new capital 
city is the grand Jami‘ Masjid which has been aptly described by 
Fergusson 19 as the ‘glory’ of Fathpur Sikri and as having been 
‘hardly surpassed by any in India’. Being the first of the great 
congregational mosques, usually associated with the chief cities of 
the Mughuls, it is at the same time a magnificent monument and 
a model for the others that followed. Though now consisting of a 
group of monumental buildings, of no mean artistic merit by them¬ 
selves, the mosque was originally conceived as a single and sym¬ 
metrical unit of the typical design, but on a rather vast and im¬ 
pressive scale. It covers a quadrangular area, 542 feet east and 


761 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


west and 432 feet north and south, with a high wall surmounted 
by a battlemented parapet surrounding an inner court of unusually 
large dimensions. Originally there were three gateways of uni¬ 
form shape and design, one in the middle of each of the perimeter 
walls on the east, north and south; but only one of these, that facing 
the sanctuary and known as the Badshahi gate, can now be seen 
in its original state. The open inner court with its fine ranges of 
arcaded cloisters surmounted by single rows of light kiosks has a 
fine and dignified appearance. 

The sanctuary on the western side of the court measures appro¬ 
ximately 288 feet by 66 feet and is, by itself a self-contained unit. 
The facade is divided into three parts consisting of a large arched 
alcove wthin a rectangular fronton, flanked by an arcaded wing on 
either side. In conformity with the design of the facade the sanc¬ 
tuary is crowned by three domes of the flat Lodi type, but consider¬ 
ably tilted at their bases with a view to increasing their height. The 
central dome, with a diameter of 41 feet, covers the prayer hall cor¬ 
responding to the nave, while two side ones, each with a diameter 
of 25 feet, are placed over the two wings. The remaining portion 
of the roof is flat supported on pillars and brackets of indigenous 
shape and design. Each dome has a finial which again is of the 
indigenous pattern. The curved ribs on the inside of each dome re¬ 
call the construction of the central dome of the Champanir mosque 
in Gujarat, a province which was noted for the traditional skill and 
dexterity of the indigenous craftsmen. Over the cloisters on 
three sides, light and beautiful kiosks line the entire length of the 
sanctuary roof, thus effectively breaking up the skyline. The facade 
is relieved by an elegant use of white marble inlay emphasising each 
architectural feature. 

The interior arrangements of the sanctuary are characterised 
by the same simplicity and spaciousness of conception which dis¬ 
tinguish the exterior. The three main divisions of the facade are 
maintained in the interior which consists of the central hall or the 
nave behind the large alcoved entrance, and two pillared aisles on 
two sides corresponding to the two arcaded wings of the facade. The 
nave is entered by three archways in the alcoved fronton and is 
roofed by the large central dome. It communicates with the pillared 
aisles by arches through the solid walls at the sides. The smaller 
domes over the wings mark the position of the chapels within the 
pillared aisles. The interior of the sanctuary, with its judicious 
sense of space, its long receding views along the well-grouped pil¬ 
lared aisles, its admirable matching of two contrasting procedures 
—the trabeate and the arcuate—and its rich mural decorations dis- 


762 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


tributed over most of the surface, especially over the mihmb wall, 
in an almost infinite variety of patterns, presents a fine and superb 
effect. 

The grand Jami‘ mosque at Fathpur Sikri had been conceived 
as a balanced and harmonious composition and had been executed 
in a masterly manner so that each part was carefully adjusted to 
the other and to the noble magnitude of the structure as a whole. 
The symmetry of the composition was, however, disturbed subse¬ 
quently by the erection of other structures within the courtyard 
and by the rebuilding of the southern entrance to the mosque en¬ 
closure as a massive and noble composition by itself. After his 
successful campaign in the Deccan the emperor was resolved to 
commemorate his victory by the erection of a triumphal archway. 
The southern entrance to the Jami‘ Masjid at Fathpur Sikri was 
considered to be a suitable position, and the original entrance was 
replaced by the construction of a massive portal. This was known 
as the Buland Darwaza which, with its immense bulk towering 
above the buildings of the city, represents one of the most striking 
compositions ever known. It is a complete structure by itself, 
raised over a lofty stepped terrace, 42 feet in height, and consists 
of a large hall and a number of smaller apartments through which 
access is obtained to the inner quadrangle of the mosque. From 
the terraced platform to the finial it is 134 feet in height, the total 
height, including that of the supporting terrace, being 176 feet. 
The width of the front is 130 feet, while from front to back it mea¬ 
sures 123 feet. 

Like most other buildings at Fathpur Sikri the fabric of this 
impressive gateway is of red sandstone, relieved by carving and 
discreet inlaying of white marble that gives an emphasis to the bold 
lineaments of the composition. The front is built in the shape of 
a semi-octagon, projecting 33 feet beyond the encircling walls on 
its flanks. Apart from its chaste ornamentation, the facade is re¬ 
markable for the treatment of the entrance. An entrance portal 
requires massive dimensions for an effect of strength, vigour and 
dignity; to give a large building a door at all in proportion to its 
dimensions is one of the most difficult problems in the science and 
art of building. The problem is to fit a doorway in an immense 
structure, proportionate to its dimensions, and at the same time 
not too large as to look out of its required purpose. The problem 
has been exercising the ingenuity of the builders in all ages, and 
different countries have been trying to solve the problem in differ¬ 
ent ways. It was in Islamic architecture that a satisfactory solu¬ 
tion of this difficult problem was achieved whereby the dignity in- 


763 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


dispensable for the situation was attained without unnecessarily in¬ 
creasing the size of the entrance. The principle was to diminish 
gradually the monumental scale of the gateway building, part by 
part, till it is reduced to the size of a doorway of the normal form. 
It requires a long experience in working along the correct prin¬ 
ciple to arrive at a satisfactory solution of such a difficult problem, 
and the method adopted by the Islamic builders proved to be effi¬ 
cient as well as highly aesthetic. In the Buland Darwaza we have 
a masterly conception in which the principle may be found to have 
been applied in its most effective and magnificent form. In the 
centre of this monumental portal is a huge rectangular fronton 
which consists of an immense archway accommodating in its rear a 
semi-domed bay or alcove in five planes in the shape of a half¬ 
decagon and in three vertical stages. The alcove or semi-dome re¬ 
presents the modulus of the design with its scale that of the monu¬ 
ment itself, irrespective of the size of the openings at the back. 
The lowest stage of the alcove consists of three ordinary-sized arch¬ 
ways for access to the interior, and is separated by a row of arca¬ 
des from the upper which consists of bold arches surmounted by a 
series of cross-ribs supporting the half-dome of the bay. The cham¬ 
fered sides are also similarly treated with the difference that each 
facade is divided into two smaller alcoves with a row of arches in¬ 
tervening. The rectangular frame on each face is flanked by richly 
decorated slender quoins projecting beyond the height of the struc¬ 
ture. The top is surmounted by battlements beyond which small 
light kiosks raise up their domed cupolas lending a variety to the 
skyline. The back of the gateway with its three arches, battle¬ 
ments and kiosks is more simple in arrangement and is of much 
smaller height. 

With its immense bulk and towering height the Buland Dar¬ 
waza presents an imposing appearance from whatever angle it is 
viewed. It has space and scale, mass and proportion, and is full 
of decorative elegance which, by emphasising the noble lineaments 
of the structure, serves its purpose most effectively. We have here 
a perfect co-ordination between the structure and its ornament, so 
indispensable in best forms of architecture. Standing out in male 
fashion against the barren rocks of Sikri ridge, this gateway has al¬ 
most an aggressive strength, more befitting in a citadel than in a 
place of worship. It has to be remembered, however, that it was 
an afterthought in the mosque design, the intention being to raise 
up a triumphal archway to proclaim the might of the empire after 
a successful military campaign. This the whole gateway fulfils 
most effectively and, as a whole, it is an admirable reflex of the 


764 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


mind of the emperor who called it into being. One may find an 
incongruity of the structure in relation to the mosque which is 
thrown out of balance by the immense pile of this portal. But, as 
already observed, this enormous gateway was no original part of 
the mosque design. Being an afterthought and conceived for a dis¬ 
tinct purpose it has to be judged as a self-contained and individual 
unit, and as such it has hardly any parallel in any other country. 
“The Buland Darwaza”, Percy Brown says, “is a work of great 
force, especially when viewed from the ground below, as then it 
presents an appearance of aspiring and overwhelming strength with¬ 
out being weighty and pretentious.” 20 

Two other later additions were made within the mosque en¬ 
closure. Although they have increased its interest as well as its 
sanctity, they have disturbed the symmetrical composition of the 
mosque as a whole by obstructing the fine spatial effect of the in¬ 
terior. One of these is the tomb of Shaikh Salim Chishti, the patron 
saint of Slkrl, situated on the north side of the quadrangle. It is 
a small and attractive building in marble, square in plan, and 
stands on an inlaid marble platform with a projecting portico on 
the south. The cenotaph chamber, a square of 16 feet side, is roof¬ 
ed over by a single dome and is surrounded by a corridor enclosed 
by elegant marble screens, rich and varied in design and so deli¬ 
cate in execution as to look almost like lace-work. The tomb was 
erected in 1571 by Nawab Qutb-ud-din Khan, and with its marble 
fabric and wealth of fanciful ornament it has a soft and effeminate 
grace in definite contrast to the robust style of Akbari architecture. 
The marble work, however, seems to be an architectural palimpsest, 
undertaken either during the reign of Jahangir or about the begin¬ 
ning of that of Shah Jahan. Marble as the main building material 
came into fashion during the later part of the reign of Jahangir 
and became the prevailing mode in the time of Shah Jahan. Due 
to this later development the followers of the holy saint were per¬ 
haps inspired by the idea of clothing his mausoleum by the more 
refined and costly marble, and though certain details, such as the 
fanciful voluted shape of the struts, the rich traceried ornamenta¬ 
tion, etc. were elaborations during this later transformation, the 
original design of the building appears to have been little affected. 
The pillars supporting the portico are richly carved, and particular¬ 
ly interesting are the convoluted struts with perforated ornament 
between the curves, springing from the shafts and supporting the 
brackets under the eaves. Such struts might have been derived 
from similar ones in the temples of Gujarat, but are elaborated to 
such an extent as to look quite fanciful. The pierced screens of 


765 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


the corridor are also very finely worked, the lightness of their exe¬ 
cution being perhaps responsible for the tomb being described as ‘a 
gem of craftsmanship’. In its present appearance, however, it 
lacks the simplicity and robustness of Akbari style and is entirely 
out of keeping with the emperor’s ideals of building art. The inte¬ 
rior of the tomb is also as elaborate as the exterior. The walls are 
variegated by rich painted patterns; the floor is inlaid in coloured 
marbles; and the wooden canopy over the cenotaph, consisting of 
four pillars supporting a handsome dome, is inlaid with ebony and 
mother of pearl. 

Close by and to the east of the tomb of the Shaikh stands the 
mausoleum of Islam Khan, a grandson of the saint, that was built 
of red sandstone in 1612. This encroachment led to the dismant¬ 
ling and closing of the entrance on the north side of the mosque 
enclosure. Though built during the reign of Jahangir, its red sand¬ 
stone fabric retains much of the quality of the Akbari style. It 
consists of a large domed chamber, square on the outside and octa¬ 
gonal inside, and is surrounded by a corridor all around enclosed 
by perforated screens. Later on, several burial chambers had been 
made on the western side by placing lateral screens across. The 
kiosks on the roof, apart from breaking the skyline, impart a pic¬ 
turesqueness to the building which, in its fabric as well as in its 
design, is nearer to the building of Akbar than to those of the time 
of Jahangir. 

At Fathpur Sikrl the civil and residential structures are, by 
far, the more numerous. Though not imposing in size generally, 
they are singularly interesting as elegant types of office and domes¬ 
tic buildings of the period. In the former class mention should be 
made of at least two fine structures, one known as the Daftar 
Khana or the office, and the other, the Diwian-i-Khas, the hall of pri¬ 
vate audience. The former consists of a rectangular hall, approxi¬ 
mately 36 feet by 19 feet internally, surrounded by a wide columned 
verandah, roughly 18 feet in depth. The roof is flat and the en¬ 
tire construction is of the indigenous trabeate order. The peri- 
stylar arrangement of the facades, with pillars arranged in pairs 
and quartettes, has a fine view of almost classical elegance. 

The Dlwan-i-Khas, though not a large structure, was a highly 
distinctive production because of the unique manner in which the 
interior has been designed and treated. It is a square building, 
about 43 feet each way externally, the facades being divided into 
two stages by wide cornices, supported on heavy brackets, running 
on all sides. The interior consists of a single vaulted chamber, 


766 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


nearly 28 feet square. The manner of the treatment of this hall is 
very unusual—not to be seen in any other building in any part of the 
world. A continuous gallery runs around the four sides, from the 
corners of which narrow galleries are thrown diagonally to converge 
at the centre. Here the diagonal passages meet a circular platform 
supported on a substantial and exquisitely patterned column rising 
from the centre of the floor and spreading into a massive expand¬ 
ing capital composed of a cluster of closely set pendulous brackets. 
It has been suggested that this circular platform of this compli¬ 
cated contrivance was intended for the royal throne, the whole 
arrangement symbolising the emperor’s dominion over the four 
quarters. The design of the brackets and of the galleries suggests 
wooden prototypes and reflects essentially the indigenous methods 
and systems. The arrangement of a hanging throne platform con¬ 
nected with hanging galleries by radiating passages represents a 
novel and original conception, and none but the versatile emperor 
could have devised it. In spite of a top-heavy appearance of the 
expanding ponderous brackets, the entire arrangement has a cer¬ 
tain dignity of effect and not a little artistic significance. The roof 
of the building is flat and is provided with kiosk with a domed 
cupola at each corner. Though a novel and unique experiment, the 
building as a whole cannot but be regarded as a successful pro¬ 
duction. 

The palaces and other residential buildings in the city are 
very elegant structures, in spite of the smallness of their scale. 
They exhibit, more or less, the same general style, the difference 
being marked by their plan and decorative detail. Of these, the 
most important conception seems to have been the one known as 
Jodha Bai’s palace. It is a stately building of large size and is de¬ 
signed in the usual scheme of suites of rooms round a paved court¬ 
yard with a substantial double-storeyed block in the middle of each 
side and at each corner. The two-storeyed blocks in the centre 
consist, more or less, of self-contained suites of apartments in the 
rear preceded by porticos in front overlooking the inner court. 
Many of these chambers are covered by waggon-vaulted roofs. 
They are connected with the corner blocks by continuous galleries 
below, each of the corner blocks being covered by a low-pitched 
dome. The view of the interior quadrangle, with its continuous 
corridor, double-storeyed blocks with their variously designed roofs, 
and wide eaves casting deep shadows over every facade, is remark 
ably impressive and provides a definite contrast to the forbiddingly 
plain exterior which, with continuous bare walls, serves as a high 
screen, no doubt intended for ensuring privacy and seclusion. Re- 


767 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


lief is obtained by the projection of annexes—a front court preced¬ 
ing the entrance, a service block and an airy pavilion (Hdw\a 
Khand )—and further by balcony windows projecting from the sides 
of the entrance and from near the angles. 

The decorative features of the palace are in extremely good taste 
and indicate a preference for the indigenous motifs. The construc¬ 
tion, likewise, is predominantly trabeate. The roofs and the para¬ 
pets still retain traces of glazed tile decorations, but the attractive 
colour scheme was intended more for emphasis and relief, than for 
any brilliant flashing effect. The carved decorations on pillars, 
balconies, perforated grilles, ornamental niches, etc. recall indige¬ 
nous patterns, and these, together with the volutes, brackets, etc. 
appear to have been derived from similar features in the architec¬ 
ture of Western India, particularly Gujarat. The use of brackets 
and lintels in the entrance archway also points to a strong indige¬ 
nous influence in methods as well as in decorative designs and their 
execution. It is apparent that persons traditionally familiar with 
the indigenous architectural practices were responsible for the con¬ 
ception and construction of this beautiful palace. 

The house connected with the name of Raja Birbal is a two- 
storeyed structure, raised on a plinth, with entrance porches 
on the north and the south. The ground floor has a suite of four 
rooms, each with a flat ceiling composed of long slabs of stone, ex¬ 
tending from wall to wall and laid on a curved cornice supported 
on brackets. The first floor is reached by two stair-cases in the 
thickness of the walls, one in the south-west corner and the other 
in the north-east. It has only two rooms, placed cornerwise, which 
open on two terraces once enclosed by stone screens. Each room 
is covered by a dome which, though of low-pitched form, has been 
built on the principle of a double dome. The entrance porches on 
the ground floor have angular roofs, thus lending a pleasing variety 
to the elevational aspect of the building. The interior as well as 
the exterior are covered with exuberant, but forceful, carvings. The 
architectural treatment of the exterior is immensely diversified with 
pilasters, dados, arched niches, and amazingly ornate brackets sup¬ 
porting the wide eaves. The crest pattern on the parapet of each 
storey is also in refined taste. Blrbal’s house at Fathpur Slkri re¬ 
presents a superb example of residential structure, remarkable for 
its balance and harmony of design and for the distinctive way in 
which the structural and decorative elements have been employ¬ 
ed in beautiful conformity with each other. 


768 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


Two other buildings of this class, though simple and unpreten¬ 
tious, are also notable productions because of the delightful eleg¬ 
ance of their setting as well as workmanship. One of them, 
known as Turkish Sultana’s house, is a modest composition of little 
structural value. It consists of a single one-storeyed apartment 
contained within a pillared gallery and situated amidst a picture¬ 
sque setting of paved courts and water-courses. Apart from its 
beautiful situation, much of its elegance and individuality rests on 
the rich variety and quality of its carved decorations covering 
every inch of its surface inside and out. Executed in a delicate 
method of low relief, the carvings include, besides motifs of more 
conventional order, a remarkable series of naturalistic panels, so re¬ 
fined in treatment as to avoid any feeling of pettiness or vulga¬ 
rity. “It is”, says Fergusson, “one of the richest, the most beauti¬ 
ful and the most naturalistic of Akbar’s buildings. ... It is impos¬ 
sible to conceive anything so picturesque in outline or any build¬ 
ing carved and ornamented to such an extent without the smallest 
approach to being overdone or in bad taste .” 21 At one time this 
building appears to have been covered with elaborate paintings, 
significant fragments of which still remain. Scholars may try to 
recognise the hand of Persian artists in the conception and decora¬ 
tion of this fine monument. But the methods of construction are 
purely indigenous and the character and technique of plastic em¬ 
bellishments suggest wooden derivations, betraying the hand of 
Indian workmen familiar with that tradition. 

The house of Miriam also represents a small, but perfect, re¬ 
sidential building characterised by a chaste simplicity of design. 
It is situated on a low terraced platform and consists of a suite of 
rooms with a pillared corridor along its three sides and with an 
open rectangular kiosk, crowned by an angular canopy, on its flat 
roof. The simple design of the pillars and brackets lends an ap¬ 
pearance almost of classical dignity to the exterior; the interior was 
originally embellished with large mural paintings drawn with great 
vigour. Traces of these still remain and they supply interesting 
specimens of the early and formative stage in the evolution of the 
celebrated Mughul school of painting. It is said that the building 
was once profusely gilded for which it was known as Sunhera 
Makan or the golden house. 

The Panch Mahal at Fathpur Sikri, described by some 
scholars as a rather “fantastic creation” is an unusual structure 
which displays in a singularly interesting manner the architectural 
preferences and ideals of the emperor. It consists of a tall pyra¬ 
midal structure of five storeys, each storey designed as an open 

769 

M.E.—49 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


pavilion supported on clusters of pillars of graceful designs. The 
principal element in the composition is the hypostylar arrangement 
of each storey, the ground floor consisting of eighty-four pillars, the 
number diminishing gradually in each successive upper storey; the 
topmost one, which is crowned by a domed canopy, is supported on 
four pillars. In spite of the arrangement being so simple, the en¬ 
tire structure is of noble and dignified proportions. The pillars in 
each storey conform to a general scheme; everyone however is 
varied in the treatment of its cap and base, as well as in its mould¬ 
ings, so that the eye finds infinite variety of interest in observing 
the details without any disturbance of the general effect of classic 
dignity and repose. The entire conception of the storeyed pavilion, 
including the design, the structural procedure and the shapes and 
patterns of the pillars and the brackets, breathes the spirit of indi¬ 
genous architectural practices, and it has been rightly suggested 
that it is derived from the old assembly halls of India. 

There are also other structures of no little artistic merit in the 
deserted city of Fathpur Sikri. Those described above, being the 
most notable, illustrate, in an effective manner, the general style of 
Akbari architecture. These other buildings, each designed for a 
special purpose, have much the same architectural character that 
we have already noticed in the monuments described above. One 
other important architectural conception was planned and initiated 
by this great emperor; and this was his own mausoleum building 
at Sikandra in the vicinity of Agra. But he did not live to 
complete it, a task that devolved on his son and successor Jahangir. 
There are reasons to believe that Akbar’s original conception was, 
to a certain extent, .modified by Jahangir, and it is to these subse¬ 
quent modifications that the present architectural appearance is at¬ 
tributed. It now stands apart from Akbar’s own buildings and a 
discussion of the monument may properly be reserved for the next 
section. 

The buildings erected by Akbar at Agra, Allahabad and Lahore 
have been mostly swept away or much disfigured during the sub¬ 
sequent operations. The noble and graceful edifices of Fathpur 
Sikri remain, however, practically unaltered and in much of their 
pristine forms. They supply, therefore, a wonderful reflex of the em¬ 
peror’s versatile personality and of his liberal and catholic views. 
Built as a single and comprehensive unit, Fathpur Sikri reflects the 

mind of the emperor inspired by the vision of a united India_a 

vision that is clearly evident in its various magnificent buildings. 
His sympathies for Indian culture led him to draw gifted artists 
from all parts of India. Coupled with their contributions there 


770 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


were the elements of the Islamic architectural tradition as develop¬ 
ed in India during the earlier phases of Islamic rule. Besides, there 
were ideas from West Asiatic building traditions. As a patron of 
the building arts Akbar stands unique in the history of Indian 
architecture. He has shown a marvellous aptitude and adaptability 
and himself guided the work of the builders and artists, each work¬ 
ing according to his own tradition and capability. The emperor’s 
liberal and catholic attitude and his highly sensitive artistic mind 
directed the movement in such a way as to blend and harmonise 
the best in every tradition into a unified and distinctive style. With 
its roots in the soil of the country, this style may be called truly 
national. 

The buildings of Akbar are mainly trabeated in their construc¬ 
tion. There is also a predominance of indigenous designs, motifs 
and practices. The genius of the emperor as a patron of the build¬ 
ing arts lies in the fact that he found immense possibilities in the 
traditional skill and experience of the indigenous builders, and he 
utilised them in full in his own architectural projects. Under his 
inspiring leadership the different traditions commingled in such an 
effective and fruitful manner as to build up a forceful architectural 
style in which the structure with its noble lineaments is found to 
be in perfect unison with its elegant decor. We have in Akbar’s 
buildings rich and variegated ornaments, no doubt, but the value of 
the structure was never missed. The ornaments, however exube¬ 
rant, are always subservient and complementary to it as emphasising, 
and giving relief to, its bold lineaments. The emphasis on the 
horizontal, clearly evident in the wide projecting eaves throwing 
deep shadows across the elevation of the building, and the lines of 
parapets and string-courses are finely counterbalanced by the equally 
strong vertical passages of light and shade produced by the pillars 
and the brackets. The solid and massive aspect of the building is 
balanced by the soaring effect of lightness imparted by the graceful 
kiosks over the roof. It is on this impressive balance between the 
horizontal and the vertical, between the solids and the voids, be¬ 
tween massive heaviness and airy lightness, that the beauty of the 
structure mainly depends, the elegant and refined ornamental treat¬ 
ment adding to its magnificence in no mean degree. In Akbar’s 
buildings we have a noble and forceful architectural style, built up 
on the traditions of the soil, a truly national art movement with 
immense possibilities under able and intelligent patronage. 


771 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


3. Development and Culmination 

Jahangir’s contributions to the building art appear to have been 
rather insignificant when compared to the vast and ambitious pro¬ 
jects of his father on the one hand and those of his son on the 
other. Like his great-grandfather Babur, he was a keen lover of 
the beauties of nature and art and was endowed with an aesthetic 
sensibility much greater than that of his father. But Jahangir’s 
tastes and predilections lay in other directions. His inclination 
was more towards the art of painting than towards that of build¬ 
ing. The Mughul school of painting had its foundation in the days 
of Akbar; it was Jahangir’s keen aesthetic sense and critical power 
of judgment and appreciation that raised the school to the highest 
peak of its achievement. In Tuzuh-i-Jahdnglri, the autobiography 
of Jahangir, we have frequent references to his reactions to paint¬ 
ing; and in these we have a frank picture of the aesthetic mind of 
the emperor and of his keen susceptibilities. Significantly enough, 
his reaction to a good building has seldom been recorded, and even 
when recorded, it is of a general and superficial nature which indi¬ 
cates that his appreciation of the building art was not above the 
level of that of an ordinary spectator. No wonder, therefore, that 
the brilliant and ceaseless architectural activity of the previous 
reign was followed by a comparatively uneventful period. Never¬ 
theless, in the history of Mughul architecture the period of Jahangir 
was not without a certain importance, supplying, as it does, a signi¬ 
ficant link between its two grand phases—the initial phase of splen¬ 
did and purposeful buildings of the time of Akbar and the culmi¬ 
nating phase of luxuriance and exuberance of the days of Shah Jahan. 

During the early years of his reign Jahangir had to take a 
certain personal interest in building art as the production and com¬ 
pletion of the mausoleum, which his father had planned as his last 
resting place, devolved upon him. His interest and patronage, as 
manifested here, were not such as to hope for a continuation and 
development of the direction which Akbar gave to the art of build¬ 
ing. Akbar’s mausoleum stands at Sikandra, five miles west of 
Agra, and consists of a singular design and composition not met 
with in any other Mughul monument of the funerary order. It re¬ 
presents a unique creation; and it is apparent that it owed its con¬ 
ception to the versatile ideas of Akbar who intended to endow it 
with a novel and original character, quite different from the con¬ 
ventional type of tombs with which we are usually familiar. The 
emperor did not live to carry his remarkable project to com¬ 
pletion, a task that had to be done by his son and successor Jahan¬ 
gir. The building was completed in 1613, eight years after the 


772 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


death of Akbar. As it now stands, the mausoleum lacks the homo¬ 
geneity and balance which constitute the essential keynotes of 
Akbar’s buildings. It has to be noted that the major part of the 
building was put up at a time when the guiding mind of a genius 
like Akbar was no longer there to supervise the construction of 
this vast project through its different stages. It is possible, there¬ 
fore, that some kind of alteration and modification of the original 
design took place, either unconsciously on the part of the builders, 
or due to undue intervention of Jahangir, of which we have several 
instances recorded in his autobiography. 22 This probably explains 
the fact that Akbar’s mausoleum at Sikandra, in spite of its unique 
character, fails as a unified composition and represents the least 
successful monument associated with the name of that great emperor. 

The mausoleum building is situated within an extensive garden 
approached by an impressive gateway in the middle of the southern 
perimeter wall and with three other false doorways, one in the 
middle of each of the three other walls provided, no doubt, for the 
sake of symmetry. The principal entrance on the south is a noble 
monument in itself because of its pleasing proportions, the variety 
of its carved and inlaid ornamentation, and lastly the elegant white 
marble minarets, one at each corner of the building. The minarets 
represent noteworthy introductions adding to the beauty of the de¬ 
sign, and the type, though new in appearance, is found in a fairly 
crystallised form, in no way inferior to the soaring minarets, one 
at each corner of the terraced platform of the far-famed Taj Mahal. 

The garden, as is usual, is laid out into a number of squares by 
broad paved walks widening out at intervals into terraces with 
ornamental fountains. In the centre of this garden stands the 
curious tomb building of a stepped pyramidal form truncated at the 
top. The building rises in several storeys, gradually diminishing 
in scale as they go up. The design is, no doubt, unusual for a fune¬ 
rary monument and must have owed its conception to the original 
ideas of Akbar. The ground storey is conceived on a superb scale 
and measures more than 300 feet each way and a little over 30 feet 
in height. Each side is pierced by a series of elegant arches with 
a larger arched alcove accommodated within a tall rectangular 
frame interposed in the middle. These arcades enclose a domed 
mortuary chamber, in place of the usual underground crypt. Such 
a conception of the mortuary chamber represents an unusual and 
unorthodox arrangement which might have been due to the liberal 
and unconventional views of Akbar. Above this lowest stage rise 
the other storeys, each receding in scale than the one below. Three 
of these storeys, built of red sandstone like the lowest, show an 


773 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


arrangement of superposed tiers of pillared arcades and kiosks, 
while the topmost, built entirely of chaste white marble, consists of 
an open terrace accommodating in the centre a cenotaph on a raised 
platform and enclosed by a beautiful colonnade on the inside, and 
on the outside by trellis-work of the most exquisite patterns. At 
each corner rises a slender marble kiosk adding to the variety of 
the skyline. 

In spite of its unusual design and a certain lack of harmony in 
the different sections of the elevation, there are not a few elements 
in this structure which are pleasing by themselves when judged 
separately and independently. The ground storey is itself a noble 
conception, a powerful structure but not too heavy, which with the 
pleasing scale of its different parts represents a suitable substruc¬ 
ture for the support of an impressive superstructure. But the up¬ 
per storeys, though satisfying in themselves, are too light and out 
of place in the substantial composition of the lowest stage. In ele¬ 
vation also these upper storeys lack balance and co-ordination in 
relation to the substructure, and the monument, as a whole, fails as 
a unified and harmonious composition. One may recognise the 
vigorous and versatile personality of Akbar in the original concep¬ 
tion of the monument, and it is possible that the lowest storey was 
completed by him before his death. In the composition of the up¬ 
per storeys we fail to notice the breadth of vision and sense of har¬ 
mony that characterised Akbar’s buildings, and it was here that 
Jahangir might have intervened. Each of these upper storeys, parti¬ 
cularly the topmost one with all its delicacy and perfect finish, 
might be considered as an elegant monument if it had stood apart 
and isolated. But they fail to harmonise with the noble concep¬ 
tion of the ground storey, and herein lies the deficiency of the 
monument as a whole. In spite of all his aesthetic tastes, Jahangir 
had not the vision and imagination of Akbar and lacked the latter’s 
guiding genius so as to correlate the different sections of the eleva¬ 
tion into a pleasing and harmonious composition. 

Something should also be said regarding the unusual plan and 
elevation of this mausoleum building. It has been suggested that 
this novel design was derived and imitated from the old storeyed 
viharas, and so far as the fundamentals of the composition are con¬ 
cerned, apart from minor architectural details, this suggestion ap¬ 
pears to be reasonable. 

In the history of Mughul architecture Jahangir’s reign marks 
the transition between its two grand phases, namely the phase of 
Akbar and that of his grandson Shah Jahan. Already, in the tomb 


774 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


of Akbar one may recognise the approach of a new direction. The 
direction was towards an effect of lightness and consequent weak¬ 
ness in the structure and to an increased leaning towards ornamen¬ 
tation. The arabesques make their appearance for the first time 
among the inlaid decorations. This tendency towards a more orna¬ 
mental effect becomes gradually emphasised, not unoften to the de¬ 
triment of the structural value when the vision and imagination 
required to correlate the ornament to the structure fail. The gene¬ 
ral trend is towards a prettiness of the building, instead of to¬ 
wards a grandeur of its conception. And this trend, so opposed to 
Akbar’s architectural ideals, becomes more and more manifest under 
the dilettante tastes of the aesthete Jahangir and the pleasure-seek¬ 
ing Shah Jahan. Mughul architecture was not destined to follow 
in the direction of forceful and purposeful buildings initiated by 
Akbar. Neither Jahangir nor Shah Jahan possessed Akbar’s genius 
for constructive ideas and so far as their personal influences on 
the architecture of the time went, they only helped to clothe in 
more costly materials the creative forms of the previous period and 
to cover them with a wealth of ornament. Both of them, parti¬ 
cularly the latter, tried to create effect by sumptuous decoration 
and lavish use of costly material, rather than by an intellectuality 
in structural design. The history of Mughul architecture during 
the period of Jahangir and Shah Jahan is governed by this domi¬ 
nant idea and reaches a baroque phase of exuberance and over-re¬ 
finement—a faithful picture of the changed outlook of the Mughul 
court after Akbar’s strong personality had passed away. 

The most important feature of the period of transition is noticed 
in the substitution of red sandstone by white marble. Hitherto the 
main fabric of the building was composed of granite or red sand¬ 
stone with occasional insertions of white marble for the sake of re¬ 
lief. This practice had been long continued and may be traced 
from the time of Ala-ud-dln Khaljl. In Akbar’s buildings white 
marble inlay on red sandstone fabric was frequently resorted to in 
order to lend relief and colour to the facades and to emphasise the 
structural lineaments. This white marble inlaying has been gain¬ 
ing ground and its effect on the red texture of sandstone fabric re¬ 
presents one of the most charming features in the ornamentation of 
the surfaces of the buildings. Always accessory to the strong linea¬ 
ments of the structure, such ornaments invariably wait on the 
monument without any detriment to the architectural design or dig¬ 
nity. But this sense for the value of the structure and its design 
was undermined when buildings came to be composed in white 
marble. This happened towards the end of the reign of Jahangir. 


775 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Marble has a certain effeminate quality. At least it has not that 
quality of solidity and strength imparted by red sandstone. White 
marble takes a shining polish and is the best possible medium for 
fine tracery and arabesque works, for painting as well as gilding. 
It furnishes a very convenient surface for costly pietra dura. By 
its very nature it invites decoration which has a tendency to get 
exuberant and sumptuous almost to the point of being overdone. 
The result is often restless. Miraculously beautiful in detail, a 
building in white marble tends to lack strength. Weakness is in¬ 
herent in marble fabric. 

Jahangir also loved colour and this was imparted to the build¬ 
ings of his period by encaustic tiling; and the system of pietra dura, 
i.e. the inlaid mosaic work of hard and precious stones of various 
hues and shades, began towards the end of his reign. These, no 
doubt, lent to the buildings a colourful and picturesque effect; but 
such ornamentations can hardly compensate for the effect of weak¬ 
ness and effeminacy inherent in a marble fabric. It is not surpris¬ 
ing, therefore, that the buildings of the later part of Jahangir’s 
reign and the pretty creations of Shah Jahan lack those qualities 
of substance and solidity that characterised Akbar’s buildings. 
There is an emphasis on colour, on sumptuous decorations and on 
lavish display of costly materials; but they hardly make up for the 
loss of substance which constitutes the chief element of forceful 
architecture. 

The change of outlook in the art of building was noticed also 
in other directions. Akbar’s preference for indigenous ideals and 
traditions is clearly manifested in his architectural undertakings. 
Not a little of the character of his buildings depends on the work of 
the indigenous artists and craftsmen gathered together from various 
directions. Akbar had the genius to co-ordinate and harmonise the 
different ideals and traditions and to guide his builders to create 
unified and forceful compositions out of the many, and often differ¬ 
ing, elements. He initiated an era of fruitful collaboration among 
artists of different traditions, not excluding the foreign; and under 
his inspiring leadership varying traditions adapted themselves lead¬ 
ing to the creation of an art movement that may be considered to 
be a product of the soil itself. As a result, a distinctive style of 
architecture came into being, a style characterised by a nobility of 
conception and forcefulness of execution. It was founded on the 
traditions of the country and extra-Indian elements were adapted 
to suit the needs of the growing style. After Akbar, his enlighten¬ 
ed direction was lacking and the style was diverted from its course. 


776 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


His successors lacked his creative instinct as well as his absorbing 
spirit of collectivism. It is not surprising that they failed to supply 
that intelligent direction that might have led the style to further 
creative achievements. No new idea, no original conception had 
been evolved during the epoch succeeding that of Akbar. The pre¬ 
vailing ideas were clothed in more costly materials and covered with 
a lavish display of costly ornament and colour. In spite of pom¬ 
pous exuberance, very few notable and forceful buildings had been 
produced in the period of Jahangir and Shah Jahan. 

The Mughul court of the time of Jahangir and Shah Jahan was 
composed of a nobility mainly of Persian extraction. The life in 
this court was imbued also with Persian ideas of luxury and grace. 
This predilection for Persianism had also its reflection on the art 
and culture of the time. In architecture one may easily recognise 
a growing preference for Persian ideas and a gradual isolation from 
the indigenous ideals and traditions. Akbar’s national style of 
architecture had its foundation chiefly on indigenous sources, and a 
gradual separation from the ideals and traditions of the soil and a 
greater dependence on foreign ideas and modes diverted the course 
of the style from the path that Akbar had chosen for it. Lured by 
foreign ideas of pomp and grace the style was practically isolated 
from its source and the inevitable desiccation was not long to follow. 
This is evident in the poverty of design and lack of structural value 
that characterised most of the monuments produced during this later 
phase of Mughul architecture. 

The above observations on the general trends and tendencies 
of this later phase of Mughul architecture seem to be necessary for 
a proper understanding of those sumptuously pretty marble monu¬ 
ments that have often been extolled by dilettante scholars as re¬ 
presenting the grand efflorescence of the Mughul architectural 
style. A correct historical perspective, however, would attribute 
to Akbar’s buildings a far greater nobility, in conception as well 
as in design and execution, representing an architecture of immense 
potentially and on a much higher aesthetic plane. The mouuments 
of the later phase represent merely a rich and baroque form of this 
architecture. 

Jahangir, we have already observed, left no personal impress on 
the architecture of his time. Even his palace in the Lahore fort, 
where he loved to reside, has nothing distinctive about it. A keen 
lover of nature, he delighted in pleasure gardens and is known to 
have constructed several such pleasances. The Shalimar Bagh in 
Kashmir is one of the most charming of his undertakings in this 


777 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


direction. The plan is, more or less, formal and stereotyped—an 
arrangement of square terraces and picturesque flower beds, paved 
walks and avenues of trees, crystal water-courses and splashing fount¬ 
ains, and airy pavilions, all laid out with the object of providing 
delight to the eyes and comfort and relaxation to the tired and jad¬ 
ed nerves. This type of ornamental pleasure gardens is inseparably 
linked up with the life of the grand Mughuls and the production 
of such pleasant and luxurious amenities suited Jahangir’s tastes 
and temperament. 

Jahangir’s mausoleum at Shahdara, near Lahore, cannot claim 
to have any architectural distinction. Like his father’s mausoleum 
at Sikandra, it is situated within an ornamental garden enclosed by 
a high brick wall with a gateway in the middle of each side. The 
garden occupies a square, over 1500 feet each side, the whole area 
being divided into sixteen smaller squares by means of paved walks 
with an ornamental fountain and a reservoir of water at each point 
of intersection. The squares were once filled up by flowered part¬ 
erres, each of a different kind. The mausoleum building is situated 
in the centre of this garden and is a square of 325 feet side. It 
stands on a low plinth and consists of one storey, 22 feet in height, 
with a handsome octagonal minaret of five storeys shooting up from 
each corner to a height of about 100 feet. Originally, a marble pa¬ 
vilion occupied the middle of the terraced roof; with its disappearance 
the building now lacks balance and symmetry of composition. The 
facade on each side consists of an arcade with a central arch accom¬ 
modating the entrance, flanked by a group of five others on either 
side. In the interior there are ranges of rooms on all the four sides 
enclosing the octagonal mortuary chamber with the marble cenotaph 
in the centre which is exquisitely embellished by inlaid patterns. 
The appearance of the whole building is unimpressive, the low fa¬ 
cades between the minarets being ineffective architecturally. The 
lavish colour, so freely imparted to its surface by inlaid marbles, 
glazed tiles and painting, can improve very little the effect of the 
monument with such a strong deficiency. 

Two other tombs, built towards the end of Jahangir’s reign, re¬ 
present more successful achievements in respect of design as well as 
execution. Historically they are also interesting as foreshadow¬ 
ing the subsequent developments of the Mughul architectural style. 
One is the mausoleum of 1‘timad-ud-Daula, father of Jahangir’s 
famous consort, Nur Jahan, who erected it in 1626. It is situated 
at Agra, on the left bank of the river Jumna, within a garden enclosed 
by a wall, measuring 540 feet each way and pierced by red sand- 


778 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


stone gateways, one in the middle of each side. It stands on a raised 
terrace and consists of a square building of 69 feet side, with an 
octagonal turret in two stages, surmounted by a domed cupola, 
thrown out at each angle, and with a square pavilion, covered by an 
angular canopy, placed in the middle of the terraced roof. The in¬ 
terior consists of a simple arrangement of a central cenotaph cham¬ 
ber enclosed by connected rooms. An agreeable light is introduced 
in the interior, both in the lower and upper storeys, by exceedingly 
delicate open lattice work, aptly described as a “gossamer of fretted 
grilles’’. 23 Entirely composed of white marble, the building is 
covered throughout by rich mosaic of pietra dura , the first and cer¬ 
tainly one of the most successful applications of this class of orna¬ 
mentation in Mughul monuments. In spite of dwarf heights of the 
corner turrets, there is an effect of balance and harmony in the de¬ 
sign and composition of the structure, the projecting cornices sup¬ 
ported on brackets providing further a co-ordinated sense of relation 
between the horizontal and vertical aspects of the building. The 
ornaments are also in elegant taste, being accessory to the structure 
and its various lineaments and in spite of their rich character, they 
have no overburdening appearance on the building. 

The tomb of Ttimad-ud-Daula is of significant interest in the 
history of Mughul architecture as supplying a link between its two 
important phases, namely those of Akbar and of Shah Jahan. It re¬ 
presents the transition from the red sandstone phase of Akbar’s 
buildings with their direct simplicity and robustness of design to 
that of the sumptuous marble with all the changes, as described 
above, inherent therein. Ttimad-ud-Daula’s tomb, as the first nota¬ 
ble building in white marble with its rich ornamentation in pietra 
dura, may be regarded as heralding this new movement, that reach¬ 
ed its culmination in the days of Shah Jahan. In this tomb, one may 
still recognise the value of architectural design and the subordination 
of the rich ornamentation to the structural form and its lines. But 
the white marble texture with its emphasis on colourful decoration al¬ 
ready suggests a certain effeminacy and weakness which some des¬ 
cribe as a reflection of the feminism of the empress who was res¬ 
ponsible for its creation. This apart, a marble structure tends to 
fail in the qualities of substance and robustness which are the essen¬ 
tial requisites of noble and forceful architecture; and weakness, 
coupled with an almost feminine love for display of pomp and orna¬ 
ment, follow as necessary corollaries. In spite, therefore, of its 
structural qualities, the tomb of Ftimad-ud-Daula furnishes the im¬ 
pression of a miniature precious object being magnified into a piece 
of architecture. And this impression becomes more manifest in 


779 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


many of the subsequent buildings in which, not unoften, the rich 
overlay of ornament is found to conceal the structure itself. I‘timad- 
ud-Daula’s mausoleum thus marks the epoch of a new direction 
which is a presage of the decline, and represents a step towards the 
brilliant, but baroque, form of Mughul architecture in the days of 
Shah Jahan. 

Another tomb, that of ‘Abdur-Rahlm Khan-i-Khanan at Delhi, 
was built towards the end of Jahangir’s reign or shortly after. It 
marks a significant link between the tomb of Humayun at Delhi 
and that of Shah Jahan’s queen, the celebrated Taj Mahal at Agra. 
Unfortunately, the building now is little more than a mere shell, 
being stripped of its white marble facing early in the second half 
of the eighteenth century. It appears to have been a copy of 
Humayun’s tomb in many respects. Like the latter, it stands on 
a terraced basement with arched recesses on each side, and shows 
the almost similar arrangement in the divisions of the facades and 
of the roof. There is, however, a minor deviation in the angles 
of the building not being chamfered as in Humayun’s tomb. Des¬ 
pite this, the tomb of Khan-i-Khanan stands midway between the 
tomb of Humayun and the most brilliant culmination of the design, 
the Taj Mahal, and marks effectively the transition from the earlier 
to the later phase of Mughul architecture. 

It was during the time of Shah Jahan that Mughul architecture 
reaches its supreme exuberance. The character of this exuberance 
has already been indicated. Like his grandfather, Shah Jahan was 
a great patron of the building arts and beautified his capitals with 
splendid palaces and other buildings. But he had not the vision 
of Akbar, nor his strength of character. This is clearly reflected, 
apart from other things, in the striking contrast offered by their 
respective buildings. The manly vigour, the direct simplicity and 
the varied originality of Akbar’s buildings stand widely apart from 
the extreme and almost effeminate grace, the sumptuous appearance 
and the dearth of structural designs that characterise the pretty 
creations of Shah Jahan. The contrast is so striking that each group 
seems to represent a class by itself, though both were the products 
of the same dynasty of rulers, one being closely followed by the 
other. Only a change of outlook and temper can explain this sharp 
contrast. 

During the reign of Jahangir the Akbari style was already los¬ 
ing its substance and vigour. His court, particularly under the 
influence of his imperious consort, patronised a culture clearly 
eclectic in character, in which the foreign, especially the Persian, 


780 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


elements predominated. In Shah Jahan’s court the Persian cha¬ 
racter was even more emphasised. We have already indicated what 
Persianism meant for Mughul architecture. One other point has 
to be noted in this regard. Some would ascribe the birth of the 
Mughul architectural style to inspiration from Persia. Mughul 
architecture had its foundation in the days of Akbar whose various 
architectural undertakings, as we have shown, contradict such an 
ascription. Persianism is a late feature in the history of Mughul 
architecture. It had very little part to play in the virile and creative 
phase of Akbar’s reign. It makes its appearance and its influence 
came to be felt when Mughul architecture had already entered its 
baroque phase. Instead of being associated with the formative phase 
of Mughul architecture, Persianism is linked up with its decline. 

The substitution of red sandstone by costly marble was appa¬ 
rently inspired by the desire to impart to the buildings a rich and 
exuberant appearance of prettiness and elegance corresponding to 
the luxurious atmosphere and temper of the court. Imbued with 
the prevailing ideas and his love for pomp and luxury and display 
of splendour, Shah Jahan chose marble as the chief medium for all 
his architectural undertakings. The inherent weakness of marble, 
as indicated above, can be arrested by an intelligent and imagina¬ 
tive guidance and this Shah Jahan, in spite of all his architectural 
predilections, failed to supply. He could not rise above his en¬ 
vironment and his mind worked in a groove which was that of the 
court. So, in spite of all the magnificence of his buildings, Shah 
Jahan failed to contribute any creative design or form in Mughul 
architecture. He imitated ideas and designs already known and 
clothed them in costly marble and overlaid them with a lavish dis¬ 
play of rich and sumptuous ornament. 

The new direction and what it presages have already been out¬ 
lined. Its symptoms will become apparent as one proceeds to sur¬ 
vey the monuments of this phase. The predilection for marble is 
graphically illustrated by Shah Jahan’s replacements of the earlier 
sandstone buildings of Akbar at Agra, described as “barbaric abo¬ 
minations’’ by a court panegyrist, by marble palaces and pavilions, 
extolled as masterpieces of “this august reign when.... lovely 
things reached the zenith of perfection.’’ 24 It is unfortunate that 
views, similar to the above, are shared also by many modern critics 
and scholars. It is oinly the lack of a correct historical and aesthe¬ 
tic perspective that can explain such misleading comparison. A com¬ 
parative estimate of the Mughul architectural style in two important 
phases of its expression has already been indicated. The contrasts 
in appearance and effect will become manifest and the relative merit 


781 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


of each clearly determined when one views the two series of Mughul 
palaces in Agra fort where the two groups are situated, as well as * 
demarcated, side by side. A keen observer cannot fail to perceive a 
nobility of conception and robustness of execution in the remains of 
Akbar’s productions as opposed to the pretty sensuousness and over¬ 
burdened ornamentation imparted by Shah Jahan’s luxurious crea¬ 
tions. One may excuse categorical statements as above from a court 
chronicler in praise of his master’s achievements, not surely from a 
discerning historian and critic having a true perspective and under¬ 
standing of the essential elements of good architecture. 

Marble of a pure white texture and delicate grain was procured 
from the quarries of Makrana in Jodhpur and formed the chief build¬ 
ing material in the time of Shah Jahan. When this was not made 
use of, stone or brick fabrics were plastered with fine stucco, smooth¬ 
ed and polished to the whiteness of an eggshell to keep harmony 
with the white marble fabric. The fine and delicate texture of 
marble fabric required a new sensibility in the ornamental treat¬ 
ment of the surfaces. Relief decoration of an essential plastic qua¬ 
lity has naturally to be avoided as the emphatic contours would ill- 
suit the smooth and chaste texture of the marble fabric with its 
own intrinsic beauty. Moulded outlines of ornamental panels, 
lending variety to the surfaces, are fine with their contours as little 
obtrusive as possible so as not to disturb the general effect. Sur¬ 
face ornaments tend to subtler forms with an emphasis on colour. 
The costly fabric invites costly decoration; and gilding and mosaic 
of precious stones, i.e. pietra dura , constitute the special features 
of ornamentation in the marble phase. A soft and effeminate qua¬ 
lity is immanent in marble fabric, and ornamentation remains effec¬ 
tive so long as it is kept restrained. But thef.tendency to lavish dis¬ 
play of pomp and ornamentation is inevitable when one remembers 
the atmosphere of the court with its exaggerated sense of luxury 
and magnificence. 

The architectural elements also register certain significant 
changes in the marble phase. There is a predilection for curved 
lines, in place of the rectangular aspect of the buildings of the pre¬ 
vious phase, particularly noticeable in the curved outlines of the 
roofs and cornices—an importation, no doubt, from the Bengali style. 
The preference for bulbous domes with constricted necks, pillars 
with tapering outlines and with voluted brackets and foliated bases, 
foliated shapes of arches, that represent the most distinguishing 
marks of the phase, all reflect the emphasis on curved lines. These 
impart, no doubt, fluidity of line and form to the structures of the 


782 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


period, and at the same time a certain sensuousness, if not voluptu¬ 
ousness, that becomes more and more emphasised. 

Though not gifted with the same originality and nobility of 
imagination, as that of his grandfather, Shah Jahan was also a great 
builder. His projects were many and compare favourably with 
those of Akbar in vastness and extensiveness. In Agra and Lahore 
forts he planned to replace the sandstone buildings of the previous 
period by palaces and pavilions in marble, and this he carried out 
in a very large measure involving the construction of many new edi¬ 
fices. Not only that, he projected a new capital city at Delhi, that 
of Shahjahanabad where he built a fortress citadel of unusual di¬ 
mensions and erected within it splendid palaces, office buildings and 
other structures. At Delhi and Agra he built two grand congrega¬ 
tional mosques wonderfully effective, not only on account of their 
vast dimensions, but also for their special purposes. To enshrine the 
remains of his beloved consort he raised up at Agra that grand mau¬ 
soleum building, the far-famed Taj Mahal, enthusiastically eulogised 
by many enamoured visitors as a “dream in marble”. Under Shah 
Jahan Mughul architecture reaped a rich harvest, but this was a 
harvest of plenty that augured degeneration. The tendencies, al¬ 
ready noted, presage decay, and notwithstanding all the brilliance 
and splendour of Shah Jahan’s buildings, students of architecture 
are agreed in recognising in his monuments the symptoms of the 
approaching decline of the style. 

Shah Jahan’s alterations and replacements in the earlier palace 
fortresses were carried out on a grandiose scale and apparently in¬ 
spired by the desire to impart to the palaces and other appurtenances 
an appearance to suit the prevailing character of the court. In such 
operations many of the buildings of his predecessors were swept 
away to make room for his own sumptuous creations. They were 
carried on at intermittent intervals, so that neither the new concep¬ 
tions at Lahore, nor those at Agra follow a symmetrical lay-out and 
arrangement. Efforts were concentrated on the production of 
pretty structures, refined in appearance and ornament, than on any 
new experiments, either in structural conception or in design. The 
court chroniclers give detailed accounts of such operations in eulo¬ 
gistic language with many poetic metaphors. Such eulogies may not 
apply to all these structures; yet, a few, by their refined and grace¬ 
ful contours and restricted ornamentation imparting a subdued 
colour effect to the surface, are not of mean artistic beauty. The 
art of building still retains its sense of sobriety, but destined soon 
to be overcome by a wealth of ornament the effect of which becomes 
overburdening. 


783 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


In Lahore fort Shah Jahan’s erections consist of the Drwan-i- 
‘Am, a hall of forty pillars, the Musamman Burz, the Shlsh Mahal, 
the Khwabagh and other buildings in the north-western sector of 
the fort. Some of these have undergone modifications and elabora¬ 
tions at subsequent dates. Originally, they appear to have belonged 
to the same style and character, as in Shah Jahan’s buildings at Agra 
and Delhi, the emphasis being on marble fabric and picturesque de¬ 
coration by pietra dura and other costly modes. The appearance of 
the Shlsh Mahal is especially sumptuous. 

In Agra fort the remodelling was undertaken on a large and 
extensive scale. The northern portion of the palace sector in the 
fort has come under such operation, for which, apparently, the ear¬ 
lier buildings have been swept away. The only undoubted remains 
of the earlier palaces are the Jahangirl Mahal and fragments of 
Akbarl Mahal. Nowhere is the contrast between Akbar’s architec¬ 
ture and that of Shah Jahlan so strongly marked as in Agra fort, the 
former, noble and robust, and the latter, elegant and, to a certain 
extent, feeble. 

A doorway from the earlier sector leads to Shah Jahan’s build¬ 
ings. It would be difficult to note each and every building erected 
during this period, and our observations will be naturally confined 
to the more notable ones. Not all the buildings, again, were put up 
at one and the same time according to a definite scheme. The first 
to be erected was the DIwan-i-‘Am, a spacious hall standing at the 
rear of an extensive court. It is said to have been built in 1627, the 
year of the emperor’s accession to the throne. It is in red sand¬ 
stone, finely plastered with stucco to the smoothness of white marble 
all over, except on the floor and ceiling. The hall measures 201 by 
67 feet and is open on the three sides and enclosed at the back. The 
roof is flat and supported by three ranges of arcades that impart an 
elegant effect to the interior as well as to the facades. Near the 
back wall of the hall there is placed in the middle an alcove of 
white marble, with inlaid patterns in pietra dura in a refined taste, 
representing the seat of the emperor. Below, in front is a marble 
dais, supported on four legs, meant for the grand vazlr. Because of 
its red sandstone fabric some scholars ascribe this building to the 
period of Akbar or Jahangir and attribute to Shah Jahan only the 
fine stucco works over sandstone fabric and the throne alcove. But 
such salient features as the shape and design of the pillars and the 
foliated shape of the arches leave no doubt about the entire concep¬ 
tion being Shah Jahan’s, possibly one of the earliest of his architec¬ 
tural undertakings at a time when marble was yet to become the 
irresistible vogue. The Dlwami-‘Am in the Delhi fort, it has to be 


784 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


noted, is also in red sandstone, and it is definitely known to have 
been the work of Shah Jahan. 

Behind the Diwan-i-’Am and separated from it by the Machchhi 
Bhavan stands the Diwan-i-Khas that was erected, according to the 
inscription it bears, in 1636-37. It is entirely in marble and con¬ 
sists of an open colonnade with an enclosed hall behind. The double 
columns of the colonnade are of graceful execution and carry foliated 
arches above. The inlaid patterns in red carnelian and other stones 
impart an elegant effect to the wall surface. 

Close by to the south is situated the sumptuous block of build¬ 
ings, known as the Khas Mahal, with the spacious court of Anguri 
Bagh in front. In contemporary chronicles it is called Ardm-gah-i- 
Muqaddas or the holy abode of rest, indicating that it was a private 
palace intended for relaxation and retirement. The Khas Mahal 
stands on a marble terrace overlooking the Jumna and consists of 
three white marble pavilions of elegant design and form. The 
middle one overlooking a court, 112 feet by 96, consists of a rectan¬ 
gular building with an open colonnade in front showing five arched 
openings of foliated shape springing from piers. Three of the arch¬ 
ways lead from the colonnaded gallery to the inner hall having 
three windows in the back wall overlooking the river and opposite 
to the arched entrances in front. The roof is flat with domed kiosks 
at the corners. According to the Pddshdh-ndma of ‘Abdul Hamid 
Lahaurl the ceiling was once inlaid with patterns in gold and colour, 
traces of which are still discernible. The court in front has a big 
ornamental pool, about 42 feet by 29, with five fountains. A series 
of subterranean chambers below this court were intended for re¬ 
tirement in summer heat. In the north-east corner of the court, at 
a lower level is the Shish Mahal (palace of mirrors), a unit of two 
chambers with arrangements for baths, so named because of the 
walls and ceilings being spangled with tiny pieces of mirror glass 
set in gilt and coloured stucco. The reflection of light on this mir¬ 
rored mosaic is charming and not to be easily forgotten. 

On either side of the central building of the Khas Mahal there 
is a pavilion, each joined to the central block by means of doorways. 
Each is of a similar design and consists of a room at either end with 
a communicating gallery in between and a screened court in front. 
The gallery is covered by a curved roof with curved cornice, while 
the rooms have angular canopies. According to the Pddshdh-ndma 
these pavilions were once profusely ornamented in gold and colours, 

785 

M.E.—50 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


while the curved roofs are stated to have been plated with sheets 
of gold. 

In front of the court of the Khas Mahal, at a slightly lower 
level, is situated the spacious court of Angurl Bagh (vine garden) 
which is a rectangle of 220 feet by 169. A red sandstone walk runs 
round the sides, while two marble roadways traverse the rectangle 
from the middle of each side and intersect in the centre which ex¬ 
pands into an extensive terrace accommodating an ornamental pool 
with fountains. The four smaller rectangles, thus formed, are divid¬ 
ed into numerous pleasingly patterned parterres by sandstone ridges. 
Except on the east where it faces the Khas Mahal, the court is en¬ 
closed on the other three sides by double-storeyed chambers built 
of red sandstone with marble facing on some of them. The sand¬ 
stone fabric and the plan may lend some illusion to their being the 
works of Akbar; but the foliated arches leave no doubt that they 
were erected during the regime of Shah Jahan. 

Close by and communicating with the northern pavilion of the 
Khas Mahal, is the Musamman Burz (octagonal tower), known also 
to some as Saman Burz (jasmine tower). It is an exquisite build¬ 
ing because of its richly inlaid patterns and marble filigree, both 
indicating a high degree of technical craftsmanship and sense of 
ornamentation. Like a fairy tower it overhangs the river and pre¬ 
sents a wide vista along the river front. It was here that the cap¬ 
tive emperor breathed his last in 1666, with his eyes turned on the 
pearly dome of the Taj Mahal as popular mind would like to believe. 
Some scholars are of the opinion that it was built by Jahangir. But 
the court chronicler, ‘Abdul Hamid Lahauri, distinctly says in his 
Padshah-ndma that on this site there was a house built by Akbar 
which was pulled down by Jahangir to make room for a structure 
that, again, in its turn, was dismantled by Shah Jahan and replaced 
by the present monument intended for the residence of his favourite 
empress, Mumtaz Mahal. 

A little apart from the group described above, stands the Moti 
Masjid (Pearl mosque), described by Fergusson 25 as “one of the 
purest and most elegant buildings of its class to be found anywhere”. 
Situated on a high eminence it commands a fine view of the palaces, 
pavilions and courts. Completed in 1654, it consists of the usual 
courtyard with an ornamental cistern in the centre and surrounded 
by cloisters on the three sides and the prayer chamber or sanctuary 
on the west. The entire building is of pure white marble raised 
on a stylobate of red sandstone. It occupies a quadrangle, 234 feet 
by 187 externally, and is approached by three gateways, one in the 


786 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


middle of each cloister. The view of the interior, an unbroken 
whiteness, in and out, above and below, is exceptionally beautiful 
and comes as a surprise after the prevailing red glow outside. The 
prayer chamber, 159 feet by 56 internally, opens on the court by 
seven arches of great beauty, all foliated in design, and is accessible 
at both ends from the private apartments by marble screens of ex¬ 
quisite workmanship. The prayer spaces are marked on the floor 
by inlaid strips of light white marble, the only attempt to colour 
effect in the whole building. The receding views of the interior 
arcades are also supremely beautiful. The roof is surmounted by 
three graceful domes of bulbous shape, the central dome with a 
substantially raised elevation in relation to the two at the flanks. 
At each corner rises an octagonal pavilion crowned by a cupola, 
while a range of light kiosks runs along the line of the parapet in 
front. In its flawless whiteness, in refined architectural propor¬ 
tions, in the skilful modulation of the various elements, including a 
charming variety imparted to the skyline, and in the masterly techni¬ 
que in which the materials have been manipulated, the Motl Masjid 
at Agra has a remarkably restrained beauty, in contrast to the florid 
appearance of the residential and office buildings created by Shah 
Jahan. Its outstanding qualities illustrate Shah Jahan’s building 
style at its peak. 

In 1638 Shah Jahan began at Delhi the construction of a new 
capital city, that of Shahj ahanabad, to contain within its perimeter 
a sumptuous palace fortress for the accommodation of the imperial 
household and court. The city was of the shape of a quadrant on 
the right bank of the river Jumna, with the palace at the apex of 
the river and the grand congregational mosque, the Jami £ Masjid, 
at an angle formed by two wide streets traversing from the main 
gates of the fortress to the city gates. The palace fortress, the Red 
Fort as it is known because of the red sandstone fabric of its ram¬ 
part walls, has been designed on an unprecedented scale with all 
the amenities of the busy and luxurious life of an imperial house 
and court provided for within its walls in a regular and systematic 
order. Built at one time and by one of the most splendid of the 
Mughul emperors, it excels the other Mughul palaces in the large¬ 
ness of its conception, in the uniformity of its arrangements and in 
the magnificence of its execution. 

The fortress with its halls, palaces, pavilions and gardens was 
completed in 1648 when, on an auspicious day the emperor entered 
it ceremonially and formally inaugurated the new capital city. It 
remained the seat of Mughul government for a little over two hun- 


787 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


died years and, though shorn of much of its one-time glory and 
splendour in the days of its disintegration, it still stands as a wit¬ 
ness to the many vicissitudes that befell the empire of the grand 
Mughuls. 

The fortress is planned in the shape of a parallelogram, with 
its angles slightly canted off, and measures 3200 feet by 1600 feet 
exclusive of the gateways. It is encircled by a massive rampart 
wall of red sandstone, relieved at intervals by boldly projecting 
bastions with domed kiosks on the roof. It has two main gateways, 
one in the middle of the western wall and the other in the south. 
The former, known as the Lahore Gate, forms the principal en¬ 
trance and faces the Chandni Chauk of historic memory. This 
portal leads to a wide arcaded passage that communicates with an 
open square courtyard of 350 feet side, from either end of which 
arcaded passages run north and south, the former leading to the 
gardens and the latter to the south gate, known as Delhi Gate. This 
arrangement encloses on the east a rectangle, occupying nearly two- 
thirds of the fortress area, and accommodates an orderly array of 
the most sumptuous buildings and gardens arranged into a regular 
system of squares and rectangles, planned and designed apparently 
by the emperor himself. 

At the eastern end of the above-mentioned square courtyard 
stands the Naubat Khana (Music Pavilion), a double-storeyed build¬ 
ing, which leads, again, to another great rectangular court, 550 feet 
by 385, with the hall of the Dlwlan-i-‘Am at its eastern apex. This 
hall of public audience has been designed in a stately manner to 
suit the solemn functions for which it was intended. The spacious 
court in front was once surrounded by colonnades that imparted an 
impressive grandeur to the entire setting. It is built of sandstone, 
but was originally covered with shell plaster polished to the smooth¬ 
ness and whiteness of ivory to fit in with the white marble structures 
that stand around. It is a colonnaded hall, open on three sides and 
enclosed at the back, the facade showing an arcade of nine foliated 
arches springing from double columns in the middle and from four 
at the corners. The interior corresponds to the facade in having simi¬ 
lar arcades in three aisles, while set in an alcove near the back 
wall is the canopied platform in white marble, richly inlaid with 
precious stones, intended for the imperial throne. The superb mag¬ 
nificence of this throne platform, known as Nashihmamri-Zill-i- 
Ilahi (seat of the shadow of God), at once visualises the splendid 
pageant of the grand Mughuls in days of their supreme brilliance. 
The recess behind the platform is covered by panels of pietra dura 
work, attributed to one Austin de Bordeaux, which, although rich 


788 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


and fine in execution, cannot be said to have been quite in keeping 
with the setting that is entirely eastern in design and appearance. 
The hall was richly painted and covered with gold; but all such 
costly decorations have vanished. 

On either side of this hall and at the back along the eastern 
rampart 'wall overlooking the river, the whole area is laid out in 
buildings, courts and gardens. The space to the south was possibly 
occupied by the private apartments of the zenana and that to the 
north by halls, pavilions, gardens and courts, with the magnificent 
Rang Mahal in the centre connecting the two blocks. The halls and 
pavilions in both the blocks are lined along the rampart wall in the 
east and face the courts and gardens on the west. Along the 
entire length run beautiful channels of crystal water, widening out 
at intervals into ornamental pools with fountains. A constant supply 
of water was obtained from the Jumna, seventy miles up the river, 
brought to the fortress by the canal of ‘All Mardian and introduced 
into the palace through an artificially scalloped marble cascade placed 
near the Shah Burz in the northern extremity of the eastern wall. 

It will be difficult to describe each and every element of this 
sumptuous conception. The palaces and halls along the eastern wall 
represent the most resplendent creations in white marble, and on 
these the highest skill was lavished, particularly in decorative treat- 
ment. With a succession of turrets, kiosks, golden domes, project¬ 
ing balconies, overhanging the sandstone ramparts, they present a 
fine view from the river, the three towers—Asad Burz and Shah 
Burz at the two comers and Musamman Burz in the middle raising 
up their heads in male fashion above the tops of other structures 
and imparting an attractive variety to the skyline along the river 
front. The inside, with the picturesque gardens with fountains, 
flower beds, pavilions placed within ornamental pools and the 
Nahr-i-Bihisht (Stream of Paradise) with its rippling water-course 
traversing the palace area, represents also a fine and magnificent 
setting for the superb structures. All combined, we have in the 
sumptuous lay-out and arrangement of the palace area a confirma¬ 
tion of the truth of the Persian couplet, inscribed on the Dlwan-i- 
Khas, that “if there is a paradise on the face of the earth, it is this, 
it is this, it is this”. 

In design and style these structures are approximately identical. 
We have usually a single-storeyed hall, open on all sides, the interior 
being divided into a number of bays and aisles by massive 
piers carrying foliated arches and supporting the flat roof. The ceil¬ 
ings were once plated with silver or gold, and the interior surfaces. 


789 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


those of the piers, arches and walls, are richly ornamented with 
precious inlay, low relief carvings or patterns in colour and gold. 
Everywhere there is an emphasis on costly splendour and sumptuous 
ornamentation, and the latter though at times having an appearance 
of exuberance and of being overdone, illustrates the highest skill 
and the most perfect workmanship, so far as technical craftsman¬ 
ship is concerned. The intricate tracery of the screen bearing the 
‘Scales of Justice’ shows in the fineness of its design and the flaw¬ 
less accuracy of its execution the fine needle-work of an embroidery 
transferred by chisel of the stone-cutter on the hard fabric of marble. 

Two buildings, representative of the style, may briefly be re¬ 
ferred to here for an idea of the grandeur and brilliance of this 
sumptuous palace conception. One of them is the DTwan-i-Khas 
(hall of private audience) which is an indispensable feature of 
Mughul court life and etiquette. In these halls of audiences confer¬ 
ences of a special and ceremonial character were held. The other 
is the Rang Mahal (palace of colour, or, differently, palace of plea¬ 
sure), intended for the delectation of the emperor and his household 
after a busy and tiring day. Both belong to the same general style 
that we have described; but they excel the other buildings in hav¬ 
ing the most lavish ornamentation and costly splendour strewn over 
all the interior surfaces and with an almost overbearing effect. 

The Dlwan-i-Khas, also known as the Shah Mahal, is an open 
colonnaded hall of one storey enclosed at the back by marble trellises. 
The front consists of a fine arcade of five foliated arches springing 
from massive piers, with similar arches, but of varying sizes, on 
the two sides. The interior is divided into bays and aisles by mas¬ 
sive piers carrying foliated arches that support the flat roof. At 
the top may be seen a beautiful kiosk at each corner. The building 
is entirely in white marble; but the chaste and elegant appearance 
of the facade is lost in the interior by a bewildering maze of rich 
and lavish ornamentation distributed over every available space in 
brilliant colour, lustrous gold and costly pietra dura. The ceiling 
also was plated with gold, patterned with arabesques and flowers; 
but this has since disappeared. Fergusson 26 considers it to be “if 
not the most beautiful, certainly the most highly ornamented of all 
Shahjahan’s buildings.” 

But even this splendid hall recedes into the background by the 
conception of the Rang Mahal, also called Imtiyaz Mahal (palace of 
distinction) in Shah Jahan’s time and described by a modern critic 
as the “crowning jewel of Shah Jahan’s seraglio”. 27 Its sumptuous 
appearance confirms the statement of the court chronicler that “in 


790 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


excellence and glory it surpasses the eight-sided throne of heaven, 
and in lustre and colour it is far superior to the palaces in the 
promised paradise”. 28 Very few traces now remain of its ori¬ 
ginal decoration; but there are still enough to enable one to visualise 
its former splendour and magnificence. Externally the building 
measures 153 feet by 69 feet, and the interior consists of a main cen¬ 
tral apartment with smaller chambers at either end. Foliated arches 
on massive piers divide this central apartment into a number of 
bays, each 20 feet square. Along this central apartment runs a 
marble water channel expanded into an ornamental fountain basin 
in the central bay. It is a part of the elaborate water course of the 
Nahr-i-Bihisht that reaches its most enchanting expression in this 
palace of colour and adds to its beauty in a supremely effective 
manner. The basin is designed in the shape of a large lotus flower 
with delicately modelled petals enclosed within a shallow, but ex¬ 
quisitely patterned, square frame. In the centre, on the pericarp 
of the lotus, is again a small flower through which the water of the 
fountain bubbles up, “enhancing the pleasantness of the surround¬ 
ings and adding to its beauty”, as recorded by Muhammad 
Salhi, the biographer of Shah Jahan. The picturesque account 
of this fountain by Sayyid Ahmad Khan is interesting and may pro¬ 
fitably be quoted. He says that the Rang Mahal “has a tank the 
beauty of which baffles description. It is made of marble and fashion¬ 
ed in such a way that it resembles a full-blown flower. Its inlay 
of flowers and foliages in various coloured stones has been so finely 
executed that it is beyond the power of any one to describe it. 
Although the tank is seven gaz square, yet it is of very little depth. 
It is just like the palm of a hand. The particular beauty of this is 
that, when it is full of rippling water, the foliage of the inlay work 
appears to wave to and fro. In its centre is a beautiful flower like 
a cup of marble; moreover, on each curving point and arched cusp, 
flowers and leaves of coloured stones spring from creeping plants, 
and creeping plants from flowers and leaves. Within the cup you 
will find a hole through which the water bubbles up from a hidden 
channel underneath. The sheet of water falling from the edges of 
the cup and the waving of the plants and flowers under the dancing 
water are nothing less than a scene of magic.” 29 

In keeping with the highly ornamental character of the foun¬ 
tain, the central feature of this elaborate composition, the whole in¬ 
terior of the building was once gorgeously decorated by painting, 
gilding and pietra dura ; the traceried marble screens, originally en¬ 
closing the arches on the outside and separating the central apartment 
from the chambers at the sides, were of much intricate decorative 


791 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


workmanship. According to Muhammad Salhi the original ceiling 
“was gilded and ornamented with golden flowers”; but this was 
apparently replaced by a silver one that again was removed in the 
reign of Farrukh-siyar ‘to supply a pressing need’ and substituted 
by one of copper. The copper ceiling was also taken off in the reign 
of Akbar II and a wooden one was put up in its place. The Rang 
Mahal is one of the most sumptuous conceptions of Shah Jahan’s un¬ 
dertakings in building art, truly representative of the splendour and 
magnificence of the Mughul court at the highest peak of its brilli¬ 
ance, and such acts of spoliation, noted also in other buildings of the 
citadel, reflect in a poignant manner the decadence that usually 
follows a peak of plenty. 

The grand Jami‘ Masjid at Delhi, the largest and most well- 
known in the whole of India, forms also an essential element of the 
scheme of the city of Shahjahanabad. Begun in 1644, it was com¬ 
pleted in 1658 when Shah Jahan had already ceased to reign. It is 
of the usual orthodox plan of an open courtyard with ranges of 
cloisters on three sides and the prayer chamber on the west. The 
courtyard has in the centre a reservoir of water for ritualistic ablu¬ 
tion and is approached by three gateways, one in the middle of each 
cloistered side. Its impressiveness is due to the vast scale in which 
it had been designed and the admirable manner in which each part 
had been disposed and adjusted in relation to the other. The en¬ 
tire scheme is raised over a lofty terraced basement with majestic 
flights of steps leading to the imposing gateways that tower above 
their surroundings; and added to these, the substantial corner tur¬ 
rets, each with a domed pavilion at the top, and the tall minarets, 
flanking the facade of the prayer chamber, impart an effect of 
noble height and dignity to the external appearance of the com¬ 
position. In the interior the immense quadrangle surrounded by 
arcaded cloisters, each interrupted in the middle by the rear face 
of the gateway, and the superb sanctuary with its varied elevations 
create an effect of spaciousness combined with a rich variety in com¬ 
position in which all the parts are found to be pleasingly co-ordinated 
to one another so as to produce a unified and impressive design. At 
the same time it has a severe and imperious aspect, and the “uncom¬ 
promising rigidity of its long horizontal lines, the harsh black and 
white inlay of its domes and minarets, its very vastness which neces¬ 
sitates the unending repetition of each detail, all combine to give 
this otherwise magnificent structure a character which never wholly 
attracts”. 30 

Almost simultaneously another congregational mosque was 
erected at Agra, just outside the Delhi Gate of the fort. It is said 


792 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


that Shah Jahan built it in order to please his favourite daughter, 
the accomplished princess Jahanara. It is neither so large nor am¬ 
bitious, and lacks the impressive grandeur of its counterpart at 
Delhi. The facade is divided, not by foliated arches, but by those 
of the so-called ‘Tudor’ type; the three domes, without necks at the 
springs, lack the height and fluidity of contour; and there are no 
tall minarets to add to the effect of elevation. Yet, its merit depends 
on its pleasing proportions, the admirable distribution of the arches 
of its facade, the slender pinnacles intermingling with beautiful 
kiosks lining the parapet, and the zigzag ornament in white marble 
on the domes. The Jami‘ Masjid at Agra has an emotional charac¬ 
ter, in contrast to the severe and imperious appearance of its coun¬ 
terpart at Delhi. 

But all the above architectural creations of Shah Jahan are 
thrown into shade by that superb conception of the mausoleum that 
the emperor raised up at Agra to enshrine the mortal remains of his 
beloved consort, Arjumand Banu Begam, better known as Mumtaz 
Mahal. The Taj Mahal, as it is called after the title of the empress, 
stands on an elevated ground on a bend of the river Jumna so 
that it has a fine view from whatever angle it is seen. As usual, 
the conception takes the form of a garden tomb, the whole being 
placed within a rectangular court enclosed on all sides, except on 
the river front, by a high wall with octagonal turrets, surmounted 
by domed pavilions, at the corners, and approached by a grand 
portal in the middle of the southern wall. The rectangle of the 
court is aligned north and south with the garden occupying a square 
of about 1000 feet side on the south and the raised terrace of the 
tomb building and two other accessory structures in the oblong 
portion at the northern end overlooking the river. The design, to 
a certain extent, is unconventional, the plan of the courtyard be¬ 
ing rectangular, not square, and the tomb itself being situated, not 
at the centre of the court, but at one end. What impresses the 
visitor is the beautiful harmony that exists among all parts of the 
conception. All arrangements, beginning from the entrance portal, 
lead on, and converge to, the main theme of the entire composi¬ 
tion, namely the superb mausoleum building poetically described as 
a “tender elegy in marble”. 

The entrance portal, rising up to a height of about 100 feet, is 
by itself a monumental composition and has been called “a worthy 
pendant to the Taj itself”. Its central archway offers a magnifi¬ 
cent vista, a framed picture so to say, of the snow-white mauso¬ 
leum building standing at the farthest end. The facade is divided 
into an enormous arched alcove within a rectangular frame, with a 


793 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


similar smaller fronton in two storeys on each side and a turret with 
a domed pavilion at each corner. The red sandstone fabric is pro¬ 
fusely inlaid with white marble and mosaic of precious stones. Along 
the frame of the central alcove are inscribed Qur‘anic texts in 
black letters, inlaid on white marble ground, in such a manner that 
the letters appear to be of the same size throughout the entire 
height. The black marble inlay of inscriptions on white marble 
surface constitutes one of the most effective ornamental motifs in 
the decorative scheme of the Taj Mahal, used with the charming 
elegance of embroidery, not only on the gateway but also on the 
mausoleum building. The arched alcove opens into an octagonal 
chamber with a smaller room on each side and a staircase at each 
corner leading to the upper storeys. 

The gateway building descends down to the square court laid 
out in the formal pattern of a Mughul garden. Two ornamental 
channels of water with rows of fountains and flanked by marble 
walks run along the middle of the square. In the centre of the 
garden court the two are joined by a cross channel, this arrange¬ 
ment being expanded into a wide raised platform with a reservoir 
of water with fountains. Avenues of cypress trees line the mar¬ 
ble walks backed by foliage and flowers in neat and small parter¬ 
res. The lay-out is balanced and harmonised in such a manner as 
to fit in with the architectural elements and to furnish a beautiful 
setting and perspective to the tomb building that stands in the 
centre of the northern end of the court. As Edwin Arnold says, 
“the garden helps the Tomb, as the Tomb dignifies the garden”. 

At the northern end of the garden court stands the red sand¬ 
stone terrace extending to the wall from east to west. The tomb 
building stands in the centre of the terrace on its own marble plat¬ 
form, flanked by two other subsidiary structures on the two sides. 
They are built entirely of sandstone. That to the west is a mos¬ 
que; the corresponding one to the east has no special significance, 
but is provided for to ensure symmetry, the jawab as it is known. 
Their situation and elevation are so judiciously disposed as to bring 
into full and fine relief the snow-white tomb building standing in 
the middle. 

The marble platform of the mausoleum building is exactly 
313 feet square and a little over 22 feet in height from the garden 
level. It is approached by two flights of steps concealed within 
a passage in the middle of the south side. At each corner rises a 
stately white marble minaret in four storeys ending at the top in 
a neat pavilion crowned by a graceful dome. From the level of 


794 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


the garden the total height of each minaret is 162 feet. The 
tomb building rises abruptly from the centre of this substantial 
platform and externally is a square of 186 feet side with each corner 
canted off. Each facade consists of a huge arched alcove, set with¬ 
in a rectangular frame, in the centre flanked by similar arched re¬ 
cesses in two stages on each side and chamfered angle. The entire 
facade is richly ornamented by inscriptions of Qur‘anic texts in 
black letters on white surface within rectangular bands, and 
flowers, arabesques and other patterns in precious inlay. In eleva¬ 
tion the scheme resolves into two parts, each approximately of 
equal height. The lower consists of the enormous facades with 
chamfered corners forming the ground storey, and the upper of the 
milk-white soaring dome with its encircling domed pavilions. From 
the garden level the entire height of the building is over 200 feet, 
a remarkable achievement carried out in effeminate marble. The 
horizontal and vertical aspects of the building have been so plea¬ 
singly combined as to render the external appearance and elevation 
perfectly balanced and harmonised. 

The interior arrangements of the building are equally elegant 
and illustrate the sense for a unified and balanced design. In the 
depth of the marble platform is accommodated the subterranean 
crypt containing the graves proper. Above we have an octagonal 
hall in the centre, forming the cenotaph chamber, with two-storey¬ 
ed apartments, one at each angle, all linked up by radiating pas¬ 
sages and corridors. The cenotaph chamber is covered by a vaulted 
ceiling just below the central dome, while the angle-apartments 
have each a domed pavilion over the roof of the second storey. 
Light is admitted into the interior by double perforated screens of 
v/hite marble set in arched recesses. In the centre of the octa¬ 
gonal hall and marked off by an octagonal rail of trellised marble 
of exquisite beauty and workmanship lies the cenotaph of the em¬ 
press with that of Shah Jahan placed by its side on the west. It 
is said that the emperor planned to erect a black marble mauso¬ 
leum on the opposite bank of the river as his last resting place and 
to join the two by a bridge over the river. But the vicissitudes 
of fortune in his last years prevented the scheme from being mate¬ 
rialised and he lies beside his beloved queen in the monument that 
was intended solely for her. The cenotaphs are composed of lovely 
white marble of the most translucent kind and are covered all over 
with the most beautiful ornamentation in costly pietra dura. The 
marble railing around the cenotaphs is said to be a later replace¬ 
ment, the original having been one of gold set with jewels. 


795 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


It is impossible, within the short space at our disposal, to con¬ 
vey even a cursory idea of the exquisite ornamentation of this 
beautiful edifice. The charming effect of the Qur‘anic inscriptions 
in black letters on white marble has already been alluded to. They 
appear on the facades and also on the interior surfaces in bold and 
effective bands. Certain elements of the building are embellished 
with patterns in low relief, but such ornamentations have been 
worked without any plastic emphasis so as not to disturb the effect 
of the smooth white texture of the building. The decorative 
scheme consists principally of floral and arabesque patterns in cost¬ 
ly pietra dura. In contemporary records we have an account of as 
many as forty-two kinds of precious stones having been used in the 
pietra dura works, and the infinite skill of the workmen is clearly 
evident in the perfect and finished execution of the intricate pat¬ 
terns, ranging from the broad scroll-works on the arch spandrils, 
soffits, etc. to the tiny floral motifs on thb cenotaphs and the marble 
grille encircling them. The numerous shades of this rich kind of 
ornamentation are so elegantly and perfectly blended that even a 
close observation and scrutiny fail to discover the points of unison 
in any part, although a powerful microscope might reveal as many 
as seventy to ninety such pieces in the composition of a single 
small flower. 31 The marble trellises with their varied patterns show 
also an inimitable delicacy of carving along with a fine sense of 
effective design. The structure and its ornament are in perfect 
unison with each other, and the balanced design of the entire con¬ 
ception and its beautiful setting have almost a universal appeal. 

In the construction of the Taj the builders also show a perfect 
mastery of technique, as is evident in every lineament of this snow- 
white misty pile. The solid foundations and the substructure of 
the terrace on the river front are, in themselves, feats of remark¬ 
able engineering skill. The practical soundness of the system that 
prevailed among the Mughul builders for construction of compact 
masonry foundations is manifest in the fact that in spite of its 
situation by the river that continually laps its side, the monument 
has not suffered the least damage or deviation due to a set-back in 
the foundation. The overhang of the great dome indicates a know¬ 
ledge on the part of the builders of the principles of tension, stress 
and strain, and at the same time imparts an appearance of surpris¬ 
ing lightness and soaring quality to the whole building. This be¬ 
comes more apparent the farther one recedes from it. The harmo¬ 
nious grouping of pavilions of apparently indigenous derivation 
around a dome of evidently Persian extraction illustrates a sense 
of balanced design, and the rustication on the face of the tall mina- 


796 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


rets produce a subtle contrast to the smooth texture of the mauso¬ 
leum building situated in the centre of the area marked by them. 
As a writer poetically observes, the minarets serve as sentinels over 
the structure that stands within, as if keeping guard over its fair 
beauty. 

By its stately and perfect proportions, the delicacy and purity 
of its lineaments, its milk-white texture assuming different hues 
and tones at different times and under different conditions, the flaw¬ 
less execution of the structure and of its varied ornaments, and, 
lastly, by its picturesque setting aided by the ingenuity of man, the 
Taj Mahal at Agra stands as a creation of superb beauty and magni¬ 
ficence, not only in Mughul architecture but in Indian architecture 
as a whole. There have been controversies regarding the designer 
of this lovely monument and a statement of Father Sebastian Man- 
rique was responsible for initiating the belief that the Taj owes its 
design to a Venetian, Geronimo Verroneo. 32 This belief, however, is 
unwarranted as the design is wholly eastern and, in India, a near 
prototype is recognised in the tomb of Humayun at Delhi erected a 
little over half a century ago. The Taj is just the culmination of the 
conception, first noticed in Humayun’s tomb and later on continued 
in the tomb of ‘Abdur Rahim Khan-i-Khanan, also at Delhi. It fits 
into a perfectly logical cycle of evolution of an Indo-Persian design. 
There are contemporary documents recording the names and respec¬ 
tive salaries of the builders, artists and craftsmen responsible for the 
creation of the monument, the chief being Ustad ‘Isa who, accord¬ 
ing to Diwan-i-Afridi (manuscript in Khuda Bux Oriental Library, 
Patna), was a citizen of Agra. The garden, though typically 
Mughul, was the work of a Hindu garden-planner of the name of 
Ranmal who came from Kashmir. The attribution of the pietra 
dura ornamentations to a French jeweller, named Austin de Bor¬ 
deaux, has also to be discountenanced, as the task is stated to have 
been entrusted to a group of Hindu craftsmen from Multan and 
Kanauj. The writer of the inscriptions, Amanat Khan ShirazI, 
came from Qandahar, while the maker of the dome, IsmaTl Khan 
RumI, apparently hailed from Constantinople. The services of these 
two were requisitioned from outside, perhaps because of their spe¬ 
cial proficiency, each in his particular field. There is no evidence 
of any western artist being concerned in the production of this 
monument. The list of the principal artists, masons and crafts¬ 
men, together with the countries of their origin, as we have in the 
contemporary chronicles, indicates how the whole eastern world 
was laid under contribution in the creation of this mausoleum that 
still stands as a notable monument in the entire range of eastern 


797 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


architecture. As the development of an Indian style the monu¬ 
ment belongs to India and has an Indian appearance and character, 
despite the hands of foreign workmen employed. 

With its luminous beauty and picturesque setting the Taj has 
been attracting enamoured visitors from far and near, and each one 
has a reaction according to his own emotions and susceptibilities. 
Not a little of its appeal attaches to the fact that here we have an 
emperor’s love given concrete shape in stone, his grief for his be¬ 
loved materialised into a monument of snow-white texture and un¬ 
common grace and elegance. This romantic association has added 
to its human interest and to its universal appeal. We have many 
beautiful and poetic eulogies in praise of this superb monument, 
but they all appear to have been swayed, to a certain extent, by 
the romantic story behind its creation. Our poet, Rabindranath, 
describes the Taj as a “tear-drop” wrung from the sorrowing heart 
of the emperor. Similar sentiments seem to inspire such romantic 
statements as that of Bayard Taylor who spoke of the Taj as a 
“fabric of mist and moonshine with its great dome soaring up like 
a silvery bubble”. Many a spectator has seen in the monu¬ 
ment the fairy-like beauty of Mumtaz Mahal materialised in 
marble, while such reactions as expressed in the following couplet 
from the pen of an Englishman of the early eighteenth century are 
also not uncommon: 

“Oh thou! whose imperial mind could raise 

This splendid trophy to a woman’s praise: 

If joy or grief inspired the bold design, 

No mortal joy or sorrow equalled thine.” 

With its milk-white texture and purity of lineaments, the Taj 
has, no doubt, a beauty of its own. Its picturesque situation and 
every arrangement and setting, so contrived and designed as to 
concentrate on the structure itself, have added to its charm. Its 
subtle proportions and varied ornaments, perfectly executed and 
finished, represent the highest skill. Added to these there is the 
romantic appeal. The Taj enchants the eye and fills the heart with 
reverence for an undying love that could find eloquent expression 
in mute marble. The poetic eulogies bestowed on the Taj ever 
since its completion will indicate that through the successive ages 
it has been viewed and considered more as a monument of immor¬ 
talised love and materialised sorrow than as a creation of architec¬ 
ture. It is emotions of this kind that prevent a dispassionate study 
of the monument and its place in the history of Mughul architec¬ 
ture. When so viewed, its beauty and perfection are found to be 


798 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


of an illusive kind. Its specialised glamour tends to wear thin on 
a closer analysis and from a correct perspective. What strikes the 
critics first is the inappropriateness of the material in relation to 
its magnitude; and the impression of a precious miniature casket 
being magnified into a monumental size appears to be inevitable. 
Its effeminacy is apparent, and no amount of praise as its being the 
tribute to a woman of uncommon beauty and grace can justify the 
inherent weakness and lack of strength which, as already observed, 
constitute the spirit of the time. The purity of its outlines is no¬ 
thing short of a rigidity and the lack of variety in its architectural 
forms is striking. Aldous Huxley recognises in the composition of 
the Taj a “poverty of imagination” which, again, is apparent when 
the monument is viewed more closely. Moreover, there is a lack 
of shadow along its front and flanks imparting, to a certain extent, 
a sense of monotony. The elaborate and costly ornamentations 
are, no doubt, exquisitely done and are flawless in their accuracy; 
but close at hand they appear to be restless and overrich. Hence 
it is a distant view of the monument that is the most satisfying, 
as it brings into magnificent relief the snow-white monument 
amidst a gorgeous setting of a luxuriant garden with its rippling 
water-courses reflecting the throbbing monument against the back¬ 
ground of the horizon. The Taj is not so much a triumph of 
architecture as of splendid decorative setting; and to this the 
monument owes much of its charm and beauty. 33 

4. Decay and Disintegration 

Aurangzib’s accession to the throne marks the end of the rich 
harvest in building art. It may appear that the abundant and 
ceaseless output that characterised Shah Jahan’s regime brought 
in a natural exhaustion and the decay of the Mughul architectural 
style followed as a matter of course. Signs of decadence were, 
however, evident even before the reign of Aurangzib in the weak¬ 
ening of the architectonic design and in the tendency to sump¬ 
tuous decoration and lavish expenditure in material. Mughul 
architecture displayed the full vigour of a progressive style during 
the time of Akbar; but after him it degenerated into a style that 
“was sweet rather than strong, and dainty rather than dignified.” 
Shah Jahan indulged his artistic taste in extravagantly ornate 
buildings. His palaces, halls and pavilions, with their effeminate 
forms and precious inlay, give at their best a picture of decadent 
splendour and belong rather to the category of exquisite bijouterie 
than architecture. In spite of the brilliance of his architectural 
undertakings, he could not contribute any new idea or form to the 


799 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Mughul architectural style. None of his buildings is distinguished 
by an intellectuality in design, and even such impressive creations 
as the Jami‘ Mas j id at Delhi, the Moti Masjid at Agra, or the splen¬ 
did Taj Mahal fail to rise above the contemporary flavour of an 
effete and overstressed magnificence. 

The reign of Aurangzlb saw the rapid dissolution of the Mughul 
architectural style. “There are few things”, says Fergusson, 34 
“more startling in the history of this style than the rapid decline 
of taste that set in with the accession of Aurangzeb”. The empire 
of the grand Mughuls reached a tottering height during his reign 
and the inevitable crash was not long in coming. Symptoms of 
disintegration were apparent even during his lifetime and with his 
death vanished the splendid imperial fabric raised up by the great 
Akbar. It is only natural, therefore, that during these declining 
days all forms of cultural activity languished. Aurangzlb’s own 
temperament seems to have contributed more to the rapid decay of 
the architectural tradition than any of the natural causes. His aus¬ 
tere puritanism gave little encouragement to art, and his narrow 
bigotry tried to exclude all non-believers from participating in the 
construction of monuments of the Islamic faith or of those intended 
for the use of the believers in Islam. Mughul architecture, we 
have already observed, had its foundation in the days of Akbar on 
a happy and fruitful collaboration among diverse ideas and techni¬ 
ques, and much of its character as a national art movement de¬ 
pended on the capacities and achievements of the indigenous ideals 
in adapting the other trends and elements to the requirements of 
the new and growing style. In the later phase of Mughul architec¬ 
ture there was noticed a slow and gradual isolation from the indi¬ 
genous inspiration, thereby leading to a poverty in architectonic 
design and loss of structural dignity. Still, the technical skill and 
efficiency of the indigenous artists and craftsmen were recognised 
both by Jahangir and Shah Jahan who utilised their services a good 
deal. With the advent of Aurangzlb even this stopped and the style 
was nipped at the roots. When the indigenous source dried up the 
style disintegrated with phenomenal rapidity. 

The productions of Aurangzlb’s reign are few and are of a de¬ 
cidedly inferior quality. Two mosques, erected during his reign, 
deserve brief mention. The first is the Moti Mas j id within the 
Delhi fort, put up in order to enable the emperor at various times 
of the day and night to pay his devotions without the trouble of a 
retinue or long journey. It is a small but graceful structure in mar¬ 
ble of the most polished kind. The curved eave over the central 


800 


MUGHUL ARCHITECTURE 


archway of the sanctuary is noteworthy, and curves seem to predo¬ 
minate also in the rounded contours of the domes. At the same 
time it has a restrained beauty, and being erected towards the early 
part of Aurangzib’s reign it appears to reflect, to a certain extent, 
the flavour of Shah Jahan’s buildings. The Jami‘ or Badsh&hl mos¬ 
que at Lahore, built in 1674 by Aurangzib’s Master of Ordnance, 
Fidai Khan Kuka, is a more vigorous composition and has an im¬ 
posing appearance in spite of the partial collapse of a few of its 
eight minarets which constituted the chief feature of its design. 
Though not comparable to the Jami‘ Masjid at Delhi, either in scale 
or in effect, the broad quadrangle of the Lahore mosque with the 
arcaded facade of the sanctuary in red sandstone crowned by three 
white marble domes has a certain dignity. These two mosques re¬ 
tain some semblance of the former achievements, perhaps because 
of sacred and orthodox character. At the same time there are 
symptoms of the approaching decline. The spirit of the style seems 
to have evaporated. 

The tomb of Aurangzib’s queen Rabi‘a-ud-DauranI at Auran¬ 
gabad illustrates in a pathetic manner the rapid deterioration of the 
Mughul architectural style. Erected in 1679 it is a frank imitation 
of the Taj Mahal at Agra, though on a much smaller scale. The 
difference between this tomb, known as the Deccani Taj Mahal, 
and Shah Jahan’s masterpiece is striking in view of so short -an in¬ 
terval that separated the two monuments, and shows in an effective 
manner the rapid decay and impoverishment of the style. Like the 
Taj Mahal at Agra we have in this tomb a domed structure in the 
centre raised on a terraced platform with four minarets at the four 
comers, all laid within a formal garden. The lay-out of the garden 
is also practically the same. The composition lacks, however, the 
subtle and satisfying proportions of the prototype, and the weak folia¬ 
tions of the arches and meaningless ornaments strewn all over the 
surface of the monument lend it almost an insipid appearance. Com¬ 
pared to the Taj Mahal, the tomb of Rabi‘a-ud-DauranI is a very 
mediocre production which, as Fergusson says, “narrowly escapes 
vulgarity and bad taste”. 35 

With the death of Aurangzib in 1707 the grand empire vanish- 
ed under a maze of fratricidal struggles, ignominious internal intri¬ 
gues and intrepid foreign aggressions. With it collapsed also the 
splendid pageant of the Mughul court. The life and spirit of the 
Mughul architectural style had already gone and the outer shell also 
collapsed. The tomb of Safdar Jang at Delhi, erected about 1754, 
is the final effort to recall the old spirit of the style; but in this it 

801 


M.E.—51 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


fails miserably. There was no hope of recovery even of the old 
glamour, and the architectural style, associated with the name of 
the grand Mughuls became extinct long before the last of the 
dynasty was pushed out of his titular sovereignty. 


1. Extract in CHI. IV. 524. 

2. Memoirs, II. 533. 

3. ibid., p. 384. 

4. Elliot, V. 124-26. 

5. CHI. IV. 525. 

6. Elliot, V. 108-09; CHI. IV. 531. 

7. Percy Brown, Indian Architecture (Islamic), p. 91. 

8. Ibid., p. 93. 

9. CHI. IV. 530. 

10. Percy Brown, Indian Architecture (Islamic), p. 97. 

11. HIE A. H. 175. 

12. Ain. I. 

13. CHI. IV. 535-36. 

14. Ibid., p. 536. 

15. Percy Brown, Indian Architecture (Islamic), p. 100. 

16. CHI. IV. 537. 

17. Ibid., pp. 537-38. 

18. Memoirs, I. 2. 

19. HIE A. II. 294. 

20. Percy Brown, Indian Architecture (Islamic), p. 105. 

21. HIE A. II. 294. 

22. CHI. IV. 549-50. 

23. Ibid, p 553. 

24. Badshah-nama, I. 221. 

25. HIE A. II. 317. 

26. Ibid. p. 311. 

27. Percy Brown, Indian Architecture (Islamic), p. 112. 

28 Ibid. p. 112. 

29. Extract from Asar-us-Sanadid of Sayyid Ahmad in CHI. IV. 557. 

30. CHI. IV. 559. 

31. Journal of Indian Art, 1885, p. 61. 

32. Percy Brown, Indian Architecture (Islamic), p. 116. 

33. The author’s estimate of the artistic excellence of Shah Jahan’s buildings—in 
particular Taj Mahal—as expressed in this para, and also elsewhere in this 
chapter, is not likely to meet with the general approval, even of scholars, not 
to speak of readers in general. It may be argued, for example, that final judg¬ 
ment on fine arts, including architecture, must give due consideration to technical 
excellence and/or propriety, as well as to the extent to which it kindles the sense 
of beauty inherent in human beings of all ages and climes. Judged by this 
test the Taj Mahal perhaps ranks much higher than any other building of any 
age or country. (Editor). 

34 HTEA. II. 321. 

35. Ibid. p. 322. 


802 


CHAPTER XXIV 


MUGHUL PAINTING 

I. Pre-Mughul Period 

The Mughul school of painting represents one of the most 
significant phases of Indian art. Though miniature paintings in 
the form of manuscript illustrations were much in vogue in eastern 
and western India long before Babur won the battle of Panipat, 
the numerous miniatures illustrating historical events, literary pas¬ 
sages, court scenes, portrait studies, natural history drawings, genre 
scenes, etc., painted during the reigns of the Imperial Mughuls un¬ 
fold a completely new concept in Indian art. In their ideas and 
execution the Mughul miniatures show something never seen be¬ 
fore in India, and their lasting effect reverberated throughout the 
Deccan, Rajasthan, the Punjab Hills and northern India long after 
the ‘Grand Mughuls’ vanished. 

Not a single miniature or illustrated manuscript has so far been 
identified as definitely emanating from the Sultanate court of Delhi, 
though references to wall-paintings and painters are found in con¬ 
temporary literary works of Amir Khusrav Dihlavl, Shams-i- 
Shiraj ‘Afif, Maulana Da’ud, etc. It appears that the art of minia¬ 
ture painting or manuscript illustration did not get any patronage 
from the Sultans of Delhi, though many of them built up large 
libraries and madrasas, which must have contained illustrated 
manuscripts prepared in ‘Iraq and Persia. 

The situation was very different in some of the provincial 
Sultanates—especially in Malwa, Gujarat, and Jaunpur, where 
manuscripts were prepared and illustrated. Mandu, Ahmadabad 
and Jaunpur were important centres of trade and commerce inha¬ 
bited by communities of prosperous and influential Jain merchants. 
The Jains consider the gift of sacred books to their preceptors a 
pious act; the books were in turn deposited with jnanabhandaras 
attached to the Jain places of worship. Some of the old and flou¬ 
rishing jnanabhandaras in Rajasthan, Saurashtra and Gujarat have 
yielded, in recent times, a large number of dated or datable manu¬ 
scripts containing numerous miniatures. Some of these illustrated 
manuscripts help us to trace precisely the evolution of the art of 
miniature painting in the 15th and 16th centuries. 


803 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


With the replacement of inconveniently narrow and brittle palm- 
leaf by hand-made paper during the 13th century revolutionary 
changes took place in the field of Gujarati manuscript painting. 
The painter found more freedom in his choice of colours and more 
working space at his disposal; and the miniatures began to show 
signs of improvement in colouring, composition, delineation and 
decorative details. At the outset the change was slow and hesitant, 
as evidenced in the illustrations of a late 14th century combined 
Kalpasutra-KdlakdchcLrya-Katha MS. in the collection of the Prince 
of Wales Museum, Bombay, and another MS. of the same subject 
dated 1414 A.D. in the collection of P.C. Jain, Bombay. Similar 
changes are noticed in the Supdsandhachariyam MS. dated 1413 
A.D., written at Delvada in Mewar, in the collection of Hema- 
chandnacharya Jnanamandir, Patan, and a Kalpasutra MS. of c. 1425 
A.D., written at Mandu, in the collection of Atmananda Jndna- 
bhanddra, Baroda. These changes led to their logical culmination 
in the style of painting evidenced in the beautifully drawn illustra¬ 
tions of a Kalpasutra MS. dated 1439 A.D., written at Mandu, now 
in the National Museum, Delhi. Another MS. of the Kdlakdchdrya~ 
Kathd , now in the Muni Punyavijayji Collection, Ahmadabad, pro¬ 
bably came from the same centre and bearing a similar date. The new 
development became even more evident in the illustrations of a 
golden lettered Kalpasutra MS. written in 1465 A.D. at Jaunpur, 
now in the Narasimhajina Polna Jndnabhanddra at Baroda. The 
miniatures and border decorations of the well-known Kalpasutra 
MS. in the Devasano Pado Bhandar, Ahmadabad, written in c. 1475 
A.D. at Ahmadabad, show daring experimentation by introducing 
decorative motifs and figural details directly lifted from Persian 
paintings. In dress, textile decoration, landscape and architectural 
details, in the depiction of elliptoid foliage, Chinese-type floating 
clouds, arabesques and ornamental decorations, in the use of colours, 
and finally, in the representation of ‘Shahi’ type kings and foreign 
soldiers with Mongoloid face, small eyes, pointed beards, drooping 
moustache and sandal-paste coloured body, an over-whelming im¬ 
pact of Persian paintings of Turkoman and other schools become 
frankly apparent. The illustrated scroll of the Vasartta Vilasa , 
written in 1451 A.D. at Ahmadabad, though not a Jain hieratic 
work, may also be included in this category. Thus within the span 
of a few decades the rigid and orthodox style of the Jain painters 
was replaced by a more flexible, naturalistic and lively style. 

The provincial Sultanates of Mandu, Jaunpur and Ahmadabad 
could not keep themselves aloof from this current of change. 
Examples which could be firmly dated and placed at Ahmadabad 
are not yet available, but Mandu shows the way with no less than 


804 


MUGHUL PAINTING 


four remarkable MSS. The most interesting and important MS. 
painted at Mandu, the Ni’matndma (colour plate 1), a treatise on 
the art of cooking, is unfortunately undated. Its colophon, how¬ 
ever, bears the name of Sultan Nasir-uddln Khalji, son of Ghiyas- 
ud-dln Khalji, and many of the miniatures illustrate the portraits 
of the former. Though Mlandu was the centre of considerable art 
activity in the field of Jain miniature painting, the illustrations of 
the NVmatndma give evidences of a developed and sophisticated 
tradition revealing close affinity with contemporary Persian paint¬ 
ings. The colour scheme is bright and lively, the foliage rich and 
fresh, and the human figures naturalistic and beautiful. The gay 
abandon of the Mandu court is amply reflected in the miniatures of 
this MS. A similar trend is noticeable in another MS, the Miftdh 
u’l-Fuzala, a dictionary of rare words, produced at Mandu. An al¬ 
together different trend, which could hardly be differentiated from 
contemporary Persian style, is noticed in the illustrations of a 
Bustdn MS., painted at Mandu in 1502 A.D. by one Haji Mahmud. 
The style is so different from the style of Ni’matndma and the 
Miftdh-u’l-Fuzald illustrations that it becomes difficult to reconcile 
it with the fact that these were all painted at Mtajndu for the same 
patron. Simon Digby mentions the title of another MS., the ‘Aj d’ih- 
u’s-San‘afi, painted at Mandu in 1508 A.D., examined by Abdulla 
Chughtai but never seen again. An Anwdr-i-Suhaili MS., recently 
acquired by the National Museum, Delhi, may also be included in 
this group. The miniatures of this MS. are however of inferior 
quality differing widely from the style of the Ni’matndma. 

Jaunpur became a flourishing literary centre where art, archi¬ 
tecture and music were encouraged with equal passion by the Sharqi 
rulers. The city came to be known as ‘Dar-ul-Aman’, the Place of 
Refuge, where Qutban wrote his AvadhI romance Mirgdvat during 
the reign of Husain Shah Sharqi (1458-1479). Some of the groups 
of MSS. discovered in recent years, namely, the Hamzandma at 
Tubingen State Library, the Khamsa-i-Amir Khusran, the Sikan- 
darndma-yi-Bahri in an American private collection, the Shdhndma 
in Bharat Kala Bhavan, Bananas, a Persian Mathnavi in the N. C. 
Mehta collection, now in Ahmadabad Culture Centre, another 
Sikandarndma whose present whereabout is not known, may have 
come from the Agra-Delhi-Jaunpur region, though no corroborative 
evidence has yet been discovered to prove this. 

Ahmadabad also became a prosperous centre of prolific literary 
and architectural activities, where many Jain MSS. and such secular 
works as the Vasanta Vildsa were prepared. But so far we have 
come across only one Islamic MS.—an Anwdr-i-SuhaiU of a much 


805 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


later date (1603 A.D.), which bears a colophon mentioning the 
name of Ahmadabad. 


II. Period of Transition 

The changes noticed in the above groups of illustrated MSS. 
Jain and Islamic—gradually crystallized into new artistic conven¬ 
tions, and a new style of painting emerged in the succeeding de¬ 
cades. This is borne out by a group of MSS. containing miniatures 
painted in a suave and refined style with a rich and lively colour 
scheme and a wide repertoire of motifs and designs. This parti¬ 
cular group is commonly designated as the Laur Chandd-Chaura- 
panchdsikd group, and includes MSS. and isolated folios of a large 
variety, namely, a MS. of the Ar any aka Parvan of the Mahdbhdrata 
in the collection of the Asiatic Society, Bombay; the MSS. of Laur 
Chanda in the Prince of Wales Museum, Bombay, and the John 
Rhylands Library, Manchester; some dispersed folios of another 
Laur Chanda MS. in the Lahore and Chandigarh Museums; the 
miniatures of a Chaura-panchdsika MS. in the N. C. Mehta Collec¬ 
tion, now deposited with the Culture Centre, Ahmadabad; the Gita 
Govinda fragment in the Prince of Wales Museum, Bombay; the 
dispersed folios of a Bhdgavata Purdna in various Indian and foreign 
collections; the Rdgamdld folios in the collection of Vijayendra Suri; 
some folios of a Mirgdvat MS. in the Bharat Kala Bhavan, and a 
Mahdpumna MS. in the &ri Digambara Jaina Atisaya Kshetra, 
Jaipur. Only two of these, namely the Ar any aka Parvan and the 
Mahdpumna , have dated colophons with names of painters and 
places of execution. The former was painted in 1516 A.D. at a 
place near Agra, and the latter in 1540 A.D. at Palam near Delhi. 
These dates help us to place the entire group and a majority of the 
miniatures in the northern belt in the first half of the sixteenth 
century, though with obvious reservations. 

The illustrations in these MSS. are of uneven quality and exhi¬ 
bit features which are exclusive to some MSS., but totally absent 
in most others. The illustrations of the Laur Chanda MSS. in the 
Prince of Wales Museum and the John Rhylands Library are of a 
high standard with marks of refinement lacking in other MSS. 
Miniatures of the Prince of Wales Museum, Gita Govinda, the dis¬ 
persed folios of the Bhdgavata Purdna , the Lahore and Chandigarh 
Museum Laur Chanda, the Ar any aka Parvan of 1516 A.D. and the 
Chaura-panchdsika show signs of a common style which, though 
not as refined as that of the Bombay and Manchester Laur Chanda 
MSS., is of a reasonably good quality. As with the case of the 
Aranyaka Parvan the MSS. of this group appear to be prepared for 
the bourgeoisie and not for any royal patron. 


806 


MUGHUL PAINTING 


The Mahapurdna MS., painted near Delhi, is of great interest 
as it was prepared in 1540 A.D., that is during the early years of 
the Mughul period. Its miniatures belong to a style continuing 
the late fifteenth century Jain tradition, but at the same time re¬ 
veal connection with the school of paintings whose earliest example 
is provided by the Aranyaka Parvan of 1516 A.D. There is, how¬ 
ever, a great problem in dating the other MSS. of this group be¬ 
cause some of them do not depict the typical five-pointed jdma 
(chakdar jdma) so conspicuous in the Hamzanama and other early 
Akbari MSS. So far not a single dated pre-Akbari MS. has been 
discovered where this particular jdma has been shown. This has 
led a group of scholars to believe that the miniatures of the Laur 
Chandd-Chaura-panchdsikd group prominently featuring this jdma 
may belong to the early Akbar period. This does not appear to be 
convincing because these miniatures are closely linked with the style 
of painting started with the Aranyaka Parvan MS. of 1516 A.D. in 
all other respects. The whole group probably belongs to the nor¬ 
thern belt extending from Delhi to Jaunpur. 

The miniatures discussed above generally have a red, and in 
some examples blue, green or yellow background, a simple com¬ 
position featuring females with narrow waist, heavy breasts, pointed 
nose, large eyes and squarish face, and a minimum of architectural 
or landscape details with occasional conventionalised trees, foliated 
rocks and strips of blue sky. In many examples the prevailing 
mood is that of a gay abandon not to be met with in the hieratic 
productions of the late 15th century. Their movement is free and 
unsophisticated. The basic theme of these works is varied and free 
from established conventions. Such popular subjects as Krishna 
legend, Rdgamdld, or popular tales as Laur Chanda, Chaura-pan- 
chdsika, Mirgdvat, etc. opened up new avenues of ideas to the artist. 
These miniatures contributed largely to the origin and evolution of 
the Rajasthani styles of painting, though it has not been possible 
yet to assess their precise contribution to the origin and growth of 
Mughul painting. 

III. Early Mughul Painting 

The foundation of Mughul painting was laid by Humayun dur¬ 
ing the years of his exile in Persia and Afghanistan. It was mainly 
due to the coincidence of the Shah of Persia Shah Tahmasp’s in¬ 
creasing disinterest in the arts for religious bigotry, and Humayun’s 
unexpected presence in Persia that the services of two of Persia’s 
greatest masters, Mir Sayyid ‘All and ‘Abdus-Samad, could be secur¬ 
ed by the Mughul emperor. They started to work at the temporary 


807 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Mughul capital at Kabul where young Akbar was also enlisted to 
have lessons in painting from them. A few of ‘Abdus-Samad’s 
works executed during this period are to be found in the Gulshan 
album compiled by Jahangir, now preserved in the Gulistan Palace 
Library, Tehran. Further details about the activities of the Kabul 
atelier cannot be traced as these have not been recorded in con¬ 
temporary chronicles. 

Both the masters followed Humayun to Delhi when he was able 
to recover the lost throne of Hindustan and continued to work after 
organising a flourishing art establishment for Akbar. A large 
number of talented painters were recruited from various parts of 
the country for working in it, and within a short time it became 
celebrated for its fine and sophisticated productions. 

The most important work produced in the Mughul studio in 
the first few years of its existence is the unusual manuscript DastS-n- 
i-Arrfir Hamza, better known as the Hamzanama. The completed 
work consisted of nearly 1200 paintings drawn in bold and vivid 
colours on linen pasted on one side of the unusually large-sized 
folios, twenty-seven inches by twenty ( colour plate 2). Unfor¬ 
tunately, only a small fragment of the work has survived, and that 
too is widely distributed among various collections in Europe and 
America, with only three or four folios and a few detached frag¬ 
ments in Indian collections. The bulk of the surviving folios are 
to be found in the Museum of Industrial Art, Vienna, the Victoria 
and Albert Museum and the British Museum, London. Akbar was 
extremely fond of these semi-mythological fantasies dealing with 
the exploits of the Prophet’s uncle, Amir Hamza, and kept the 
gigantic illustrated volumes handy in the zanana. None of the 
folios, so far found, is signed or bears any contemporary attribution 
to any artist, and the colophon of the MS>. has never been found, 
rendering the task of fitting this important work into a secure chro¬ 
nological sequence extremely difficult. The Hamzanama is men¬ 
tioned by Abu-’l-Fazl, Badauni and Shahnawaz Khan, but there is 
considerable discrepancy between their accounts regarding its 
authorship, antiquity and even the exact number of its folios. 
Badauni and Shahnawaz Khan mention that the work of preparing 
the illustrations was initiated at Akbar’s instance and took fifteen 
years and the toils of fifty ‘Bihzad-like painters’ under the super¬ 
vision of Mir Sayyid ‘All, and subsequently of ‘Abdus-Samad. An¬ 
other author, Mulla ‘Ala J ud-Daula QazvinI, refers in his Nafais-ul- 
Ma'asir to the Hamzanama as a brain-child of Humayun who ap¬ 
pointed Mir Sayyid ‘All to supervise its completion with scrupulous 
care. Though many earlier scholars subscribed to this view, it does 


808 


MUGHUL PAINTING 


not seem to be plausible to create such a style of art as reflected 
in the paintings of the Hamzandma outside India or in the unstable 
political conditions in which Humayun had to live during the years 
of his exile. The work was probably completed by 1575-76 A.D. 
The complicated compositions, consisting of architectural details, 
interiors of palaces, forts or pavilions, and armies of attendants, 
heroes or women in vivid and violent action show a remarkable 
grasp on treatment and technique. The colour scheme is invari¬ 
ably very bright with splashes of red, blue, yellow, green, etc. 
Exotic plants with colourful flowers and foliages and minute details 
of architectural decorations and furniture, etc. characterise the paint¬ 
ings of the Hamzandma. 

The miniatures of an ‘Ashiqa manuscript dated 1568 A.D., an 
Anwdr-i-Suhaill manuscript dated 1570 A.D., and an undated manus¬ 
cript of Tildsm and Zodiac have closely similar appearance. Some 
miniatures of the Anwdr-i-Suhaili manuscript of the School of 
Oriental and African Studies, London, follow the Persian tradition 
more faithfully than the rest which have close affinity with the Indian 
realism where the trees, flowers, birds, and animals are represented 
in a highly naturalistic manner ( colour plate 3). The animal stu¬ 
dies in the miniatures of this manuscript are particularly striking 
for their realistic appearances. They are more lively and self-pos¬ 
sessed than the conventional mask-like animals found in Persian 
painting. The trees and flowers depicted in these miniatures are 
mostly Indian, though the composition of rocks and hills and forms 
of cloud follow the Persian tradition. The numerous illustrations 
of the Tutindma of the Cleveland Museum of Art probably belong 
to the next decade when the painting atelier underwent consider¬ 
able structural change. 

With Akbar’s increasing interest in religion and his insatiable 
desire to go into the depth of various religions—Hinduism, Zoroas¬ 
trianism, Jainism, Christianity and Judaism—the extent and scope 
of his library was enlarged. He wanted the basic religious texts of 
other religions—especially of Hinduism—translated into Persian so 
that he himself, members of the royal family and his officers might 
have first-hand knowledge about these works, and ordered for the 
preparation of sumptuous manuscripts of these translations filled 
with appropriate illustrations. Abu-’l-Fazl gives a list of important 
works including books on history, biography, Persian classics, 
poetry, theology, etc. specially written for the emperor by leading 
calligraphers and illustrated by the painters of the imperial atelier. 
Besides the two Persian pioneers, a large number of Indian painters 
were employed in the studio and placed under them, many of whom 


809 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


in course of time became celebrated masters. Abu-’l-Fazl mentions 
the names of fifteen painters. Das want, Basawan, Kesav, La‘l, 
Mukund, Mishkin, Farrukh the Qalmaq, Madhu, Jagan, Mahes, Khem 
Karan, Tara, Sanwala, Haribans and Ram, who became outstand¬ 
ing masters of art amongst more than a hundred painters most of 
whom were Hindus. They were recruited from various centres— 
Gwalior, Gujarat', Lahore, Kashmir, and also probably from Malwa, 
Rajasthan, and western and eastern Uttar Pradesh. Akbar took a 
keen personal interest in the works of his artists, examined their 
weekly output, assessed their merit and rewarded the painters ac¬ 
cordingly. All types of artists’ materials and costly ingredients 
were made readily available to the painters, and the paintings 
dazzled in rich gloss and warm colours. Abu-’l-Fazl narrates in his 
chronicle how Akbar was personally impressed by the works of an 
humble painter named Daswant, the son of a Kahdr or Palki-bearer, 
who was helped to become ‘the first master of the age’, whose works 
‘did not trail behind those of Bihziad and the painters of China’. 

The only manuscript in which paintings drawn by this cele¬ 
brated painter is to be found is the Razmndma , now preserved in the 
Maharaja Sawai Man Singh II Museum, Jaipur. The manuscript 
was in course of preparation when Daswant became mentally un¬ 
balanced and committed suicide in 1584. ‘Abdus-Samad’s courtier- 
son, Muhammad Sharif, supervised its illustration, and Daswant drew 
the preliminary outlines of as many as twenty-nine miniatures, all of 
which were however completed by a second painter. Besides those 
mentioned above, all other painters mentioned by Abu-’l-Fazl, with 
the exception of Farrukh the Qalmaq, participated in illustrating this 
important manuscript. The MS. constitutes a landmark in the history 
of Mughul painting as it was the precursor of a series of well-written 
MSS. with a large number of well-chosen miniatures for the per¬ 
sonal use of the emperor. Many hands were employed to illustrate 
this MS. and as many as three painters collaborated to produce some 
of the finest and fairest examples of Akbari painting. Besides 
Daswant, Basawan, La‘l, Tulsi and Mishkin were responsible for 
painting some excellent compositions. Basawan was the most out¬ 
standing painter amongst them who excelled in all the branches of 
painting—drawing of outline, application of colour, portrait and land¬ 
scape painting, etc. In a monochrome sketch in the Indian Museum, 
Calcutta, showing Majnun in the wilderness with an emaciated horse, 
Basawan (plate 57) can be seen at his best. 

After the Razmndma a large number of illustrated manuscripts 
were prepared in the imperial atelier which include the Rdmayana 
completed in November, 1588, also preserved in the same Museum; the 


810 


MUGHUL PAINTING 


Diwdn of Anwari dated 1588, in the Fogg Museum of Art, Cambridge, 
Mass., U.S.A.; the Tdrikh-i-Khdnddn-i-Ttmuryya in the Khudabux 
Oriental Library, Patna; the Akbar-ndma, the bulk of whose minia¬ 
tures is in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London; the BdhdriStdn 
written in 1594-95, in the Bodleian Library, Oxford; the Khamsa of 
Nizami dated 1595-96 divided between the Walters Gallery, Baltimore 
and the British Museum; the Anwdr-i-SuhdiU prepared in 1595-96 in 
the Bharat Kala Bhavan, Banaras; the Bdburndma prepared in 1595- 
96 in the National Museum, Delhi; the Jdmi'ut-Twdrikh dated 1596, 
in the Persian Imperial Library at Tehran; a Khamsa of Amir 
Khusrav Dihlavi; the Diwans of Hafiz and Shahl; and a sumptuous 
copy of the Tdrikh-i-'Alfi which was commissioned in 1594 but left 
unfinished, etc. The miniatures included in these manuscripts con¬ 
stitute numerous excellent examples of miniature painting prepared 
in the Mughul studio. In respect of compositional unity and distri¬ 
bution of space and colour they reveal a masterly command over 
technique and a mature and lively interest in man and nature. The 
paintings also reveal a superb blending of heterogeneous Persian, 
Pre-Mughul Islamic and indigenous, Deccanese and European 
artistic elements into a concerted and well-blended style which be¬ 
came typical of the developed Akbari idiom. The colour-tones be¬ 
came more subdued, lines more sure and subtle, expression more 
lively and composition well-knit. The painters succeeded in a bril¬ 
liant way in expressing the ideals of amity and synthesis preached 
by their imperial patron. The Dtwdn-i-Hdfiz manuscript in the col¬ 
lection of the Raza Library, Rampur, contains some delicate minia¬ 
tures finished by individual masters including a very fine one by 
Farrukh Beg ( plate 59). 

Some of the finest paintings of the last decade of the 16th cen¬ 
tury are to be found in the Akbar-ndma fragment in the Victoria and 
Albert Museum, London. Though the paintings continue the same 
tradition of miniature painting apparent in the manuscripts of Timur- 
ndma, Jdmi'ut-Twdrikh, Tdrikh~i-‘Alfi, etc., they reveal a sense of 
realism and authenticity, witnessed or experienced by the painters 
themselves, which is missing in those works. The portraits are 
lifelike, the architectural details contemporary and the flora, fauna 
and landscape in most examples authentic. In one miniature gra¬ 
phic details of the celebration of the much-awaited birth of an off¬ 
spring to emperor Akbar ( colour plate 4) have been painted with 
a suave charm and lively naturalism which was unknown in early 
Akbari paintings. 

Along with the uncertain political condition emanating from 
Prince Salim’s rebellion and the untimely deaths of Princes Murad 


811 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


and Daniylal, signs of slackness in the rate and quality of artistic 
production of the Akbari atelier became apparent. The number of 
manuscripts came down and the number of miniatures 
also decreased considerably. Amongst the manuscripts pro¬ 
duced durirtg the last seven years of Akbar’s reign, mention may 
be made of the Bdbur-nama manuscripts in the British Museum and 
in the Museum of Eastern Cultures, Moscow; the Jog Bdshisht dated 
1602 in the Chester Beatty Library, Dublin; the Nafahat-al-TJns 
dated 1603 in the British Museum; another Akbar-nama manuscript 
dated 1603-4 distributed between the British Museum and the 
Chester Beatty Library; and the Iyar-i-Ddnish dated 1604-5 divided 
between the Chester Beatty Library and the Cowasji Jehangir Col¬ 
lection, Bombay. Most of the miniatures included in these manus¬ 
cripts are neatly drawn with a simple composition and sombre 
colour scheme and executed by single painters. Works of the 
masters mentioned in Abu-’l-Fazl’s list become scarce while a new 
group of painters who worked as assistants in the earlier years pre¬ 
dominate. 


IV. Newi Tradition under Jahangir 

Another important development took place during these years 
which led to a rapid change in the style of Mughul painting. Prince 
Salim started a new studio under an emigre Harati painter named 
Aqa Riza which worked in full swing at Agra and during the years 
of Salim’s rebellion at Allahabad, and brought about a ‘minor artistic 
revolution’. We know of at least two interesting manuscripts—the 
Rajkunwfrr dated 1602 in the Chester Beatty Library ( colour plate 
5) and the collection of Ghazls and Rubd‘is of Amir Nazm-ud-DIn 
Hasan Dihlavl dated 1602 in the Walters Gallery, Baltimore, which 
were produced at Allahabad. The pocket size Diwdn of Hafiz divid¬ 
ed between the Chester Beatty Library and the British Museum, the 
Anw\ar-i-Suhaili containing works of Aqa Riza, Anafnt, Abu’l Hasan, 
Bishndas, etc. in the British Museum were certainly taken in hand 
during the same period, though completed at a later date after Salim 
ascended the Mughul throne as Jahangir in 1605. The paintings of 
these manuscripts with the exception of a few examples in the 
Diwdn-i-Hdfiz, show a certain simplicity and rustic charm which is 
rare in the refined and sophisticated productions of the Akbari atelier. 
The colour-tones are generally very subdued and the composition 
rather simple ( colour plate 5). Besides these manuscripts sump¬ 
tuous muraqqa's or albums were compiled by his painters in which 
the collection of Persian masterpieces by Bihzad, etc., European en¬ 
gravings and early Akbari productions, along with calligraphic 
panels written by Mir ‘All, Sultan ‘All, etc., were used as centre- 


812 



MUGHUL PAINTING 


pieces, while the margins of the folios were embellished with floral 
designs, landscape patterns and miniature pictures of everyday 
scenes and important personalities. 

The trend started in his princely days was vigorously pursued 
by Jahangir and Mughul painting reached its logical culmination in 
the course of his reign. He helped it to be free from its bond with 
the text of manuscripts as it was his desire to have a small group of 
master painters, each highly specialised in one or more branches of 
the art, who could prepare pictures of persons or groups or themes 
selected by him and pulsating with life. 

At the outset he instructed his painters to bring out some in¬ 
teresting manuscripts from the imperial library for adding new mini¬ 
atures. Later on he became interested in portraits and had a large 
number of portraits of the members of the royal family, dignitaries 
of the court, important persons in the fields of religion, literature, 
music, art, etc. He even sent his leading portraitist, Bishndas, to 
Iran with his envoy Shiah ‘Alam for a set of lifelike portraits of the 
Shah, his nobles and family members. Portrait painting was prac¬ 
tised in Akbar’s time also. Akbar himself ‘sat’ for the preparation 
of his own portraits and instructed his painters to prepare album- 
full of portraits of the members of the royal family and the leading 
grandees of the realm. These portraits are in most cases full-length 
standing representations with the face in either profile or three- 
quarter profile against a monochrome background. In some exam¬ 
ples preserved in the Jahanglri albums the names of the persons are 
noted by the emperor himself, and in some cases he even mentions 
the names of the painters and the year of execution. Though at the 
outset Manohar, Nanha (plate 61) and Farrukh Beg were entrusted 
to paint these portraits, later on Manohar, Abu-’l-Hasan and Bishndas 
prepared most of the individual and group portraits. These minutely 
drawn portrait-studies were widely copied at later times and in¬ 
troduced the fashion of having albums of portraits of important 
officials and generals during the time of Shah Jahan and Aurangzlb. 

Jahangir was keen to preserve a faithful account of his activi¬ 
ties and important events in the form of a memoir and commanded 
his painters to prepare pictorial records of important festivals, 
assemblies, as well as of unusual interesting birds, animals or 
flowers seen and appreciated by him. Many delightful paintings 
depicting Jahangir’s coronation and assemblies held during such 
festivals as holi, ab-pashi (plate 63), birthday weighing, etc. and meti¬ 
culously delineating the emperor’s hunting expeditions, formal recep¬ 
tions and travels, are preserved in Indian and foreign collections. 
Parts of his original memoir written in his own handwriting have 


813 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


been acquired by the National Museum, Delhi, and a fragment con¬ 
taining some exquisite illustrations like Khusrau’s trial, scenes of 
Jahangir’s journey to Kabul, festival of db-pdshi, etc. is preserved in 
the Rampur Raza Library. In an example in the Indian Museum, 
Calcutta, Jahangir is shown as exhibiting his hunting skill to the 
Rajput prince Karan (plate 62) when he fired at the right eye of a 
lioness exactly as indicated by the latter. 

During the later part of his reign Jahangir became addicted to 
wine and opium to such an extent that the control of the imperial 
authority was usurped by his all-powerful wife, Nur Jahan, and son 
Khurram. Some superb miniatures were painted by the Jahanglri 
painters like Abu-’l-Hasan, Bichitr, Hashim, etc. in which the em¬ 
peror was given grossly exaggerated importance in a symbolic way 
as if to make up the loss of his political stature. In some examples 
in the Freer Gallery of Art, Washington D.C. and Chester Beatty 
Library, Dublin, he is shown as receiving and embracing Shah ‘Abbas 
of Iran, whom in reality he never met, or presiding over an imagin¬ 
ary assembly of holy men and emperors of distant lands or shooting 
at the severed head of his arch-enemy Malik ‘Ambar, whom he could 
in fact never subdue. This feature of presenting the patron-emperor 
as an all-powerful entity pampered by the gods, respected by the 
kings and loved and feared by the subjects, was a new feature in 
the development of Mughul painting. Slowly the earlier tradition 
of preparation of illustrations for manuscripts was discarded in fa¬ 
vour of muraqqa‘s or albums of single miniatures, portraits, natural 
history studies, drawings and copies of European engravings. 

Amongst the host of painters working under Jahangir, Farrukh 
Beg, Daulat, Manohar, Bishndas, Mansur and Abu-’l-Hasan secured 
their places in the history of Mughul painting by virtue of their art¬ 
istic genius. Farrukh Beg entered into the Akbari atelier during its 
heyday but maintained his individualistic style which was never sub¬ 
merged in the millieu of its syncretistic atmosphere (plate 59). He 
continued to work for some years in the Jahangir studio and pre¬ 
pared some wonderful studies of old poets, dervishes and a superb 
study of the Bijapurl Sultan Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah. Daulat, Manohar, 
Bishndas and Mansur all worked during the last few years of Akbar’s 
reign as budding masters. From a fragmentary inscription on a 
miniature of the Nafahat-al-ZJns in the British Museum we come to 
know that Daulat was a pupil of Farrukh Beg. The colour scheme 
of his works has a freshness which is rare amongst the works of his 
other contemporaries. During the first few years of Jahangir’s reign 

Daulat prepared some excellent portraits of his fellow painters_ 

Bishndas, Govardhan, Abu-’l-Hasan and a self-portrait—at the corn- 


814 


MUGHUL PAINTING 


mand of the emperor. These studies along with some portraits of 
calligraphers presented singly or with painters or assistants, on the 
margins of folios or under the colophon of manuscripts, provide us 
with interesting documents of social history. 

Manohar, son of the celebrated Akbari master Basawan and 
Bishndas, nephew of another well-known Akbari painter Nanha 
(plate 61) excelled in portrait painting. Though Manohar was 
never mentioned in the Tuzuk, there is no doubt about his com¬ 
petency and the emperor’s reliance on him for the preparation of 
some of the finest portrait-studies and assembly groups showing mul¬ 
tiple portraits of princes, nobles, officials and foreign envoys in for¬ 
mal groups. Jahangir was satisfied with the work of Bishndas when 
he returned from Persia with pictures of Shah ‘Abbas and members 
of his family and court. Some of his works surviving at Boston, 
Leningrad, etc. fully testify to the fact of his competence. 

The most important of all Jahangiri painters were Ustad Man¬ 
sur and Abu-’l-Hasan. The emperor himself speaks highly of them 
and bestowed the titles Nadir-al-‘Asr and Nadir-uz-Zaman on them 
in recognition of their merit. Ustad Mansur started his career dur¬ 
ing the last few years of Akbar’s reign as a minor painter but due 
to Jahangir’s profound personal interest he became an incompar¬ 
able expert of drawings of natural history subjects. His studies of 
rare animals, uncommon birds, unusual flowers etc. are so meticul¬ 
ous and lively that ornithologists and zoologists wonder at his sci¬ 
entific power of observation. Two signed works of this great 
master—one of a rare Siberian crane and the other of a Bengal 
florican (plate 64)—are in the Indian Museum, Calcutta, while 
some more may be found in the National Museum, Delhi, the Maha¬ 
raja Sawai Man Singh II Museum, Jaipur, and the Prince of Wales 
Museum, Bombay. Some of his universally known studies may be 
viewed in the Victoria and Albert Museum, Metropolitan Museum, 
and the Freer Gallery of Art. Abu-’l-Hasan was a far more sophis¬ 
ticated painter who was born within the Mughul household being 
a son of Aqa Riza, and grew up in the shadow of Prince Salim’s pre¬ 
sence. His earliest known work is, interestingly enough, a copy of 
Durer’s St. John drawn in his thirteenth year in 1600. Gradually 
he became a master artist and painted many important works in¬ 
cluding the iconographical paintings where he elevated his patron 
to the level of an all-powerful superhuman. He was equally pro¬ 
ficient in all branches of miniature painting, but the most interesting 
feature of his works is the colour scheme—very effective, very at¬ 
tractive and colourful. The extraordinary painting of a chanar tree 
with hosts of squirrels in every conceivable position in the collection 


815 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


of the India Office Library, London (plate 65) is generally attribut¬ 
ed to Abu-’l-Hasan, but if any reliance is placed on the late attribu¬ 
tions mentioned at the back of the picture, it is likely to be a joint 
work of Mansur and Abu-’l-Hasan. 

Mention should be made here about the impact of European art 
on the development of Mughul painting. Though there were some 
contacts with European traders and missionaries before, the first real 
contact with Europe was established through the first Jesuit mission 
of 1580, which came to Fathpur SikrI from Goa on special invitation 
from Akbar. Along with other things the Jesuit fathers presented 
European prints and engravings of Christian subject-matter which 
were appreciated and received with much enthusiasm by the Mughuls, 
especially Prince Salim. By virtue of their novelty and superior 
technical quality these European art objects made the Mughul pain¬ 
ters realise their own shortcomings and within a short time we 
notice quite a few of them drawing inspirations from these. At the 
outset the Akbari masters copied out designs and details from Euro¬ 
pean engravings and applied typical Mughul colours—red, blue, 
yellow, green, magenta, etc. on them. The result was a curious ad¬ 
mixture of oriental taste and occidental technique, which can be 
seen from a remarkable work in the Bodleian Library, Oxford, by 
Kesavdas (plate 58). Similar studies made by such leading Akbari 
masters as Basawan, Sanwala aind Mishkin testify to their serious 
interest in European workmanship. The precise and sure line work 
apparent in the deep and penetrating expression in Basawan’s line 
drawing study of Majnun and the emaciated horse (plalte 57) reveal 
the extent of seriousness this great painter attached to the master- 
works of Europe pouring in the Mughul capital. 

In the next stage the Mughul painters introduced occasional 
European figures and scenes in their own works—with a consider¬ 
able improvement on the technique of shadowing, modelling and 
perspective. In order to relieve the monotony of their flat bird’s- 
eye-view perspective they started introducing replicas of European 
cityscapes and landscapes with occasional figures of European men 
and women in the distant background. These features became quite 
evident in such early works as the Jaipur Razmndma and Rdmdyana, 
TdHkh-i-Alfi, Bdhdristdn, etc. Under Jahangir the painters went 
far ahead and adopted many European religious motifs and symbols 
in their effort to evolve a new iconography. The colour scheme of 
a typical Jahangir period painting is more subdued and naturalistic, 
its perspective more accurately drawn and lines more sure and subtle 
—a lot of which is the result of technical improvement and the new 
experience of his painters. Abu-’l-Hasan used many European motifs 


816 



MUGHUL PAINTING 


and ideas in his works by drawing inspiration from these European 
materials and even colouring or copying the engravings. The most 
important painter who studied and incorporated interesting details 
from European paintings was of course the great painter Basawan. 
In sum, the total impact of European art on Mughul paintings be¬ 
came pronounced in these directions: in such technical matters as 
colour modelling, indication of depth and true perspective, in chang¬ 
ing the general attitude of both the painter and the viewer by enlarg¬ 
ing the range of subjects; and incorporating various motifs and sym¬ 
bols—mainly of religious nature like cherub, hour-glass, bird of 
paradise, angel, crown etc.—for expressing the theophanic ideas of 
Jahangir. 


V. Period of Decadence 

Mughul painting lost much of its glamour and refinement and 
reached a torpid stage within a few years after Jahangir’s death. 
Though Shah Jahuan was interested in good miniatures in his prince¬ 
ly days and maintained his preference for miniatures and illustrat¬ 
ed manuscripts (as evidenced by his autograph notes on so many of 
them) during the first few years after his accession, much of his 
enthusiasm later was reserved for architecture. Aurangzlb was so 
orthodox and averse to painting (and music) that the highly deve¬ 
loped art of miniature painting headed for a steady decline. The 
sprawling art-atelier was virtually disbanded and the painters either 
ceased to paint or chose to migrate to the courts of favourable pa¬ 
trons in other centres. 

For the first few years Shah Jahan allowed the painters to work 
in the same manner as they were doing during the last decade of 
Jahangir’s reign. The style of their works changed as Shah Jahan’s 
taste differed from that of his father. He loved however to have 
himself portrayed as a universal monarch under divine care—eulo¬ 
gised by angels who carry his crown from the Heaven or hang the 
banner for his long and victorious life. Whether standing or seated 
on the peacock throne or riding on his favourite horses he is invari¬ 
ably shown as clad in the finest attire and jewellery, and haloed. 
In the large number of court assemblies to be seen at the India 
Office Library, the Bharat Kala Bhavan, the Bodleian Library, the 
Jaipur Maharaja Sawai Man Singh II Museum, and elsewhere he is 
invariably given the most exalted position amongst the multitude 
of courtiers and officers. There is yet another category of pictures 
where he is shown in company with his father Jahangir and grand¬ 
father Akbar, all enthroned under a richly embroidered canopy, 
where Akbar is shown as handing over the crown to him. 

M.E.—52 

817 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


At the initial stage some illustrated manuscripts including a 
Bustdn in the British Museum, a Gulistdn in the Chester Beatty Lib* 
rary and a Mush-wa~Gorbeh in the Maharaja Sawai Man Singh II 
Museum, Jaipur, were prepared. Their miniatures retain the basic 
traits of Jahangir paintings and are well-finished with an attractive 
colour scheme. In many of these miniatures as well as the single 
portrait studies a noticeable peculiarity is the indication of depth 
and perspective achieved throhgh the depiction of hazy, lightly- 
coloured cityscape in the distant background. In the allegorical 
pictures of ‘Ubaid’s celebrated work Mush-war-Gorbeh the animals 
are depicted with a loving care which is so characteristic of Akbari 
and Jahangir! paintings. Here of course the colouring is very sub¬ 
dued. 

Similar formal setting fading into a cityscape background is also 
noticeable in the miniatures commonly known as ‘conversation pie¬ 
ces’. Though Jahangir was shown in company of ascetics like Gosain 
Chidrup or Mulla Mir, etc., and isolated entertainment scenes of 
poets and religious teachers occur in the Dlwidn-i-Hdfiz manuscripts 
at Rampur Raza Library ( plate 59) or the fragment of the pocket- 
sized work in the Chester Beatty Library, scenes showing assembly of 
poets or law-givers were never very popular in Jahangir’s time. 
Similar studies of poetic and religious discussions are also included 
in the album prepared by Dara Shukoh as a present to his wife. The 
latter work also contains some exquisite studies of young princes and 
beautiful maidens. Portrait painting in general was practised more 
vigorously during Shah Jahan’s reign than in his predecessor’s time, 
and formal portraits of high nobles and courtiers as well as delicate 
line-drawing portraits like that of a musician by Muhammad Nadir 
Samarqandi were painted in abundance. These remarkable works 
of art attracted the attention of celebrated painters and critics by vir¬ 
tue of their fine draftsmanship and soft feminine touch. 

Though Shah Jahan devoted his whole-hearted energy and in¬ 
terest for architectural monuments of unique delicacy and beauty, 
his art-atelier was still capable of producing the celebrated manus¬ 
cript of Shdhjahdn-ndma as late as in 1657. The pictures in this 
manuscript represent the last flicker of the great Mughul art tradi¬ 
tion. They are all conceived in a grand scale with meticulous atten¬ 
tion devoted to men and nature. The portraits are finished with lov¬ 
ing care. The well-known painting in the Indian Museum showing 
Shah Jahlan witnessing Sufi dance (plate 67) is a fine example of the 
style of this period. The famous painting of Dancing Dervishes 
with well-finished portraits of Hindu and Muslim religious teachers 
and saints of the Spencer Churchil collection, now in the Victoria 


818 


MUGHUL PAINTING 


and Albert Museum, is generally assigned to this period when Dara 
Shukoh was taking deep interest in the teachings of mystics and 
saints of all religions. 

Jahangir’s preference for assembling albums containing calli¬ 
graphic panels and pictures of all sorts was also imbibed by Shah 
Jahian. In the Shah Jahani albums portrait-studies of important offi¬ 
cials (plate 69), poets, singers, etc. along with studies of birds and 
animals made by Hunhar, Bichitr, Morar, Muhammad Nadir Samar- 
qandi, etc. were used with the calligraphic panels. The margins of 
these albums generally depict the sophisticated floral motifs and 
flowering spray motifs in brilliant colours resembling the motifs 
used in the Red Fort or the Taj Mahal. In many examples human 
figures have also been introduced amidst scrolls of floral and vegetal 
motifs. 

The production of the Shah Jahani atelier displays an extrava¬ 
gant use of richness in decorative details and colours which take 
away the lively vigour and freshness so evident in the Jahangir! 
paintings. The period of decay has already set in and Mughul paint¬ 
ing deteriorates into conventionalism and lifeless repetition of a set 
formula (plate 70). Aurangzib (cf. plate 68) hastened this process 
of decadence by his bigotry and hatred against the art of painting. 
He might have revived some interest at the end of his long rule, as 
a result of which a number of miniatures of reasonably good quality 
were prepared in which he is shown hunting, in court or at war. But 
this was not enough to keep the workshop engaged and alive. The 
centres of artistic activities have already shifted to other regions 
where interesting developments in the saga of Indian painting were 
taking place. 


VI. Regional Centres 

A detailed notice of developments in the field of Indian paint¬ 
ing as achieved in different centres of Rajasthan and Central India 
—like Mewar, Amber, Bikaner, Bundi, Malwa, etc.—need not be in¬ 
cluded here because the style and contents of the productions of 
these schools were very much different and distinctive. The im¬ 
pact of Mughul painting was undeniably tremendous as details of 
dresses and costumes, interior decorations, artistic conventions, 
colour scheme, and technique followed the Mughul pattern, but the 
art of Rajasthan belongs to a different tradition and the indebted¬ 
ness to Mughul painting did not change its basic traits and character 
in its entirety. As many of the Rajput rulers had to serve the im¬ 
perial Mughuls and spend much of their time in the Mughul capital 
they were familiar with all the developments that were taking 


819 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


place in every field of human endeavour. Rajasthani painting of 
the 16th and 17th centuries betrays a close knowledge of all these 
developments within the framework of its own traditions. 

Mention should however be made of the brief but glorious de¬ 
velopments that were taking place at the remote corners of the 
Peninsula—at Bijapur, Golconda and Ahmadnagar. The style of 
painting prepared at these Deccanese kingdoms was highly refined 
and sophisticated with a brilliant colour scheme and rich decorative 
details which differ considerably from the general style of Mughul 
painting. These paintings have a cool poetic quality which is rare¬ 
ly found in the numerous paintings prepared at the Mughul studio. 
Though there are some dated materials from which it is possible to 
trace some of the earlier productions, the achievements of the three 
centres cannot be easily differentiated for their complicated rela¬ 
tionship with each other and the consequent migration of painters 
from one place to another. The landmarks in the history of these 
Deccanese kingdoms are the battle of Talikota in 1565 jointly fought 
by them against Vijayanagara and the beginning of Mughul on¬ 
slaught in 1591. 

The earliest Deccanese paintings, discovered so far, are to be 
found in an unfinished manuscript of Tdrif-i-Husain Shahi in the 
Bharata Itihasa Sarixsodhaka Mandala, Poona. These were painted 
between 1565-1569. The remarkable palette of blue, gold, mauve, 
pink, red and yellow with tall and stately ladies clad in colourful 
saris and the happy intermingling of idea and expression make 
these paintings unique in the history of Indian art. Some extra¬ 
ordinary examples of Ragas and Raginis were prepared at Bijapur 
during the last decade of the 16th century from which the solitary 
example of Hindola Raga in the National Museum, Delhi, may 
easily be regarded as one of the finest musical paintings ever pain¬ 
ted. The other set—of which ten exquisite pieces were brought by 
Raja Anup Singh of Bikaner—reveals indebtedness to Mughul paint¬ 
ing and has been assigned a similar date. The well-known encyclo¬ 
paedic work Nujum-al-ulm dated 1570 in the Chester Beatty Library 
containing 876 illustrations of different sizes was also probably 
prepared at Bijapur. 

The enchanting and gorgeous picture of an unknown lady 
(plate 71)—sometimes identified as a yogirii and sometimes as the 
Queen of Sheba—definitely hails from Bijapur as the exotic flower¬ 
ing plants, golden sky and rich attire of the subject could not have 
been conceived in a centre of less importance. 


820 


MUGHUL PAINTING 


The enlightened rulers of Bijapur, ‘All ‘Adil Shah I and his 
successor Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah II, provided good patronage for the 
development of art and music and lent the school of Bijapur its 
poetic charm and delicacy. A series of great portrait studies were 
painted at Bijapur, with some brilliant and remarkable likeness of 
Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah II. These portraits have a feeling of intense 
liveliness and exotic romanticism which are rarely found in Mughul 
portrait studies. The colour scheme is worked out meticulously to 
make these studies so strikingly effective. The interesting portrait 
of a prince and his minister in the Indian Museum, Calcutta (plate 
72) may also have come from the same centre, though its painting 
style is less opulent and more straightforward. Interesting por¬ 
traits were also prepared in Golconda during the first half of the 
17th century from where equally striking pieces of painted textiles 
were manufactured and exported. From about the middle of the 
17th century these important centres seem to have ceased to pro¬ 
duce good paintings though inferior examples continued to be paint¬ 
ed for many more years. 


821 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 

1. GENERAL SECONDARY WORKS 

(Only works covering the whole of the Mughul period are re¬ 
ferred to here and those cited in individual chapters are generally 
excluded from this list). 


Abd-ur-Rahim 


Ahluwalia, 

Manjeet Singh 

Ahmed, Aziz 

Akbar, 

Muhammad 

Alaev, Lenonid 
Borisovich 

Bhargava, V. S. 

Bhattacharyya, 

S. N. 

Bhuyan, S. K. 

Brij Narayan & 

Sri Ram Sharma, 
(ed. & tr.) 


Camps, Arnulf 

Chand, Tara 
-do- 

Chicherov, A.I. 

Commissariat, 

M.S. 

De, U. N. 

De Laet, Joannes 


Edwardes, S. M. 

& Garrett, 
H.L.O. 

Ghauri, Iftikar 
Ahmad 

Goswami, B. N. 

& Grewal, J. S. 


Mughal Relations with Persia and Central 
India. Dept, of History, Aligarh Muslim Uni¬ 
versity, n.d. 

Studies in Medieval Rajasthan History, Ali¬ 
garh, 1970. 

Studies in Islamic Culture in the Indian Envi¬ 
ronment, Oxford, 1964. 

The Punjab under the Mughals, Lahore, 1948. 

luzhnaia Indiia, Sotsiarno-ikonomischeskaia 
istoriia, XIV-XVIII, Vekov, Moskva, Nauka, 
1964. 

Mar war and the Mughal Emperors, 1526-1748, 
Delhi, 1966. 

A History of Mughal North-East Frontier 
Policy, Calcutta, 1929. 

Padshah-Buranji, Gauhati, 1947. 

A Contemporary Dutch Chronicle of Mughal 
India, Calcutta, 1957. 

Cambridge History of India, Vol. IV, ed. R. 
Burn, Cambridge, 1937. 

Jerome Xavier S. J. and the Muslims of the 
Mughul Empire; controversial and missio¬ 
nary activity, Schoneck, 1957. 

Influence of Islam on Indian Culture, Allaha¬ 
bad, 1943. 

Society and State in the Mughul Period, Delhi, 
1961. 

India, Economic Development in the 16th-18th 
Centuries, Moscow, 1971. 

A History of Gujrat, Vol. II (1573-1758), 
Orient Longmans, 1957. 

Some Aspects of Medieval Indian History, New 
Delhi, 1971. 

The Empire of the Great Mogol, tr. by J. S. 
Hoyland and annotated by S. N. Banerjee, 
Bombay, 1928. 

Mhghal Rule in India, Delhi, 1962. 


War of Succession between the Sons of Shah 
Jahan, 1657-1658, Lahore, 1964. 

The Mughal and Sikh Rulers and the Vaish- 
navOs of Pindori, Simla, 1969. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


823 


Goswami, B. N. 

& Grewal, J. S. 
Grewal, J. S. 
Habib, Irfan 


Hasan, Mohibbul 
(Compld.) 
Hodivala, S. H. 

-do- 

Hutchinson, 

Lester 

Irvine, William 

Karim, Abdul 
Keene, H. G. 

Kennedy, Pringle 

Khosla, R. P. 

Lai, K. S. 

Manucci, N. 

Nijjar, B. S. 

Nizami, K. A. 

-do- (Ed.) 

Ojha, Gauri 
Shankar 
Orme, Robert 

-do- 

Owen, S. J. 


Pant, D. 

Poole, 

Stanley Lane 
Prasad, Iswari 

Rahim, M. A. 


Reu, B. N. 
Rizvi, S. A. A. 


The Mughals and the Jogis of Jakhbar, Simla, 

1967. 

Muslim Rule in India, Calcutta, 1970. 

The Agrarian System of Mughal India, Dept, 
of History, Aligarh Muslim University, Asia, 
1963. 

Historians of Medieval India, Meerut, 1968. 

Historical Studies in Mughal Numismatics, 
Calcutta, 1923. 

Studies in Indo-Muslim History, Bombay, 1939. 

European Freebooters in Moghul India, Asia, 
London, 1965. 

The Army of the Indian Moguls, London, 1903; 
New Delhi, 1962. 

Dacca, the Mughal Capital, Dacca, 1964. 

The Fall of the Moghul Empire, Reprint, Delhi, 
1971. 

History of the Great Moghuls, Reprint, Cal¬ 
cutta, 1968. 

Mughal Kingship and Nobility, Allahabad, 
1934. 

Studies in Medieval Indian History, Delhi, 
1966. 

Memoirs of the Mogul Court, tr. W. Irvine, 
ed., Michael Edwardes, London, 1957. 

Punjab under the Great Mughals, Bombay, 

1968. 

Studies in Medieval Indian History and Cul¬ 
ture, Allahabad, 1966. 

Medieval India, a Miscellany, Dept, of History, 
Aligarh Muslim University, Asia, 1969. 

Rajpmtana Ka Itihas, Vol. III, Ajmer, 1937. 

Historical Fragments of the Mogul Empire, 
London, 1805, Calcutta, 1905. 

Selections from Orme Manuscripts, ed., C. S. 
Srinivasachariar, Annamalainagar, 1952. 

India on the Eve of British Conquest, an analy¬ 
tical history of India, 1627-1761, 2nd edn., 
Calcutta, 1954. 

The Commercial Policy of the Moguls, Bom¬ 
bay, 1930. 

Medieval India under Mohammedan Rule, Re¬ 
print, Delhi, 1963. 

History of Medieval India, 3rd edn., Allaha¬ 
bad, 1940. 

History of the Afghans in India, 1545-1631, 
with special reference to their relations with 
the Mughals, Karachi, 1961. 

Marwar Ka Itihas, Jodhpur, 1938. 

Muslim Revivalist Movements in Northern 
India in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Cen¬ 
turies, Agra, 1965. 


824 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Saran, P. 

Sarkar, J. N. 
-do- 

Satish Chandra 
Sen, S. N. 

S. R. Sharma 
-do- 
-do- 

Siddiqi, N. A. 
Srivastava, A. L. 
Tripathi, R. P. 
Thomas, Edward 

Tod, James 
Varma, R. C. 
Wilson, H. H. 

Ali, S. M. 
Ansari, A. S. B. 
Ansari, M. A. 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 


Studies in Medieval Indian History, Delhi, 
1952. 

Fall of the Mughal Empire , 4 Vols., 2nd edn., 
Calcutta, 1949. 

Studies in Mughal India , 2nd edn., Calcutta, 
1919. 

Parties and Politics at the Mughal Court, Ali¬ 
garh, 1959. 

The Military System of the Marathas, Bom¬ 
bay, 1958. 

The Religious Policy of the Moghul Emperors, 
Calcutta, 1940. 

Mughal Empire in India, revised edn., Agra, 

1966. 

Studies in Medieval Indian History, Sholapur, 
1956, 

Land Revenue Administration under the 
Mughals, 1700-1750, Asia, 1971. 

The Mughul Empire, 4th revised edn., Agra, 
1964. ' 

Rise and Fall of the Mughal Empire, Allahabad, 
1956. 

The Chronicles of the Pathan Kings of Delhi, 
with a supplementary. The Revenue Re¬ 
sources of the Mughal Empire in India from 
1593 to 1707, London, 1871, 2nd enlarged 
edn., Delhi, 1967. 

Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan, popular 
edn., 2 Vols., London, 1914. 

Foreign Policy of the Great Mughals , Agra, 

1967. 

A Glossary of Judicial and Revenue Terms &c 
of British India, London, 1875. 

2. SELECT ARTICLES 

‘Arakan rule in Chittagong, 1550-1666’, 
J.A.S.P., Dacca, 12, Dec. 1967, 333-351. 

'Justice under the Mughals’, Pakistan Review, 
10 Dec. 1962, 37-41. 

‘Amusements and Games under the Great 
Mughals’, Islamic Culture, 35, Jan. 1961, 21- 
31. 

‘Court Ceremonies of the Great Mughals,’ 
Islamic Culture, 35, July 1961, 183-197. 

‘The Harem of the Great Mughals’, Islamic 
Culture, 34, Jan. 1960, 1-13, April 1960, 107- 
124. 

‘The Hunt of the Great Mughals’, Islamic 
Culture, 34, Oct. 1960, 242-53. 

‘Some Aspects of the Social Life at the Court 
of the Great Mughals’, Islamic Culture, 36, 
July 1962, 182-95. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


825 


Goiteiu, S. D. 

Grover, B. R. 
Habib, Irfan 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

Hasan, S. Nurui 
-do- 

Lewis, Bernard 
Mitra, K. 
Mustafa, K. 
Nizami, K. A. 

Qaiser, A. Jan 

Qureshi, I. H. 

Rahim, A. 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

Rashid, S. A. 

-do- 

Raychaudhuri, T. 
Rizvi, S.A.A. 


‘Letters and Documents on the India Trade in 
Medieval Times’, Islamic Culture } 37, July 
1963, 188-205. 

‘Nature of Land Rights in Mughal India’, 
IESHR, I, July 1963, 1-23. 

‘Banking in Mughal India’ in Contributions to 
Indian Economic History, ed., T. Raychau- 
dhuri, Calcutta, 1960. 

‘Currency system of the Mughal Empire, 
1556-1707’, Medieval India Quarterly, 4, 

1961, 1-21. 

‘Usury in Medieval India’, Contemporary 
Studies in Society and History, 6, July 1964, 
393-419. 

‘Potentialities of Capitalistic Development in 
the Economy of Mughal India’, Journal of 
Economic History, March 1969, 32-78. 

‘The position of the Zamindars in the Mughal 
Empire’, IESHR, I, April 1964, 107-119. 

‘Shaikh Ahmad Sirhindi and Mughul Politics’. 
PIHC, VIII (1945), 248-57. 

‘The Mughals and the Ottomans’, Pakistani 
Quarterly, Karachi, 1958. 

‘Jain Influence at the Mughal Court’, PIHC, 
III (1939), 1061-72. 

‘Travel in Mughal India’, Medieval India 
Quarterly, 3, Jan/April 1958, 270-84. 

‘Naqshabandi Influence on Mughal Rulers and 
Politics’, Islamic Culture 9 39, Jan. 1965, 

41-52. 

‘Shipbuilding in the Mughal Empire during 
the Seventeenth Century’, IESHR, 5, June 
1968, 149-70. 

‘The Position of the Monarch in the Mughal 
Empire’, University Studies, 1, April 1964, 

1-18. 

‘An Aspect of Diplomacy of Mughal Age’. 
JPHS, 9, Oct. 1961, 289-295. 

‘The Position of the Afghans under the 
Mughals’, JPHS, 6, 1958, 126-42. 

‘Mughal Relations with Central Asia’, Islamic 
Culture, II (1931), 81-94, 188-94. 

‘Mughal Relations with Persia’, Islamic Cul¬ 
ture, VIII (1934), 457-73, 649-64, IX 

(1935), 113-30. 

‘Madad-i-Ma’ash Grants under the Mughals’, 
JPHS, 9, April 1961, 98-108. 

‘Ottoman-Mughal Relations during the Seven¬ 
teenth Century’, Journal of the Punjab Uni¬ 
versity Historical Society, 14, June 1962, 67- 
78. 

‘The Agrarian System of Mughal India’, En¬ 
quiry, n.s. 2, Spring 1965, 92-121. 

‘The Mughal Elite in the Sixteenth and Seven¬ 
teenth Century’, Abr-Nahrain, 1971, 69-104. 


826 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Standish, J. F. 
Siddiqi, N. A. 
-do- 

Sinha, S. N. 

Umar, M. 

-do- 

Varma, R. C. 
Yusuf, K. M. 


‘Persian Influence in Mughal India’, Islamic 
Quarterly, 3, July/Sept. 1968, 160-173. 

‘The Classification of Villages under the 
Mughals’, IESHR, 1, Jan. 1964, 73-83. 

‘The Faujdar and Faujdari under the Mughals’, 
Medieval India Quarterly, 4, 1961, 22-35. 

‘The Administrative set up of the Suba of 
Allahabad under the Great Mughals, 1526- 
1707’, Islamic Culture, 39, April 1965, 85- 
109. 

‘Life of Mughal Royalty in India during 18th 
Century’, Medieval India Quarterly, 4, 1961, 
137-153. 

‘Mughal Aristocracy during 18th Century’, 
Medieval India Quarterly, 5, 1963, 88-112. 

‘Relations of the Mughals with Kashgar, 
Mecca and Turkey’, Islamic Quarterly, Jan./ 
June 1966, 26-39. 

‘The Judiciary m India under the Sultans of 
Delhi and the Mughal Emperors’, Indo - 
Iranica, Vol. 18, No. 4, 1-12. 


CHAPTER I 
SOURCES 

As this Chapter is itself an analysis of the various sources for 
the study of Mughal India, a bibliography on it becomes super¬ 
fluous and so no such attempt is made. Only commentaries on 
sources are enlisted below. 

Commentaries on Sources 

History of India as told by its own Historians, 
8 Vols., London, 1867, &c. 

Studies in Indo-Muslim History, Bombay, 
1939. 

Persian Sources of Indian History, collected, 
edited and translated into Marathi by G. H. 
Khare, 3 Vols., Poona, 1937. 

Mughals in India, a Bibliographical Survey, 
Bombay, 1967. 

Descriptive Catalogue of non-Persian Sources 
of Medieval Indian History, covering Rajas¬ 
than and adjacent regions, New York, 1965. 
A Bibliography of Mughal India, Bombay, n.d. 
Mughal Bibliography ; Select Persian Sources 
for the study of Mughals in India, Bombay, 
1962. 

CHAPTER II 
BABUR 

1. Original Sources 
Primary: Turki 

Bdbur-ndma The foundation of our knowledge of Babur’s 

history. 


Elliot and Dowson 
Hodivala, S. H. 
Khare, G. H. 

Marshall, D. N. 
Saran, P. 

Sharma, S. R. 
Taraporewala, 

V. B. D. & 
Marshall, D. N. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


827 


Turki text 

(a) Edited by N. Ilminsky, Kazan, 1857 from 
the Bukhara manuscript edited by Kehr 
in London, 1737. 

(b) Facsimile from a manuscript belonging to 
the late Sir Salar Jang of Hyderabad, 
edited with a preface and indexes by A. S. 
Beveridge. Leyden and London, 1905. 

Translations: Persian 

(a) By Shaikh Zain-ud-dm Khvafi who was 
Sadr in Babur’s reign and died in 940/ 
1533-34. MSS. in the British Museum and 
Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris. 

(b) By Payandah Hasan, commenced in 994/ 
1586 and continued by Muhammad Quli 
Hisari. MSS. in the Cambridge University, 
British Museum, India Office and the 
Bodleian. 

(c) By Mirza ‘Abdur-Rahlm, completed in 
998/1589-90. MSS. in the British Museum, 
Bibliotheque Nationale, India Office, 
Bodleian, Ry lands and many other libra¬ 
ries abroad and in India. 

Lithographed edition, Bombay, 1308/ 
1890-91. 

French 

By A. Pavet Le Courteille from Ilminsky’s 
text. Paris, 1871. 

English 

(a) By John Leyden and William Erskine 
from ‘Abdur-Rahim’s Persian version. 
London, 1826. Second edition, London, 
1844. 

Annotated and revised by Sir Lucas 
King. Oxford, 1921. 

(b) By F. G. Talbot. Summarised from 
Leyden and Erskine’s translation with an 
introduction and supplementary notes, 
London, 1909. 

(c) By A. S. Beveridge from the Turki (Hyde¬ 
rabad Codex), London, 1921. 

German 

By A. Kaiser from Leyden and Erskine’s ver¬ 
sion, Leipzig, 1828. 

by Muhammad Salih. A history of ShaibanI 
Khan in verse. Valuable for Babur’s rela¬ 
tions with the Uzbegs. Edited and translated 
into German by A. Vambery, Vienna, 1885. 
Re-edited by P. M. Melioransky and A. N. 
Samoilovich, St. Petersburg, 1908. 


828 


Habib-us-Siyar 


Tdrikh-bRashidi 


Humayun-nama 


Ahsan-us-Siyar 


Tdrikh-i-Amir 

Mahmud 


Tarikh-i-ilchi-i- 
Nizdm Shah 


Shdh-ndma-i- 

Qdsimi 


Tdrikh-i- 

‘Alamdrai 

‘Abbdsl 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 
Persian 

by Khvand Amir, commenced in 927/1521 but 
continued to 935/1529. It is a general his¬ 
tory, but valuable for Babur’s career outside 
India. The author was Babur’s contemporary 
and met him in India. Lithographed text, 
Teheran, 1271/1855. Also Bombay, 1273/ 
1857. 

by Muhammad Haidar Dughlat, composed in 
952/1545-46. The author who was Babur’s 
cousin was in intimate contact with him dur¬ 
ing his Kabul career and took part in various 
important political affairs. The work is 
valuable as it is of help in filling the lacunae 
in the Babur-ndma. British Museum MS. Or. 
157. English translation by Sir E. Denison 
Ross, with a preface by N. Elias, London, 
1895. 

by Gulbadan Begam. The authoress was the 
daughter of Babur and her work contains 
some personal recollections of her father. 
Text edited and translated into English by 
A. S. Beveridge, London, 1902. 

by Mirza. Barkhwardar Turkman, completed in 
937/1530-31. Important for relations be¬ 
tween Babur and Shah Ismafil. MS. in 
Nawab ‘Abdus-Salam Khan’s library, Ram- 
pur. 

by Muhammad bin Khvand Amir, compiled 
after 957/1550. It is a history of Shah Ismafil 
and Shah Tahmasp and valuable for Babur’s 
career outside India. The author was the son 
of the famous historian Khvand Amir, Bri¬ 
tish Museum MS. Or. 2939. 

by Khur Shah, compiled in 971/1563-64. It is 
a general history including chapter on 
Safavi Shahs and Indian rulers. The author 
was an envoy of the Nizam Shiah of Ahmad- 
nagar to the Shah of Persia and remained in 
Persia from 952/1545 to 971/1563-64. This 
lends supreme importance to his work for 
Babur’s history outside India, particularly 
for his relations with Shah Isma‘11 and the 
Uzbegs. British Museum MSS. 23, 513 and 
Or. 153. 

by Mirza Qasim GunabadI, composed after 971/ 
1563-64. It is a poetical history of Shah 
Isma‘11 and Shah Tahmasp. British Museum 
MS. Or. 339. The First daftar on the history 
of Shiah Isma‘11, completed in 940/1533 was 
lithographed at Lucknow in 1870. 

by Iskandar MunshI, composed in 1038/1629. 
It is one of the best authorities for the his¬ 
tory of the Safavi kings of Persia and is 


Akbar-ndma 


Tabaqdt-i-Akbari 


Tarlkh-i-Firishta 


Tdrikh-x-Ha qqi 


Tdrikh-i-Alfi 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 829 

very valuable for Mughul-Safavl relations 
during the period it covers. Contains a de¬ 
tailed account of the relations between 
Babur and Shah IsmaTl. Valuable for 
Babur’s career outside India. MS. at the 
library of the Asiatic Society, Calcutta. 
Lithographed, Teheran, 1313-14/1896-97. 

SECONDARY 

Persian 

by Shaikh Abu-’l-Fazl, completed in 1004/ 
1596. Published by the ASB in three 
volumes, Calcutta, 1873-86. Also litho¬ 
graphed edition, Lucknow, 1284/1867-68. 
English translation by H. Beveridge, pub¬ 
lished by the ASB, Calcutta, 1907, 1912 and 
1939. Volume I deals with the reigns of 
Babur and Humayun and is of some value 
in connection with Babur’s various Indian 
invasions. 

by Khvaja Nizam-ud-dm Ahmad, composed in 
1002/1593-94. Volume II gives a brief good 
account of Babur and Humayun, though the 
chronology is defective and there are in¬ 
accurate statements as well. Lucknow, 1875 
and Calcutta, 1931. English translation by 
B. De, Volume II, Calcutta, 1936. 

by Muhammad Qasim Hindu Shah better 
known as Firishta, completed in 1015/1606- 
7. Though a southerner, Firishta’s chapters 
on Mughul history are of importance as 
offering a neutralist view. Scholars rather 
undervalue his work. He gives a dispassio¬ 
nate and accurate account of Babur’s career 
and is of value in filling the lacunae in the 
Bdbur-ndma. Lithographed text edited by J. 
Briggs, Bombay and Poona, 1831-32. Also 
Lucknow text, 1864-65 and Cawnpore, 1874, 
1884 and 1905-6. English translation by J. 
Briggs, London, 1829. Reprinted Calcutta, 
1908-10. 

by ‘Abdul-Haqq Dihlavl. It is a brief history of 
India from the time of Muhammad Ghurl to 
1596. For the period from Buhlul Lodi on¬ 
wards it is based on oral tradition and per¬ 
sonal observation. Useful for Babur’s rela¬ 
tions with the Lodis. The author’s account of 
certain events is different from that of other 
contemporary chroniclers. British Museum 
MSS. 26, 210 and the Bodleian Ouseley MS. 
59. 

by Ja’far Beg Asaf Khan, composed in 997/ 
1588-89. It is a syndicate work on general 
history up to 1589, but the fourth volume in 


830 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Haft IqVim 


Tdnkh-i - 
Ibr dhtml 


Majdmi‘-ul 

akhbdr 


Rauzat-ut-Tahirin 


Ma‘dan-i-Akhbdr - 
i-Ahmadi 


Iqbdl-ndma 


which the history of the Mughul emperor 
from Babur to Akbar occurs, is attributed to 
the authorship of Ja’far Beg Asaf Khan. 
The account closely resembles that of the 
Tabaqdt-i-Akbari. India Office MS. No. 3293 
which is a very beautiful copy. Also British 
Museum MS. Or. 465. 

by Amin Ahmad Razi, composed in 1002/1593- 
94. Though a work on geography and bio¬ 
graphy, it gives a succinct account of Indian 
history in connection with Agra. Amin 
Ahmad was a foreigner, but he came to 
India and stayed here for a considerable 
time. Though his account is very brief, its 
importance lies in the fact that it corrobo¬ 
rates the statements of other historians and 
offers the stand-point of an independent 
author who was not connected with the 
Mughul Court. MS. at the ASB library, 
Calcutta. 

by Ibrahim bin Harir, composed in 957/1550. 
It is a general history including that of 
Muslim India up to 1550. Its treatment is 
quite different from that of Niziam-ud-din 
and Abu-’I-Fazl whom the majority of chro¬ 
niclers follow. Its account is methodical and 
the work ‘is very remarkable for its accu¬ 
racy in the chronological part’ (Sachau). 
India Office MS. 104 and Bodleian MS. 97. 

by Muhammad Sharif-ul-Husaini, known as 
Waqu‘i, completed in 1000/1591-92. It is a 
compendium of general history and in deal¬ 
ing with the Mughul period of Indian his¬ 
tory shows independence of Abu-’I-Fazl and 
Nizam-ud-din. It corroborates as well as cor¬ 
rects some of the statements of Nizam-ud- 
dm. The author was a poet of Akbar’s court. 
The work is far more detailed than the 
Tdrikh-i-Haqql and seems to be also better 
as a chronicle. India Office MS. 119. 

by Taher Muhammad Hasan Tmad-ud-din, 
completed in 1015/1606-7. It is a general his¬ 
tory of the Muslim East including India up 
to the last year of Akbar’s reign. British 
Museum MS. Or. 168. 

by Ahmad bin Bahbal, completed about 1023/ 
1614. It is a general history and consists of 
two volumes. The second volume comprises 
the history of the Chaghatai dynasty from 
Timur to Jahangir. India Office MS. 121 
which is the only one extant. 

by Mu‘tamid Khan, composed in 1029/1619-20. 
It is divided into three volumes: the first 
treats of the history of Muslim India from 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


831 


T cirikh-i-Khdnddn- 
i-Ttmuriya 


Wdqi‘dt-i- 

Mushtaql 


Nafais-ul- 

Maasir 


Ahscm-ut- 
Tawuflkh or 
Muntakhab-ut 
Tawdrikh 


Zafar-ul-Wdlih - 
bi-Muzaffar wa 
Alih 


Tazkirat-ul 

Muluk 


Tdrikh-i-Sbahi or 
Tdrikh-u 
Salatin-i- 
Ajdghina 


Muhammad bin Sam to Humayun. India 
Office MS. 312. 

Composed early in the reign of Akbar. It is a 
history of Timur and his successor in Iran, 
and of Babur, Humayun and Akbar down 
to the twenty-second year of his reign. MS. 
551 at the Oriental Public Library, Patna, 
which is the only one extant. 

by Shaikh Rizqullah, composed in 980/1572- 
73. Detailed accounts and anecdotes relating 
to the times of the Lodis, of Babur, Huma¬ 
yun and Akbar and of the Surs. He was a 
detached and religious-minded person and 
his account of contemporary events is the 
main source of Nizam-ud-dm, Ni‘mat-Ullah, 
‘Abdullah and Ahmad Yadgar. British Mu¬ 
seum MS. Or. 1929. 

by Mlrza ‘Ala-ud-Daula Qazvini, composed in 
983/1575. Though the work is mainly de¬ 
voted to notices of poets of the sixteenth 
century, it contains a short account of the 
Mughul emperor Babur, Humayun and 
Akbar. British Museum MS. Or. 1761. Pho¬ 
tostat copy at the Calcutta University Libr¬ 
ary. 

by Hasan bin Muhammad-ul-Khaki-us-Shirazi, 
completed in 1019/1610-11. The author 
came to India from Shiraz in the time of 
Akbar and held different offices under him. 
His work is a general history up to the date 
of composition and in the Indian section he 
closely follows Nizam-ud-din. British Mu¬ 
seum MS. Or. 1649 and the MS. at the Pub¬ 
lic Library, Lahore. 

by ‘Abdullah Muhammad bin ‘Umar al-Makkl, 
completed in 1020/1611. It is a history of 
Gujarat written in Arabic, but it gives a 
summary of the reigns of the Mughul em¬ 
perors. It mainly follows Abu-’l-Fazl, but 
gives occasionally new details. Edited by Sir 
E. D. Ross in three volumes. London, 1910, 
1921 and 1928. 

by Rafi‘ud-din Shirazi, composed in 1020/1611. 
Though a history of the Deccan, it deals with 
the history of the Mughul emperors of India 
and of the Safavl monarchs of Persia. Sir 
Jadunath Sarkar’s copy, made from the MS. 
at the Salar Jang Library, Hyderabad, A.P. 

by Ahmad Yadgar, composed about 1023/1614. 
It is a history of Afghan rulers of India from 
Buhlul Lodi to the defeat and death of Himu 
and is of value for Mughul-Afghan relations. 
Besides it deals also with the reigns of Babur 
and Humayun. The author’s father was in 


832 


Ahsan-ut- 

Tawdrikh 


Khulcisat-ut - 
Tawdrikh 


Rauzat-us- 

Safavtya 


Khuldsa-u 

Maqdl 


Nusakh-i- 

Jahdndrd 


Lubb-ut- 

Tawdrikh 


Zubdat-ut- 

Tawdnkh 


Caldecott, R. M. 
Edwardes, S. M. 
Erskine, W. 

Grenard, 

Fernand 

Poole, S. Lane 
Williams, L. F. 
Rushbrook 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

the service of Mirzia ‘Askari and he supplies 
several details of incidents occurring during 
the last few years of Babur’s reign which 
are not found in any other chronicle. Edited 
by M. Hidayat Husain. Calcutta, 1939. 

by Hasan-i-Rumlu, composed in 985/1577. 
Though the work professes to be a general 
history, it is mainly a history of Shah Isma‘11 
and Shah Tahmasp. Text, Baroda, 1931. Eng¬ 
lish translation by C. N. Seddon, Baroda, 
1934. 

by Ahmad Ibrahlmi, completed in 1000/1592. 
A history of the Safavis. (It is of great im¬ 
portance for Mughul-Safavi relations. MS. at 
Preussische Staatsbibliothek, Berlin. Photo¬ 
stat copy at the Calcutta University Libr¬ 
ary. 

by Mirza Beg, compiled about 1035/1625. A 
fairly detailed history of the Safavi dynasty, 
it is valuable for Babur’s career outside In¬ 
dia and for Mughul-Safavi relations during 
the period it covers. MS. P. 583 at the Asia¬ 
tic Society Library, Calcutta. 

by Muhammad Tahir, composed under Shah 
‘Abbas II (1052-1077/1642-1667). A history 
of the Safavi dynasty, its treatment is dif¬ 
ferent from that of other Safavi chronicles. 
Bodleian MS. which is the only one extant. 

by Qazi Ahmad Ghaffari, composed in 972/ 
1563-64. It is a general history of the East 
including that of the Safavi and Indian 
rulers. British Museum MS. Or. 141. 

by Yahya bin ‘Abdul-Latif Qazvini, composed 
in 948/1541. It is a general history from the 
earliest times to the date of composition. 
MS. 469 at the Oriental Public Library, 
Patna. 

by Muhammad Afzal Husaini, composed about 
1063/1652. Malcolm and Morley valued the 
work very much as a history of the Safavi 
dynasty. MS. 1750 at the Oriental Public 
Library, Patna. 

2. Modern Works 

Life of Baber, London, 1844. 

Babur, diarist and despot, London, 1926. 

A history of India under Baber and Humayun , 
Vol. I, London, 1854. 

Baber, first of the Moguls, Translated from the 
French into English and adapted by Homer 
White and Richard Glaenzer, London, 1931. 

Babar, London, 1899. 

An empire builder of the sixteenth century, 
London, 1918. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


833 


Banerji, S. K. 


Bausani, A. 


Beveridge, H. 


Hidayat-Ullah 
Lamb, H. 


Momin, 

Mohiuddin 
Mustafa, Khurshid 
Naimuadin, 

Sayyid 

Prasad, Ishwari 
Rahim, Abdur 
Rosset, L. F. 


Sarwar Zaidi, 
S. M. 

Schimmel, A. 
Sharma, S. R. 
Yusuf Ali, A. 
Varma, R. C. 


3. Select articles 

(a) ‘Babur and the Hindus’, JUPHS. (Journal 
of the United Provinces Historical Society ) 
9 ii (1936), 70-96. 

(b) ‘Babur’s post-war settlements in the 
Doab, Malwa and Bihar’, PIHC, 1946, 296- 
300. 

‘L’lndia vista da due grandi personalita’ musul- 
mane. Babare Biruni’, Al-Biruni Commemo¬ 
ration Volume, 1951, 53-76. 

(a) ‘Babar Padshah Ghazi’, Calcutta Review, 
Volume CV, No. 209. 

( b) ‘A letter from the Emperor Babur to his 
son Kamran’, JAS . N.S. (1919), 329-334. 

‘Babur and the Afghans’, Proceedings of the 
Pakistan History Conference (1958), 203-15. 

‘Varying cultural influences of the last Timurid 
Age in Samarkand. An aspect of the character 
of Zahir A1 Din Muhammad surnamed 
Babur (the tiger), founder of the Dynasty 
known as the Great Moghuls of India’, Tru- 
dui XXV dvadtzat pyatogo Mezhdunarod- 
nogo Kongressa Vostokovedov, Moskva 
1960, tom III (1963), 217-221. 

‘A Soyurghal of Babur’, IHRC. Proceedings. 
36 ii (1961), 49-54. 

‘Babur’s court in India’, Is. C. 30 (1956) 40-43. 

‘Some unpublished verses of Babur’, Is. C. 30 
(1956)," 44-50. 

‘Khalifa’s conspiracy’, University of Allahabad 
Studies, 1943. History section. 

‘Mughul Relations with Persia’, Is. C., 8 (July 
1934), 457-64. 

‘Le Padishah Baber (1483-1530) son passage 
a Kaboul. Afghanistan’ (Societe des etudes 
histo'riques d’Afghanistan), 1946, 3. 36-46. 

‘Babur the humane and just’, Proceedings oj 
the Pakistan History Conference (1952), 
250-254. 

‘Babur Padishah, the poet’. Is. C., 34 (1960), 
125-138. 

l The story of Babar’s death’, JRAS. (1926), 
295-98; (1928), p. 399. 

‘The self-revelation of Bahar’, JUPHS , 3 ii 
(1926), 61-82. 

‘The relation of the Mughals with the tribes 
of the North West’, Is. C., 24 (1950), 249-58. 


CHAPTER III 

HUMAYUN 

1. Original sources 
Primary 

For Tarikh-i-Amir Mahmud, Tarlkh-i-Ilchi-i-Nizam Shah, Shah- 


M.E. - 53 


834 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


nama-i-Qasimi, TarIkh-i-‘Alamarai ‘AbbasI, Nusakh-i-Jahanara, Lubb- 
ut-Tawarlkh and Tankh-i-Ibrahlml, see Chapter II. 


Tazkirat-ul- 

WdqVdt 


Tdrikh-i - 
Humayun 
Shahi 


Humayun-nama 


Muklntasar or 
Tdrikh-i- 
Humdyun wa 
Akbar 


Humdyun-ndma 


by Jauhar Aftabchl, composed in 995/1587. A 
contemporary straightforward and eye-wit¬ 
ness account, it is the foundation of our 
knowledge of Humayun’s reign. It is, how¬ 
ever, weak at chronology. British Museum 
MS. Add. 16, 711; India Office MS. 221; Lin- 
desiana MS. 412 now in John Rylands Libr¬ 
ary, Manchester; and Punjab University 
Library MS. at Lahore. 

English translation by Major C. Stewart, Lon¬ 
don, 1832. Also Calcutta, 1904. 
by Shaikh Ilahdad FaizI Sirhindi composed 
during the reign of Akbar. It is a recension 
of the Tazkirat-ul-Wdqi‘dt written at Jau- 
har’s request by FaizI Sirhindi for presenta¬ 
tion to Akbar. India Office MS. 222. 
by Gulbadan Begam, composed in 1000/1591- 
92. As an eye-witness and contemporary ac¬ 
count by Babur’s daughter, its importance 
is next to Jauhar’s chronicle. It throws con¬ 
siderable light on the manner and customs 
of the period. Gulbadan Begam is, however, 
more an affectionate sister than a dispas¬ 
sionate historian of Humayun. The work has 
been edited and translated into English by 
A. S. Beveridge, London, 1902. Lithogra¬ 
phed edition, Lucknow, 1925. 
by Bayazld Blyat, completed in 1000/1591-92. 
It is a history of the reigns of Humayun and 
Akbar from 1542 to 1591. For Humayun’s 
reign it is a contemporary account as the au¬ 
thor was with him for a considerable time. 
India Office MS. 223. Text published by the 
Asiatic Society, Calcutta, 1941. 

Abstract in English by H. Beveridge in JAS, 
lxvii, no. 1 (1898), pp. 296-316. English 
translation excluding chapters i-iii by B. P. 
Saksena in Allahabad University Studies, 
Vol. VI, pt. 1, (1930), pp. 71-148. 
by Khvand Amir, composed in 941/1534. It 
is an eye-witness account of the rules and 
ordinances of Humayun, description of court 
festivities and of some buildings erected by 
him. Text edited by Hidayat Husain under 
the title of Qanun-i-HumayunI and translat¬ 
ed into English by Baini Prasad and both 
published by the Asiatic Society, Calcutta, 
1940. 


Tarikh-i-Rashidt by Muhammad Haidar Dughlat. See chapter 

II. The author knew Humayun intimately; 
and his assessment of Humayun’s character 
and some details about his reign are of 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


835 


Mirdt-ul- 

Mamdlik 


India Office MS. 224 


Haft Risdla-i- 
Taqwim-ul- 
Bulddn 

British Museum 
Add. MS. 1688 

‘Indyat-ndma 


Faiyydz-ul- 

Quwdnln 


Durar-ul-mansur 


much value. He gives an eye-witness 
account of the battle of Kanauj. 

by Sidl ‘All Ra‘Is. Translated into English by 
A. Vambery under the title: The Travels 
and Adventures of the Turkish Admiral Sidi 
‘AU Ra c is in India, Afghanistan, Central 
Asia and Persia during the years 1553-1556, 
London, 1899. The Turkish admiral arrived 
in India in 1556 and was in this country at 
the time of Humayun’s death. Valuable for 
the last days of Humayun’s life. 

Date of composition not known. It contains his¬ 
torical extracts dealing with Humayun’s 
flight to Persia and the recapture of Qanda- 
har. 

Buhar Library (National Library), Calcutta, 
MS. 45. The contents are similar to those of 
the India Office MS. 224. 

It is of very great importance as it repro¬ 
duces several letters of Humayun and Shah 
Tahmasp which are not found elsewhere. 

by Tnayat Khan Rasikh, compiled in 1163/ 
1750. It is a collection of letters and other 
historical documents by the Mughul em¬ 
perors Babur, Humayun, Akbar and others 
and eminent men of the Mughul empire. 
India Office MS, 411. 

Compiled by Nawab ‘Ali Husain Khan of 
Lucknow. Contains letters of Humayun and 
Akbar. Sir Jadunath Sarkar’s copy of the 
MS. now at the National Library, Calcutta. 

by Muhammad ‘Askar! Bilgrami, compiled in 
1231/1816. Contains the letters of Shah 
Tahmasp and Humayun. MS. at the library 
of the Asiatic Society, Calcutta. 


Secondary 

For Akbar-nama, Tabaqat-i-Akbarl, Tarlkh-i-Haqqi, Tarlkh-i- 
Alf!, Haft Iqlim, Majami‘ul-Akhbar, Rauzat-ut-Tahlrin, Ma‘dan-i- 
Akhbar-i-Ahmadi, Iqbal-nama by Mu‘tamid Khan, Tarikh-i-Khiandan- 
i-Tlmurlya, Tazkirat-ul-Muluk, Nafa‘is-ul-Maasir, Ahsan-ut-Tawarikh 
by Hasan, Waqi‘at-i-Mushtaqi, Tarikh-i-Shahi or Tarlkh-i-Salatin- 
i-Afaghina, Ahsan-ut-Tawarikh by Hasan-i-Rumlu, Khulasat-ut-Tawa- 
rlkh, Rauzat-us-Safaviya, Khulasa-i-Maqal and Zubdat-ut-Tawarlkh 
by Muhammad Afzal Husain!, see chapter II. 

Tdnkh-i-Akbari by ‘Arif Qandahari, composed during the reign 

of Akbar. It is a general history of India 
from the early Muslim period to the reign of 
Akbar. The MS. at the Rampur State Libr¬ 
ary is a fragment dealing with the reign of 
Akbar, but the Allahabad University Library 
MS. gives a brief account of some details re¬ 
garding Humayun from his sojourn in Persia 
to his death. The reign of Humayun is also 


836 


Humayun-nama 
in verse 


Iqbal-nama or 
Tdrikh-i- 
Humayun 
Bddshdh 
Muntakhab-ut- 
Tawdrikh 


Tarikh-i-Firishta 


Zubdat-ut - 
Tawdrikh 


Subh-i-Sddiq 


Muntakhab-ut- 

Tawdrikh 


Mujmal-i - 
Mufassal 


Asdr-i-Shdh 

Jahdni 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

not in the E. G. Browne MS. at the Cam¬ 
bridge University Library. 

Composed during the reign of Akbar. It is a 
poetical account of Humayun. The author’s 
name and date of composition are not men¬ 
tioned. The work was probably composed 
during the reign of Akbar who is alluded to 
as the reigning sovereign. British Museum 
MS. Or. 1797. 

Composed by the poet Faizi bin Mubarak. 
Lindesiana MS. 431 now in John Rylands 
Library, Manchester. 

by ‘Abdul-Qadir Badauni, composed in 1004/ 
1596. Volume I deals with the history of 
Humayun in considerable detail. Though 
Badauni generally follows Nizam-ud-dln, he 
has always something new to give. Text pub¬ 
lished by the Asiatic Society, Calcutta, 1868. 
English translation by G.S.A. Ranking pub¬ 
lished by the Asiatic Society, Calcutta, 1898. 
See Chapter II. Firishta’s treatment is his 
own; and he has occasionally something new 
to offer. In his treatment of Humayun’s reign 
he is brief, systematic and comparatively 
free from any prejudice. 

by Nur-ul-Haqq, composed in 1014/1605. It is 
a general history of India from Muhammad 
of Ghur to the accession of Jahangir. The 
author was the son of ‘Abdul-Haqq, author 
of the Tdrikh-i-Haqqi. India Office MS. 290. 

by Muhammad Sadiq, composed in 1048/1638- 
39. A considerable portion of this volumin¬ 
ous general history is devoted to an account 
of the Mughul dynasty till the author’s 
times. It deals with Humayun’s reign at con¬ 
siderable length. MS. 471 at the Oriental 
Public Library, Patna. 

by Muhammad Yusuf, completed in 1056/1646. 
It is a general history up to the accession of 
Shah Jahan and gives a summary account of 
Humayun’s reign. MS. 476 at the Oriental 
Public Library, Patna. 

by Muhammad Barari Ummi, composed in 
1085/1655. It is a general history of the East 
from the earliest times to 1627. Contains a 
brief account of Humayun. MS. 43 at the 
library of the Asiatic Society, Calcutta. Also 
Bodleian MS. 101. 

by Muhammad Sadiq Dihlavi, composed during 
the reign of Shah Jahan. It traces the his¬ 
tory of the Mughul emperor from Babur to 
Shah Jahan. MS. 564 at the Oriental Public 
Library, Patna. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


837 


Tdrikh-i-Sher- 

Shahi 


Tdrikh-i-Khdn 
Jahdnt wa 
Makhzan-i- 
Afghdni 


Tarikh-i-Ddudi 


Afsanah-i - 
Shahan 


Tdrikh-i- 

Gujardt 


Mir at -i- 
Sikandari 


Zafar-ul-Wdlih bi 
Muzaffar wa 
e Alih 

Tdrikh-i-Sind, 
better known as 
Tdrikh-i - 
Ma ( sumi 


by ‘Abbas Khan Sarwianl, composed after 987/ 
1579. It is a biography of Sher Shah written 
by order of Akbar. Transcript of Sir Jadu- 
nath Sarkar, now at the National Library, 
Calcutta. See chapter IV. 

by Khvaja Ni‘mat-Ullah, completed in 1021/ 
1613. History of the Afghans to the date of 
composition. MSS. at the library of the Asia¬ 
tic Society, Calcutta. Edited by S.M. Imam- 
ud-din, Dacca, Vol. I, 1960; Vol. II, 1962. See 
chapter IV. 

by ‘Abdullah, written during the reign of 
Jahangir. History of the Afghan rulers of 
India up to the year 983/1575-76, based on 
the Waqi‘at-i-MushtaqI. British Museum MS. 
Or. 197. Also transcript of Sir Jadunath 
Sarkar now at the National Library, Cal¬ 
cutta. See chapter IV. 

by Muhammad Kabir bin Shaikh Isma‘Il, com¬ 
posed in all probability towards the end of 
Akbar’s reign. The author was reported to 
have met Akbar three times. Narratives and 
anecdotes concerning the Lodi and Sur Sul¬ 
tans of Delhi. British Museum MS. Add. 
24409. 

by Abu Turab Vail, composed before 1003/ 
1595. It is a history of Gujarat from 932/1526 
to 992/1584. The author’s father and uncle 
were in the service of Humayun. Valuable 
for Humayun’s relations with Bahadur Shah 
of Gujarat. Edited by Sir E. D. Ross and pub¬ 
lished by the Asiatic Society, Calcutta, 
1909. 

by Sikandar bin Muhammad Manjhu, com¬ 
pleted in 1020 or 1022/1611 or 1613. It is a 
history of Gujarat from 798/1396 to 1000/ 
1591. Bombay, 1831, 1890. English transla¬ 
tion by Fazlullah Lutfullah Faridi. Bombay, 
1899. Also English translation by E. C. 
Bayley entitled Local Muhammadan Dynas¬ 
ties: Gujarat, London, 1886. 

by ‘Abdullah Muhammad, see chapter II. Valu¬ 
able for Humayun’s relations with Bahadur 
Shah of Gujarat. 

The author was in the Mughul emperor’s ser¬ 
vice for some time and retired in 1606. It is 
a history of Sind from the Muslim conquest 
to 1600. 

The work is of importance for Humayun’s acti¬ 
vities in Sind. Edited by U. M. Daudpota, 
Poona, 1938. English translation by Captain 
G. G. Malet, Bombay, 1855. 


838 

Banerji, S. K. 

Erskine, W. 

Khan, Iqtidar 
Alam 

Prasad, Ishwari 
Ray, Sukumar 

Avasthy, R. S. 
Banerji, S. K. 

Beveridge, H. 
Blochmann, H. 

Kazimi, M. R. 

Khan, I. A. 

Qanungo, K. R. 

Rahim, Abdur 

Ray, Nishith Ranjan 
Ray, Sukumar 

Rodgers, C. J. 

Sharma, Sri Ram 

Varma, R. C. 

SHER 

Tarlkh-i-Sher 

Shahi 

Makhzan-i- 

Afghana 

Tarlkh-i-Daudi 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 
Modern Works 

Humdyun Badshah. Vol. I, Calcutta, 1938; Vol. 
II, Lucknow, 1941. 

A History of India under Baber and Humdyun, 
Vol. II, London, 1854. 

Mirza Kamran, Dept, of History, Aligarh Mus¬ 
lim University, Bombay, 1964. 

The Life and Times of Humayun, Calcutta, 
1955. 

Humayun in Persia, Calcutta, 1948. 

Select Articles 

‘The delay in Humayun’s accession—an ex¬ 
planation’, JUPHS, 14 (1941), 58-65. 

(a) ‘Humayun’s religion’, PIHC, I (1935), 46- 
61. 

(b) ‘Humayun’s religion’ JIH, 17 (1938), 151- 
164. 

(c) ‘Kingship and nobility in Humayun’s 
time’, JUPHS, 14 (1941), 25-38. 

‘Humayun in Persia’, Calcutta Review, Janu¬ 
ary 1898. 

‘Note on C. J. Rodgers’ article; Notes on the 
death of Humayun’, JAS, Vol. XL (1871), 
136. 

‘Humayun in Iran’, Is. C., 18, Jan. 1969, 5-11. 

‘Wizarat under Humayun, 1545-55’, Medieval 
India Quarterly, 5, 1963, 73-79. 

‘Humayun’s relations with the Rajput Princes’, 
JIH, I (1922), 582-85. 

‘Mughal relations with Persia’, Is. C., 8 (July 
1934), 464-66. 

‘Humayun and Maldeo’, PIHC (1939), 1124-32. 

‘A letter of the Mughul Emperor Humayun to 
his brother Kamran’, PIHC (1958), 318-19. 

‘Notes on the death of Humayun’, JAS, Vol. 
XL (1871), 133. 

‘Humayun and Maldev’, JIH 11 (1932), 192- 

202 . 

‘The relation of the Mughals with the tribes 
of the North West, Is. C., 24 (1950), 258-60. 

CHAPTER IV 

SHAH AND HIS SUCCESSORS 
1. Original Sources 
(a) Afghan Sources 

‘Abbas Sarwani. Translated in Elliot and 
Dowson, IV, 305-433. 

Ni’mat-Ullah. Translated by B. Dorn in His¬ 
tory of the Afghans, 1829. 

‘Abdullah. Partly translated in Elliot and Dow¬ 
son, IV, 434-513. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


839 


Qanungo, K. R. 

Roy, N. B. 
Srivastava, A. L. 
Thomas, E. 


(b) Non-Afghan Sources 

Ta'rlkh-i-Rashidi, Muhammad Haidar Dughlat, 
Tr., Elias and E. Denison Ross, 1895. 
Tazkirat-ul-Waqi‘at, Jauhar, Translated by C. 
Stewart, 1832. 

Memoirs of Babur, Humayun-nama, Tabaqat-i- 
Akbari, Akbar-nama. See chapter III. 

2. Secondary Works 

Sher Shah and his times, 2nd edn., Bombay, 
1965. 

The Successors of Sher Shah, Dacca, 1934. 
Sher Shah and his Successors, Agra, 1950. 
Chronicles of the Pathan kings of Delhi, Delhi, 
London, 1871. 

Also see Bibliography on chapter III. 


3. Articles 

‘The Date of Sher Shah’s Accession’, Islamic 
Review\, 1936, 127. 

‘Date and Place of Sher Shah’s Accession’, 
Journal of the Asiatic Society of Pakistan, 
5, 1960, 63-71. 

‘The date and place of Sher Shah’s Birth’, 
Journal of Bihar and Orissa Research 
Society, 1934, 108. 

‘Administrative System of the Surs (Sher 
Shah and his Successors), Islamic Culture, 
31 (Oct. 1957), 322-34. 

‘Revenue System of Sher Shah’, JIH, 37 
(April 1959), 57-66. 

CHAPTER Y 
AKBAR 

1. ORIGINAL SOURCES 
Persian 

For Tarikh-i-Alfl, Tarlkh-i-Haqql and Rauzat-ut-Tahlrln, Tarikh- 
i-Salatln-i-Afaghina, see chapter II. 

For Tarlkh-i-Ilchl-i-Nizam Shah, Tarikh-i-‘Alamarai ‘Abbasi, 
Majami‘-ul-Akhbar, Nafa‘is-ul-Maasir, Ahsan-ut-Tawarlkh by Hasan, 
Ahsan-ut-Tawarikh by Hasan-i-Rumlu, Rauzat-us-SafavIya, Khu- 
lasa-i-Maqal, Zubdat-ut-Tawarikh by Muhammad Afzal Husaini, 
Tnayat-mama, Faiyyaz-ul-quwanln, Subh-i-Sadiq, Mujmal-i-Mufas- 
sal, Asar-i-Shah JahanI, Waqi‘at-i-MushtaqI, Makhzan-i-Afghani, 
Tarlkh-i-Daudi, Afsanah-i-Shahan, see chapter III. 

Akbar-nama by Shaikh Abu-’l-Fazl, completed in 1004/ 

1596. 

The main foundation of our knowledge of 
Akbar’s history. Behind the rhetoric and 
adulation of Abu-’l-Fazl, there is a vast mass 


Bhattasali, N. K. 
Karim, Abdul 

Saran, P. 

Misra, Satish 
Chandra 

-do- 


840 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Am-i-Akbari 


Muntakhab-ut- 

Tawdrlkh 


Tabaqat-i- 

Akbarl 


Tarikh-i-A k b art 


of material in the Akbar-nama which is not 
to be found elsewhere. Abu-’l-Fazl’s defects 
as a historian have been unduly exaggera¬ 
ted. Vols. II and III. Text, Lucknow, 1284/ 
1867-68. Asiatic Society, Calcutta, 1877-86. 
English translation by H. Beveridge, Asiatic 
Society, Calcutta, Vol. II, 1912 and Vol. Ill, 
1939. 

by Shaikh Abu-’l-Fazl, completed before 1011/ 
1602. Extremely valuable for administrative 
system, statistical and geographical account 
of the Mughul Empire under Akbar. Edited 
by H. Blochmann in two volumes, Calcutta, 
1867-77. English translation, Vol. I by H. 
Blochmann, Calcutta, 1873 and Vols. II and 
III by H. S. Jarrett, Calcutta, 1891, 1894. 
Second edition of Vol. I revised by D. C. 
Philiot, Calcutta, 1939 and of Vols. II and 
III, revised and further annotated by Sir 
Jadunath Sarkar: Vol. II, Calcutta, 1949 and 
Vol. Ill, Calcutta, 1948. 

by ‘Abdul-Qadir Badauni. See also Chapter III. 
Volume II is on the history of Akbar’s reign 
and Volume III gives an account of the emi¬ 
nent men of the Mughul empire in arts, let¬ 
ters and science. Badauni wrote the history 
of Akbar from the point of view of a bigoted 
Sunni, but it is extremely valuable as a 
check on the lop-sided rosy picture of Akbar 
and the Mughul empire by Abu-’l-Fazl as 
well as for the evolution of Akbar’s religious 
beliefs. Text, Vol. II, Calcutta, 1865 and Vol. 
Ill, Calcutta, 1869. English translation of 
Vol. II by W. H. Lowe, Calcutta, 1898; 
second edition, 1924 and of Vol. Ill by T. W. 
Haig, Calcutta, 1925. 

by Khvaja Nizarn-ud-dm Ahmad, completed in 
1002/1593-94. Volume II gives the history 
of Akbar’s reign—a bare narrative of events. 
Volume III deals with provincial histories 
and is of value in connection with Akbar’s 
conquest of these kingdoms. Text, Lucknow, 
1875 and Calcutta, Vol. II, 1931 and Vol. Ill, 
1941. English translation by B. De: Vol. II, 
Calcutta, 1936 and Vol. Ill, Calcutta, 1940. 

by Muhammad ‘Arif Qandaharl, completed in 
1580. See also chapter III. The author was 
Mrr-i-Saman to Bairarn Khan and also served 
as an officer under Akbar’s vazir Muzaffar 
Khan Turbati. Though it is a history of 
Akbar’s reign up to only 987/1579, it is of 
great value as offering a view-point indepen¬ 
dent of Abu-’l-Fazl and Nizam-ud-dm and 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


841 


Tdrikh-i-Hurndyun 
wa Akbar 


Tdrikh-i-Khdnddn- 

i-Timunyci 


Akbar-nama 


Takmila-i-Akbar- 
nama 


Zubdat-ut- 

Tawdrikh 


Ma‘dan-i-Ak~hbdr- 

i-Ahmadi 


lnslnd-i-Abu-l- 

Fazl or Mukdta- 
bat-i-‘ Alldmi 


throws new light on Akbar’s personality and 
government. Sir Jadunath Sarkar’s trans¬ 
cript of the MS. at the Rampur State 
Library. 

by Bayazid Blyat. See chapter III. Though it 
is not a systematic account of Akbar’s reign, 
it is valuable as a plain straightforward nar¬ 
rative of events by a contemporary. 

See chapter II. It gives the history of Akbar’s 
reign up to the twenty-second year. It is 
valuable as the earliest written account of 
Akbar. 

by Shaikh Ilahdad FaizI Sirhindi. It is a plain 
account of Akbar’s reign to 1010/1601 com¬ 
posed at the suggestion of Akbar’s chief 
BakhshI, Shaikh Farid Bukhari, who died in 
1616 and under whom the author served. 
Valuable for the history of some of the last 
years of Akbar’s reign and particularly for 
the eye-witness account of the siege of Aslr- 
garh. India Office MS. 289. 

by Tnayat-Ullah. A detailed account of Akbar’s 
reign from the forty-seventh year to his 
death, a continuation of Abu-’l-Fazl’s Akbar- 
ndma. The Text has been published at pp. 
802-43 of the Calcutta text of the Akbar- 
ndma, Vol. Ill and the English translation 
at pp. 1206-62 of H. Beveridge’s translation 
of the Akbar-ndma, Vol. III. For various 
issues regarding the author and date of com¬ 
position see Beveridge’s translation, Vol. Ill, 
p. 1204. 

by Shaikh Nur-ul-Haqq, composed in 1014/ 
1605. Though the work is based on the 
Tarlkh-i-Haqql, the narrative is brought 
down to 1605 with addition of numerous in¬ 
formations. Valuable as a contemporary ac¬ 
count. See chapter III. 

See chapter II. Valuable as offering an inde¬ 
pendent view, independent of Abu-’l-Fazl 
and Nizam-ud-dm and particularly for bio¬ 
graphical materials regarding Bairam Khan 
and ‘Abdur-Rahim. The India Office MS., the 
only one extant, breaks off in the thirty- 
seventh year of Akbar’s reign, 999/1590-91. 
Ni‘mat~Ullah, author of the Makhzan-i- 
Afghdm, valued it as the best historical 
work. 

Compiled in 1015/1606-7 by his sister’s son 
‘Abdus-Samad. It contains letters written in 
Akbar’s name and by Abu-’l-Fazl to kings 
and nobles which throw considerable light 


842 


Ruq‘dt-i-Abu-’l- 

Fazl 


Jarida-i-Faramin- 

i-Salatln-i- 

Delhi 


Tdrlkh-i-Firishta 


Iqbdl-nama 


Anfa‘-ul-Akhbdr 


Haft Iqlim 


Madsir-i-Rahimi 


Hdldt or Wdqiat- 
i-Asad Beg 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

on Akbar’s relations with neighbouring 
rulers and with his own officers. Calcutta, 
1810 and Cawnpore, 1913. 

Compiled by his nephew Nur-ud-dln Muham¬ 
mad. Date of composition not known. These 
letters are addressed by Abu-’l-Fazl to his 
friends and contemporaries, among them 
being Akbar, Daniyal, Murad, Salim, Ak¬ 
bar’s queens and daughters. They throw 
much light on Akbar’s history. Lucknow, 
1913. 

It contains letters addressed by Akbar to Raja 
‘All Khan and to several nobles as well as 
his instructions for the administration of the 
cities and countryside. Aligarh Muslim Uni¬ 
versity MS. 

See chapter II. Firishta offers to some extent 
a dispassionate neutralist view of Akbar’s 
reign and is of special value for Akbar’s re¬ 
lations with the Deccan Sultanates. He has 
avoided several errors of Nizam-ud-din. His 
importance has been rather undervalued by 
modern scholars. 

by Mu‘tamid Khan. See chapter II. Volume II 
of the work deals with the reign of Akbar, 
mainly based on Abu-’l-Fazl’s Akbar-nama. 
India Office MS. 312. Also Buhar (National 
Library, Calcutta). MS. 66. 

by Muhammad Amin, composed in 1036/1626- 
27. Valuable for a brief account of the last 
years of Akbar’s reign. Extracts on events 
of 1003/1595 and 1012-14/1603-05 in Sir 
Henry M. Elliot: Bibliographical Index to 
the Historians of Muhammadan India, Vol. I, 
Calcutta, 1850; Persian Text, pp. 91-93 and 
English Translation, pp. 389-94. 

See chapter II. Besides offering the stand¬ 
point of an independent author not connec¬ 
ted with the Mughul court, it contains valu¬ 
able geographical account of the Mughul em¬ 
pire as well as accounts of the notables of 
the time. 

by Muhammad ‘Abdul-BaqI Nihavandl, com¬ 
pleted in 1025/ 1616. Though primarily a life 
of ‘Abdur-Rahlm Khan-i-Khanan, it contains 
a history of Akbar’s reign in the first volume 
and the second gives a biographical account 
of Bairam Khan and history of the provin¬ 
cial kingdoms. Published by the Asiatic 
Society, Calcutta, Vol. I, 1924 and Vol. II, 
1925. 

by Asad Beg who was employed in the Deccan. 
The Memoirs from 1011/1602 to 1014/1605 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


843 


‘ Abdullah-nama 


Tdrikh-i-Gujardt 


Mimt-i-Sikandari 


Zafar-ul-Wdlih bi 
M.uzaffar wa 
Alih 

Tdrikh-i-Ma‘ suml 


Sarvadesha 

Vrittanta 

Samgraha 


Bhdnuchandra 

Charitra 

Vira Bhanudaya 
Kavyam 


Dalpat Vilds 


Khydt 


Bir Singh-Deva 
Charitra 


are valuable for the last years of Akbar’s 
reign, particularly for the murder of Abu- 
-’1-Fazl. Transcript of Sir Jadunath Sarkar, 
now at the National Library, Calcutta. 

by Hafiz Tanish. Valuable for Akbar’s rela¬ 
tions with his arch-enemy ‘Abdullah Khan 
Uzbeg. Punjab University Library, Lahore. 

See chapter III. Important for Mughul activi¬ 
ties in Gujarat during Akbar’s reign. 

See chapter III. Valuable for Akbar’s conquest 
of Gujarat. 

See chapter II. It is of value, particularly for 
Akbar’s relations with Gujarat. 

See chapter III. Valuable for Akbar’s relations 
with Sind. 

Sanskrit 

by Mahesh Thakur. It is a history of the 
Mughul emperors from Biabur to Akbar. It is 
a summary in Sanskrit of Abu-’l-Fazl’s 
Akbar-ndma and has no independent value. 
Photostat copy of the India Office Ms. at the 
Calcutta University Library. 

by Siddhi Chandra Upadhyaya. A contem¬ 
porary account of the Jain missions to 
Akbar’s court. Ahmadabad, 1941. 

by Madhava. A contemporary history of the 
Baghela kings of Bhath, it is of value for 
Mughul relations with Rewah. Edited and 
translated by K. K. Lele and A. S. Upadh¬ 
yaya, Lucknow, 1938. 

Hindi JRaj asthdnl 

Written for a contemporary Rajput chief, 
Dalpat Singh of Bikaner, it gives a valuable 
account of Akbar with particular reference 
to his relations with the Rajput chiefs. MS. 
at the Anup Library, Bikaner. 

by Muhanote NainsI, composed during the 
reign of Maharaja Jasvant Singh of Jodh¬ 
pur-middle of the seventeenth century. His¬ 
tory of Jodhpur in particular and Rajasthan 
in general. Useful for Mughul relations with 
the Rajputs. Translated from Rajasthani into 
Hindi by R. N. Dugar and edited by G. H. 
Ojha in two volumes. Banaras: Samvat, 1982. 

by Keshava Das, composed about 1607. A poeti¬ 
cal account of the Bundela chief; important 
for Bir Singh’s relations with the Mughuls. 
Hindi Text compiled by Shyam Sundar Dwi- 
bedi, Allahabad, 1956. 


844 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


The Relagam do 
Equebar 


Mongolicae 

Legationis 

Commentarius 


The annual Rela¬ 
tions of Ft. 
Ferndo Guerreiro, 
S. J. 


De Laet 


Antonova, K. A. 


Azad, M. H. 
Aziz, Abdul 

Bhargava, V. S. 

Binyon, L. 

Burn, Sir 
Richard (Ed.) 
Commissariat, 

M. S. 

Diez, E. 
Grousset, R. 


European Sources 

by Fr. Anthony Monserrate, S. J., Edited and 
translated into English by Fr. H. Hosten in 
Journal and Proceedings of the Asiatic 
Society of Bengal, N. S. 8 (1912), pp. IBS- 
221 under the title, ‘Father A. Monserrate’s 
Account of Akbar (26th Nov. 1582).’ 

by Fr. Anthony Monserrate, S. J., Latin text 
edited by Fr. H. Hosten published in 
Memoirs of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, 
III, No. 9, pp. 518-704, 1914. Translated into 
English under the title ‘The Commentaries 
of Fr. Monserrate by J. S. Hoy land and an¬ 
notated by S. N. Banerjee, Bombay, 1922. 

Published at Lisbon in five parts. Translated 
into English with Introduction and Notes 
under the title ‘ Akbar and the Jesuits' by 
C. H. Payne, London, 1926. 

Travels of Ralph Fitch (1583-91) and John 
Mildenhall (1599-1606) in Early Travels in 
India, edited by W. Foster, London, 1921. 
Travels of Ralph Fitch have been edited by 
J. H. Riley under the title Ralph Fitch, 
England’s Pioneer to India, Burma etc., 
London, 1899. 

De Imperio Magno Mogoli, sive India vera, 
Commentaries ex variis Auctoribus Conges- 
tus. Leyden, 1631. Translated into English 
from Latin version by J. S. Hoyland and an¬ 
notated by S. N. Banerjee under the title 
‘The Empire of the Great MogoV : A transla¬ 
tion of Da Laet’s Description of India and 
fragment of Indian History’, Bombay, 1928. 
An English translation of De Laet’s Dutch 
original by Brij N'arain and annotated by 
Sri Ram Sharma has also been published 
under the title A Contemporary Dutch Chro¬ 
nicle of Mughal India , Calcutta, 1957. 

2. Modern Works 

Ocherki ohshchestvennykh atnoshenii u politi- 
cheskogo storia mogolskoi Indii Vremen 
Akbara, 1556-1605, Moskva, 1952. 

Darhar-i-Akbari (in Urdu). Lahore, 1898. 

The Mansabdari system and the Mughul army. 
Lahore, 1945. 

Marmar and the Mughal Emperors , Delhi, 
1966. 

Akbar, London, 1932. 

The Cambridge History of India, Vol. IV. 
Cambridge, 1937. 

History of Gujarat, 2 Vols., Bombay, 1938, 
1957. 

Akbar, Gottsucher and Kaiser, 1961. 

Figures de Proue, Paris, 1948. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


845 


Habib, Irfan 

Irvine, W. 
Krishnamurti, R. 
Maclagnn, Sir E. 

Malleson, G. B. 
Modi, J. J. 
Moreland, W. H. 

-do- 

Noer, Graf von 


Ojha, G. H. 

Roy Chowdhury, 
M. L. 

Sharma, G. N. 
Sharma, Sri Ram 


Shelat, J. M. 


Smith, V. A. 

Srivastava, A. L. 
Tripathi, R. P. 

Varma, R. C. 

Wellesz, Emmy 


Ahmed, Aziz 
Ahmad, Q. M. 
Ali, M. Athar 

Allnutt, E. F. 
Arora, P. 
Antonova, K. A. 


Agrarian system of Mughal India, Bombay, 
1963. 

Army of the Indian Moguls, London, 1903. 

Akbar: The Religious Aspect , Baroda, 1961. 

The Jesuits and the Great Mogul, London, 
1932. 

Akbar , London, 1890. 

Par sees at the Court of Akbar, Bombay, 1903. 

The Agrarian System of Moslem India, Cam¬ 
bridge, 1929. 

India at the death of Akbar, London, 1920. 

Kaiser Akbar, Vols. I and II, Leipzig, 1880, 
1885. Translated into English by A. S. 
Beveridge under the title ‘ The Emperor 
Akbai'\ Vols. I and II, Calcutta, 1890. 

Rajputana Ka Itihas, Vols. I, II and III, 
Ajmere, 1926. 

The Din-i-Ilahi, Calcutta, 1941. An uncritical 
compilation. 

Mewar and the Mughul Emperors, Agra, 1954. 

Religious Policy of the Mughal Emperors, Cal¬ 
cutta, 1940. An able study, based on original 
sources. 

Akbar, Vols. I and II, Bombay, 1959. A popu¬ 
lar work based on secondary and translated 
sources. 

Akbar the Great Mogul, Oxford, 1917, 1919 
(second edition). 

Akbar the Great, 2 Vols., Agra, 1962-67. 

Some aspects of Muslim Administration, 
Allahabad, 1936, 1956 (second edition). 

Foreign policy of the Great Mughals, Agra, 
1967. 

Akbar’s Religious Thought reflected in Mogul 
painting. An excellent summary of Akbar’s 
religious history. London, 1952. 

3. Select Articles 

‘Akbar, heretique ou apostat?’ JA 249 (1961), 
21-38. 

‘Was Bairam Khan a rebel?’, Is. C. 21 (1947), 
56-72. 

‘Foundation of Akbar’s Organization of the no¬ 
bility: an interpretation’, Med. Ind. Quart., 
1961, 290-99. 

‘Christianity in the courts of Akbar and Jahan¬ 
gir’, IRQ. 12 (1936), 294-307. 

‘Akbar’s popularity’ JPHS (Journal of Punjab 
Historical Society ), 10, ii (1929), 1-3. 

‘The social background of Akbar’s religious re¬ 
form’, Trudui XXV Mezdhunarod, Kongr, 
Vostokovedov, 1960, tom IV (1963), 9-15 
(Trudi Instituta istorii, arkheologii i etno- 
grafii: Akad. Nauk Kazakhskoy SSR). 


846 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Ansari, A. A. 

Ansari, Azher 

Ansari, M. A. 

Banerji, S. K. 
Bashir, Ahmed 

Basu, K. K. 

Bhanu, Dharma 

Bhattacharyya, 
D. C. 

Buckler, F. W. 
Camps, A. 


Desai, M. D. 
Edwards, C. C. 

Fazlur Rahman, 
A. K. Md. 
Goetz, H 

Halim, A. 

Haq, Mahfuz-al 


Hasan, Saiyid 
Nurul 
Heras, H. 

Jaffar, S. M. 


‘The north-west frontier policy of the Mughals 
under Akbar’, J. Pak. Hist. Soc. 4 (1956), 36- 
63. 

‘Social condition at the court of Akbar and its 
influence on society’, Is. C. 33 (1959), 124- 
i38. 

‘Akoar’s contribution to social life at the 
court’, University of Allahabad Studies, 
1958, history section, 1-18. 

‘Social reforms of Akbar’, IHQ 29 (1953), 50- 

55. 

‘Akbar and his new policy’, Sind University 
Research Journal, Arts series I (1961), 54- 

56. 

‘The siege of Asir—a new study’, PIHC (1939), 
1101 - 1110 . 

‘The Raushania movement and the Mughuls’, 
IHQ 29 (1951), 1-14. 

‘Sanskrit scholar of Akbar’s time’, IHQ 13 
(1937), 31-36. 

‘A new interpretation of Akbar’s ‘Infallibility’ 
decree of 1579’, JRAS, 1924, 590-608. 

‘An unpublished letter of father christoval de 
Vega S. J.: its importance for the history of 
the second mission to the Mughal court and 
for the knowledge of the religion of the Em¬ 
peror Akbar’, Stadia Orientalia, Cairo I 
(1956), 181-192. 

‘Jaina priests at the court of Akbar’, Journal 
of Gujarat Research Society 4 (1942), 1-17. 

‘Relations of Shah ‘Abbas the Great of Persia 
with the Mughul Emperors, Akbar and 
Jahangir’, JAOS 35 (1915-17), 247-268. 

‘Akbar’s religion’, J. Asiatic Soc. Pakistan, 10 
(1965), 121-134. 

‘The Rajput Empresses of Akbar and Jahan¬ 
gir’, Jadunath Sarkar Commemoration 
Volume, II, 1958, 125-134. 

‘Akbar’s conquest of Ranthambhor’, J. Pakistan 
History Society 7 (1959), 241-249. 

(a) ‘Akbar’s illiteracy. Was he utterly un¬ 
lettered?’, Proceedings of All India Orien¬ 
tal Conference I (1930), 556-564. 

(b) ‘Was Akbar utterly unlettered?’, Is. C., 4 
(1930), 239-250. 

‘The “Mahzar” of Akbar’s reign’, JUPHS, 16, 
i (1943), 125-137. 

‘The siege and conquest of the Fort of Asirgarh 
by the Emperor Akbar’, IA 53 (1924), 33-41. 

‘Religious views of Akbar and Aurangzeb as 
disclosed by contemporary archives’, Proc. 
All Pakistan History Conference I (1951), 
271-275. 

‘Akbar and the Parsees’, Calcutta Review, Vol. 
CIV, No. 207. 


Karkaria, R. P. 



GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


847 


Khan, Iqtidar Alam 

Mehta, C. Nowroz 
Menon, K. P. 
Moreland, W. H. 


Mujeeb, M. 
Nizami, K. A. 

Prashad, B. 
Qureshi, I. H. 
Rahim, ‘Abdur 

Rahim, M. A. 
Ray, S. 


Seth, D. R. 
Sharma, Sri Ram 

Shastri, Hirananda 
Smith, V. A. 


‘The nobility under Akbar and the develop¬ 
ment of his religious policy, 1560-80’, JRAS, 
1968, 29-36. 

‘Din-i-Ilahi’, Proc. All India Oriental Confer¬ 
ence, 1940 112-128. 

‘The personality of Akbar’, Is. C. 1 (1927), 412- 
424. 

(a) ‘Akbar’s land-revenue system as described 
in the ‘Ain-i-Akbari’, (in collaboration 
with A Yusuf ‘Ali), JRAS. 1918 1-42. 

(b) ‘The agrarian statistics of Akbar’s em¬ 
pire’, JUPHS. 21 (1919), 1-39. 

(c) ‘Rank (mansab) in the Mogul state ser¬ 
vice’, JRAS. 1936, 641-65. 

(d) ‘Monserrate on Akbar’s army’ JIH. 15 
(1936), 50-53. 

‘Akbar’, JIH. 40 (1962), 725-45. 

‘Faizi’s Masnavi on Akbar’s conquest of 
Ahmedabad’, Med. Ind. Quart., 1963, 133- 
52. 

‘Raja Birbal—a biographical study’, JAS. ser. 
hi 10 (1944), 41-52. 

‘Akbar’s revenue reforms’ J. Pak. Hist. 
Society, 1 (1953), 205-217. 

(a) ‘Mughal relations with Persia’ , Is. C. 8 
(July 1934), 466-73. 

(b) ‘Mughul relations with Central Asia’, 
Is. C. (Jan. 1937), 81-90. 

‘Akbar and translation works’, J. Asiatic Soc. 
Pakistan, 10 (1965), 101-119. 

(a) ‘The Death of Himu’, Dacca University 
Studies, Vol. 1 (1935). 

(b) ‘Bairam Khan Khan-i-Khanan: his age 
and the date of birth’, IHQ. 26 (1950), 
314-19. 

(c) ‘Indo-Persian contacts during the age of 
Akbar’, Indo-Iranica, IV (1950-51), 17-22. 

(d) ‘The execution of Tardi Beg Khan’, IHQ. 
28 (1952), 147-55. 

(e) ‘Akbar and the coup d’etat of March 
1560’, PIHC. (1952), 206-210. 

‘Akbar and the Deccan’, Is. C. 30 (1956), 126- 
138. 

‘Assessment and the collection of the land re¬ 
venue under Akbar’, IHQ. 14 (1938), 705- 
734. 

‘Akbar as a Sun-worshipper’, IHQ. 9 (1933), 
137-140. 

(a) ‘The Death of Himu’, JRAS., 1916, 527 et. 
siqq. 

(b) ‘The Jain teacher of Akbar’, Commemora¬ 
tion Essays presented to R. G. Bhandar- 
kar, 1917, 265-276. 


848 

Srivastava, A. L. 


Tripathi, R. P. 

Varma, R. C. 
Yasin, Mohammad 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

(a) ‘Akbar and national integration’, JIH. 40 
(1962), 1-8. 

(b) ‘Some misconceptions about Akbar the 
Great’, JIH. 42 (1964), 361-70. 

(c) ‘Amber’s Alliance with Akbar: an esti¬ 
mate of Raja Bharmal’, JIH. 46, April 
1968, 27-34. 

(a) ‘Maham Anagah and Akbar’, JIH. 1 (1921- 
22), 327-44. 

(b) The army organization of Akbar’, PIHRC. 
5 (1923), 56-66. 

‘The tribal policy of the Mughals’, Is. C. 26 iii 
(1952), 13-21. 

'Akbar and Indian nationalism’, JIH. (1960), 


CHAPTER VI 
JAHANGIR 
1 . Original Sources 
A. Persian 


Tuzuk-i- 

Jahdngiri 


Iqbdl-ndma 


Tatimma WdqVdt 
i-J ahdngiri 
Madsir-i- 
Jahdngiri 

Intikhdb-u 

Jahangir Shah 

Maasir-i - Ra himi 


Shash Fath-i- 
Kdngra 

Khuldsat-ut- 

Tavc\drikh 

Muntakhab-ul- 

Lubdb 

Baharistdn-i- 

Ghaibi 

Wiqaya 


by Jahangir himself to the seventeenth year 
of his reign, 1662/63, and continued under 
his direction to the nineteenth year by Mu‘- 
tamid Khan. English translation by A. 
Rogers, edited by H. Beveridge, Vols. I 
(1909), II (1914); 2nd edn., Delhi, 1968. 

MuTamid Khan, Bib. Ind., Calcutta, 1865. Part¬ 
ly translated in Elliot and Dowson, VI, 393- 

438. 

Muhammad Hadi. Partly translated in Elliot 
and Dowson, VI, 393-99. 

Khwaja Ghairat Khan. Partly translated in 
Elliot and Dowson, VI, 442-45. 

Anonymous. Partly translated in Elliot and 
Dowson, VI, 447-52. 

Muhammad ‘Abdul-BaqI. Part I printed by 
Asiatic Society of Bengal, Calcutta. 

Muhammad Jalal Tibatiba. Partly translated 
in Elliot and Dowson, VI, 518-31. 

Sujsan Ray. Edited by M. Zafar Hasan and 
lithographed at Delhi, 1918. 

Muhammad Hashim Khafi Khan. Printed in 
Bib. Ind., Calcutta, 1869. 

Mirzia Nathan. English trans., Dr. Borah, 2 
Vols., Gauhati, 1936. 

Asad Beg. Partly translated in Elliot and Dow¬ 
son, VI, 150-74. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


849 


Bir Singh Dev 
Charitra 


Beni Prasad 


B. Hindi 
Keshava Das. 


C. European Sources 

Letters Received by the East India Company 
from its Servants in the East, 1602-17, 6 
Vols. Vol. I, ed., Danvers, Vols. II-VI, ed., 
Foster, London, 1896-1902. 

English Factories in India, ed., W. Foster, 
Oxford, (1618-21). 1906, (1622-23). 1908, 
(1624-29), 1909. 

Early Travels in India, ed., W. Foster, Lon¬ 
don, 1921. 

Relations, Eernao Guerreiro; Portions tr. by 
C. H. Payne, Jahangir and the Jesuits, Lon¬ 
don, 1930. 

The Embassy of Sir Thomas Roe to India, 
1615-19, ed. W. Foster, London, 1926. 

Remonstratie or Jahangir’s India, F. Pelsaert, 
Translated by W. H. Moreland and P. Geyl, 
Cambridge, 1925. 

Voyage of Peter Flories to the East Indies in 
the ‘Globe’, 1611-15, ed., W. H. Moreland, 
Hakluyt Society, 2nd series, LXXIV, Lon¬ 
don, 1934. 

Voyage of Thomas Best, 1612-14, ed., W. Fos¬ 
ter, Hakluyt Society, 1934. 

Relations of Golconda in the early Seventeenth 
Century, relations of Methwold (1-50), 
Schorer (51-65), and an anonymous Dutch 
factor (67-95), ed. and tr., W. H. Moreland, 
Hakluyt Society, London, 1931. 

Journal, 1608-17, John Jourdain, ed., W. Fos¬ 
ter, Hakluyt Society, 2nd series. No. XVI, 
Cambridge, 1905. 

‘Voyage’ 1609, Joseph Salbancke, Purchas His 
Pilgrims, MacLehose, III, 82-89. 

‘Journal’, 1615-16, Richard Steel and John 
Crowther, 1615-16, Purchas His Pilgrims, 
MacLehose, IV, 266-80. 

The Travels of Pietro Della Valle in India, tr. 
Edward Grey, Hakluyt Society, 2 Vols., 
London, 1892. 

‘Discourse on the Province of Indostan & C, 
1611’, Manuel Godinho de Eredia, tr., Hos- 
ten, JASB, Letters, IV, 1938, 533-66. 

Surat ‘Diary’, Pieter Van Den Brooke, 1620- 
29, tr., Moreland, JIH, X, 235-50. XI, 1-16; 
203-18. 

2. Secondary Works 

History of Jahangir, London, 1922, 5th edn., 
1962. 


850 

Gladwin, F. 
Moreland, W. H. 
Payne, C. H. 

Aslam, M. 
Chagatai, M. A. 

Mathur, M. L. 
Nath, R. 


Srivastava, 
B. B. Lai 


Tuzuk-i- 
Jahdngirl 
Makhzan-i- 
Afghdna 
Maasir-i- 
J ahangiri 
Iqbdl-nama 

Fa dshah-ndma 

Padshah-ndma 

Padshah-ndma 

Padshah-ndma 

Shdhjahdna-nama 

‘Amal-i-Sdlih 


Zafar-ndma-i- 
‘Alamgirt 
Indyet-ndma 
Char Chaman 
Khulasat-ut- 
Tawdrikh 
Mulakhkhds 
Subh-i-Sadiq 
Tabaqdt-i- 
Shahjahdni 
Tuhfat-i- 
Shahjahdnl 
Selected Documents 
of Shah Jahan’s 
Reign 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

Reign of Jahangir, Calcutta, 1788. 

From Akhar to Aurangzeb, London, 1923. 

Jahangir and the Jesuits, London, 1930. 

3. Articles 

‘Jahangir and Hardat Shaikh Ahmad Sir- 
hindi’, JASP, 10, June 1965, 135-147. 

‘Emperor Jahangir’s Interviews with Gosain 
Jadrup and his portraits’, Islamic Culture, 
36, April 1962, 119-128. 

‘Jahangir’s Farmans in Jaipur Archives’, JIH , 
36, Aug. 1958, 259-72. 

‘Augustin of Bordeaux and his Relations with 
the Mughal Court, 1612-32’, Quarterly Re¬ 
view of Historical Studies , 8, 1968/69, 157- 
164. 

‘The Fate of Khusrau’, JIH, Aug. 1964, 479-92. 

CHAPTER VII 
SHAH JAHAN 
1. Original Sources 
A. Persian 

See chapter VI. 

See chapter VI. 

See chapter VI. 

See chapter VI. 

‘Abdul-Hamld Lahauri. Bib. Ind., 2 Vols., 
1866-72. 

Mirza Amlnai Qazvini. 

Jalal-ud-dln Tabatabai. 

Muhammad Waris. 

Muhammad Sadiq. 

Muhammad Salih Kambu, ed. G. Yazdani, 4 
Vols. (Vol. IV: index), Bib. Ind., Calcutta, 
1912-46. 

Mir Khan. 

Inayet Khan Rasikh. 

Chandra Bhan. 

See chapter VI. 

Mumammad Tahir. 

Muhammad Sadiq. 

Sadiq Khan. 

Sudhari Lai. 

Published by Daftar-i-Diwani, Hyderabad, 
Deccan, 1950. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


851 


English Factories in 
India 


Travels 


Travels 


Travels in India 

C A General Descrip¬ 
tion of India’ 
Mandelslo’s Travels 
in Western India 


Ghauri, I. A. 

Qanungo, K. R. 
Saksena, B. P. 


Ansari, A. A. 
Ali, M. Athar 

Ghauri, I. A. 

Halim, A. 

Khan, Y. M. 
Sharma, Ram 
Singh, Raghubir 


‘ Alamgir-nama 


B. European Sources 

See chapter VI, (1624-29) 1909, (1630-33) 

1910, (1634-36) 1911, (1637-41) 1912, 

(1642-45) 1913, (1646-50) 1914, (1651-54) 
1915. 

Peter Mundy, Vol. II, Travels in Asia, 1630-34, 
ed., R. C. Temple, Hakluyt Society, 2nd 
series, XXXV, London, 1914. 

1629-43, Sebastian Maurique, trans. & ed., 
Luard and Hosten, 2 Vols., Hakluyt Society, 
London, 1926-27. 

1640-67, Tavernier, tr. V. Ball, 2nd edn., re¬ 
vised by W. Crooke, London, 1925. 

cl638, extracts, trans. by Moreland, JIH, XVI, 
1937, 63-77. 

(A.D. 1638-9), S. Commissariat. 

2. Secondary Works 

War of Succession between the sons of Shah 
Johan, 1657-58, Lahore, 1964. 

Dara Shukoh, Calcutta, 1952. 

History of Shah Jahan of Delhi, Allahabad, 
1932. 

3. Articles 

‘Shah Jahan’s North-West Frontier Policy’, 
JPHS, 5, April-July 1957, 113-23. 

‘The Religious Issue in the War of Succes¬ 
sion’, 1658-59, Medieval India Quarterly, 5, 
1963, 80-87. 

‘Ideological Factor in the Mughal War of Suc¬ 
cession, ‘1657-58’, JPHS, 8, April 1960, 97- 
120 . 

‘Shahjahan, Farman in favour of certain 
money-lenders’, text with translation, 
IHRC, Dec. 1942, 59-60. 

‘Shahjahan’s Relations with Golconda’, JPHS , 
April 1959, 90-98. 

‘Aurangzib’s Rebellion against Shah Jahan’, 
JIH, Vol. XLIV, pt. 1, April 1966, 109-24. 

‘The Date of the Battle of Dharmat’, BPP, 74, 
July-Dee. 1955, 144-46. 

CHAPTERS VIII & X 
AURANGZIB 

1. Original Sources 

A. Persian Chronicles 

by Mirza Muhammad Kazim, ed., Khadim 
Husain and Abdul Hai. An official history of 
the first ten years of Aurangzib’s reign, 
based on State records. Bib. Ind., Calcutta, 
1865-73. 


852 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


( Alamgir-nama 


Maasir-i- 

‘Alamgin 


Wdqi‘dt-i- 

‘Alamgtn 

(also Zafar-ndma) 

‘Amal-i-Salih 

Tdrikh-i-Shdh 

Sujd% 


Tdrtkh-i - 
Aurangzib 

Fathiyya-i- 

‘ibriyya 


Nuskha-i - 
Dilkushd 


Futuhdt-i- 

‘Alamgiri 


Waqi e dt 

Mirdt-i-Ahmadi 


by Hatim Khan, B.M. Addl. MSS. 26, 233. An 
abridgement of Muhammad Kazim’s ‘Alam- 
gir-nama, but giving certain facts omitted 
by Klazim. 

by Muhammad Saqi Musta’idd Khan. A com¬ 
plete but condensed history of Aurangzib’s 
reign; the first ten years abridged from 
Kazim’s ‘Alamgir-nama. Bib. Ind., ed., 
Ahmad ’Ali,* 1870-3. 


by ‘Aquil Khan RazI; covers 1657-63. 

See chapter VII. 

by Mir Muhammad Ma‘sum (an old servant of 
Shuja‘). Essential for events in Bengal 
though ends abruptly on 18 April 1660. Mss. 

I. O.L. & O.R.P., Patna. 

by Abu-1-Fazl Mamuri, B.M. Or. 1671. 

by Shihab-ud-din Ahmad Talish. A diary of 
Mir Jumla’s Kuch Bihar and Assam cam¬ 
paigns. The first portion of the work has 
been printed under the title Tarlkh-i-Muluk- 
i-Asham, Calcutta, 1848. Abridged in English 
by Blochmann, J.A.S.B. , 1872; Two sec¬ 
tions translated by Jadunath Sarkar in J.B. 
and O.R.S. “Continuation” (Bodleian MS. 
589) gives the history of Bengal from Mir 
Jumla’s death to the conquest of Chatgaon 
(1663-66). Sir J. N. Sarkar translated four 
long sections of the ‘Continuation’ in 

J. A.S.B 1906 & 1907. 

by Bhimsen. An invaluable account of an eye¬ 
witness of the Deccan affairs, 1670-1707. 
B.M. 0!r. 23. For life of the author and 
analysis of contents, see, J. N. Sarkar, Stu¬ 
dies in Mughal India, Calcutta, 1919, 242- 
249. 

by Ishwar Das Nagar. B. M. Addl. 23, 884. An 
authoritative work for events in Rajputana, 
1657-98. For life of the author and analysis 
of contents, see, J. N. Sarkar, Studies in 
Mughal India, 242-249. 

by Ni‘mat Khan ‘All, lithographed, Nawal 
Kishore, Lucknow, 1928. 

by ‘All Muhammad Khan, ed., Nawab Ali, 2 
Vols. & Supplement, Baroda, 1927-28, 1930. 
Original source for Gujarat affairs, the 
wealth of far mans, etc. quoted in extenso 
and the economic data supplied. Very use¬ 
ful details of political history from 1730 on¬ 
wards. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


853 


Muntakhab-ul- 

Lubdb 

Ausaf-ndma-i- 
‘ Alamgiri 

Aurang-nama 
A ‘poem’ 
Khulasdt-ut- 
Tdwdrikh 
Chahar Gulshan 


Mirdt-ul-Alam 
Sa ( T-i-Nuhzat-i- 
‘Alamgir Padshah 
Alqab-ndma 

Riydz-us-S aldtin 


Tarlkh-i-Bangdla 


Madsir-ul 

Umard 


Basdtin-us- 
S aldtin 

Qutb-ndma-i- 

‘Alarn 


by Muhammad Hashim Khafi Khan. See chap¬ 
ter VI. 

by Alah Yar Balkhi; Ms. Cambridge Univer¬ 
sity library. Brown Cat. 100. Pers. 477. An 
eulogy in prose and verse of Aurangzib. 

by Haqiri. Ms. Hyderabad Asafiya Library. 

See chapter VI. 

by Rai Chaturman Saksena. Portion translated 
and annotated by J. N. Sarkar, India of 
Aurangzib, Calcutta, 1901. 

by Shaikh Muhammad Baqa, B. M. Addl. 7657. 

MS. Brochet, 1, 703, Supp. Pers. 477. 

B. M. Or. 1913, containing titles of the princes 
and nobles of Aurangzib. 

by Ghulam Husain, ed., Abdul Hak Abid, Bib. 
Ind. 1890; Trans. Abdus Salam, Calcutta, 
1904. 

by Sallm-ullah. Trans. F. Gladwin. Narrative 
of Transactions in Bengal, Calcutta, 1788, 
reprint, 1918. 

by Shah Nawaz Khan, ed., Molvi Abdur 
Rahim, Bib. Ind., 1888, 3 Vols. The famous 
biographical dictionary of the Mughul 
nobles. 

by Mirza Ibrahim Zubairi. Despite being a 
later compilation, this is a very useful and 
accurate history of Bijapur. 

by Sayyid Muhammad Mir Abu Turab. 


B. Administrative Literature, Accountancy Manuals, etc. 

Zawdbit-i - B. M. Or. 1641. A very useful official manual, 

( Alamgiri containing statistics, office procedure, admi¬ 

nistrative regulations and miscellaneous in¬ 
formation regarding the Mughal empire, 
C. 1689. 

Dastur-al-‘ Amal- 


i- Alamgiri C. 1659. B. M. Addl. 6, 599. 

Dastur-al- Amal- 
i-Mumdlik-i 


MoJnrusa-i 
Hindusthdn, 
Aurangzib 
Dastur-al-Amal- 
i-Tlm-i Navisin- 
dagi, Aurangzib 
Farhang-i- 
Karddni 
Intikhab-i- 
Dastur-al 
( Amal-i Padshahi, 
Aurangzib 


Post-1671. B. M. Or. 1840, ff. 133a-144b. 


Post-1676, B. M. Addl. 6599, ff. 133b-185a. 
A.D. 1679, Jagat Rai Shuja‘i Kayath Saksena, 
Aligarh, Abdus Salam, Farsiya 85/315. 


Post-1686. Edinburgh, 224. 


854 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Dastur-al-Amal 

Aurangzib 

Siydq-ndma 


Farhang-i-Kdrddni 
o Kdr-dmozi 
Khulasatu-s 
Siydq 

Dastur-al c Amal-u 
Shahjahdrii, & C 


Post-1696. Bodl. Fraser 86. 

A.D. 1694-96; MunshI Nand Ram Kayash 
Shrivastavya, Lithograph, Nawal Kishore; 
Lucknow, 1879. 

A.D. 1699, XJdaichand, Edinburgh 83. 

A.D. 1703. B.M. Addl. 6588, ff. 64a-94a. 

Late Aurangzib (?), I.O.L. 415, ff. 23b-109b; 
B.M. Addl. 6588, ff. 15a-47b. 

Statistical Account of the area, divisions and 
revenues of the provinces of the Mughul 
Empire, drawing upon the Ain and the Vil¬ 
lage and Area Statistics of Aurangzib’s 
reign. Compiled after the death of Aurang¬ 
zib. B. M. Or. 1286, ff. 310b-343a. 


C. Records 

Akhbardt-i-darbdr- 

i-mu’alla 


A. hkdm-i- 
( Alamgln 


Selected Documents 
of Aurangzeb’s 
reign 

Selected Waqai of 
the Deccan 
( 1660-71 ) 
Waqa-in-Ajmer, 
1678-80 


and Documents Including Collectanea 

Daily reports and news letters from the court 
by the agent of the Raja of Amber. The 
main transactions publicly contracted at the 
courts, such as appointments, promotions 
and demotions of mansabdars , posting of 
officials, news received from provinces and 
expeditions, the Emperor’s instructions on 
particular problems of administration are 
reported in the Akhbarat. 

ed., J. N. Sarkar. English translation by the 
same, Anecdotes of Aurangzib, 4th ed., 
Calcutta, 1903. 

Documents preserved at Jaipur (now at Bika¬ 
ner). Transcripts of selected documents in 
the Dept, of History, Aligarh. 

Records preserved at the Central Record Office 
(U.P.) Allahabad. A collection of farmans , 
sale deeds, gift-deeds, judgments etc. and 
other documents concerning grants. Mostly 
17th & 18th centuries. 


ed., Yusuf Husain Khan, Hyderabad, 1958. 


ed., Yusuf Husain Khan, Hyderabad, 1953. 

Asafiya Library, Haiderabad, Fan-i-Tarikh, 
2242. The volumes contain reports of a 
news-writer, first posted at Ranthambor, 
and then at Ajmer and finally accompanied 
the imperial army under Padshah Quli 
Khan in the Rajput war. Very useful infor¬ 
mation about the working of the Mughul 
administration and the Rathor rebellion of 
1679-80. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


855 


Nigar-nama 
- i-Munsht 
‘Malikzddaf 


Addb-i- Alamgirl 


Akham-i-Alamgm 


Ruq‘dt-i-‘Alamgiri 


Kalimdt-i- 

Tayyibdt 


KalimcLt-i- 

Aurangzlb 


Raqaim-i-Karaim 


Dastur-ul- amal- 
i-Agahi 


Rumuz-wa- 

Isharaha-i- 

‘Alamgtri 

Jdmi‘al-Inshd 


Bahar-i-Sakhun 

Faiyydz-ul - 
qawdnin 


Collection of Farmdns of Aurangzlb and Far- 
rukh Siyar, MS. Fraser, 228. 

A collection of administrative documents, let¬ 
ters, etc. 1684. B.M. Or. 1735; Or. 2018, 
Bodl. Ms. Pers. el; lithographed ed. Nawal 
Kishore, Lucknow, 1882. 

D. Collection of Letters 

A collection of fully drafted letters written by 
Qabil Khan on behalf of Aurangzlb (1650- 
58 ), together with a collection of letters 
written on behalf of Prince Akbar, c. 1680, 
by Muhammad Sadiq during the Rathor re¬ 
bellion. B.M. Addl. 16, 847; Or. 177; Abdus 
Salam Collection, 326/96, Azad Library, 
Aligarh. 

Letters and orders collected by ‘Xnayat-ullah 
Khan, Aurangzib’s last secretary, covers c. 
1700-5. I.O. 3887. Rampur State Library and 
Patna O.P.L. 

ed., Saiyed Najib Ashraf Nadvi, Vol. 1, Azam- 
garh, 1930. Aurangzib’s correspondence with 
Shah Jahan, Jahanara and other princes be¬ 
fore his accession, largely extracted from 
Adab-i-Alamgirl. 

Letters and orders compiled by ‘Inayat-Ullah 
in 1719. Covers 1699-1704. Bodl. Fraser 157; 

A. S.B.; O.P.L., Abdus Salam, 322/92, 

Maulana Azad Library, Aligarh. 

Inydyatullah. Covers c. 1703-6. Complete 
copv in Rampur State Library, a fragment 
in I.O.L., 3301, ff. 33a-60b. 

Letters to Amir Khan. Compiled by Sayyld 
Ashraf Khan Mir Muhammad Hasaini. Bodl. 
Ouseley 168 & 330. B.M. Addl. 26, 239; Sir 
Sulaiman collection, 412/145, Maulana 
Azad Library, Aligarh. 

Letters and orders collected by Raja Bahar 
Mai, in 1743-44. B.M. Addl. 26,237; Abdus 
Salam 323/93, Maulana Azad Library, Ali¬ 
garh. 

Letters and orders collected by Sabadmal (?), 
1739-40. B.M. Addl. 20,240. 

Munshi Bhagchand. A collection of letters, the 
bulk consisting of letters written by Jai 
Singh and the correspondence between the 
Mughul and Persian Courts. B.M. Or. 1702. 

1663-64. Muhammad Salih Kanbu Lahori, 

B. M. Addl. 5557; Or. 178. 

Letters of Mughul emperors, and princes, 
nobles and other rulers, collected by f Iba- 
dullah Faiyaz in 1723-24. B.M. Or. 9617 (2 
Vols). 


856 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Khatut-i-Shivaji 

Inshd-i-Raushan- 

kalam 


Kdrndma-i-wa qai‘ 
Haft Anjuman 

Matin-i-Inshd or 
Mufid-al-Insha 

Riydz-al-W addd 
'Arzdashts 


Durr-al-Ulum 


Nigarnama-i 

Munshi 


Ruq'dt-i-HamdcL- 
ud-din Khan 


Ruq‘dt-i-Nawdzish 

Khan 

Inshd-i-Madhuldl 

Muraqa‘at-i- 

Hasan 

Majmu’a-i- 

munshat-va- 

ghaira 


Royal Asiatic Society, London, MS. 173. 

Bhupat Ray. Letters written on behalf of 
Ra‘dandaz Khan, faujddr of Baiswara, 
1698-1702, and of his son and deputy, Sher- 
andaz Khan. I.O.L. 4011, B.M. Addl. 6600, 
Abdus Salam collection, 339/409, Maulana 
Azad Library, Aligarh. 

Chathmal ‘Hindu’. A collection of letters 
written on behalf of Ma‘tabar Khan ( fauj - 
ddr of Kalyan) c. 1688-98. I.O.L., 2,007. 

Compiled by Udiraj, the secretary of Rustam 
Khan and of Mlrza Rajia Jai Singh. Paris 
Bib. Nat. No. 37, a fragment. Two complete 
MSS. in India. 

A collection of letters written on behalf of ‘Ali 
Quli Khan, faujddr of Kuch Bihar and col¬ 
lected by Champat Rai in 1700 A.D. Bodl. 
679. 

Izid Baksh ‘Rasa’ 1673-95. B.M. Or. 1725. The 
author’s own letters. 

Jai Singh’s petitions to the Court and Princes, 
1655-58; also includes a few ‘arzdashts from 
other nobles belonging to Aurangzlb’s 
reign. R.A.S., Pers. Cat. 173; ff. 8-76. 

Collection of letters and documents belonging 
to Munshi Gopal Rai Surdaj, collected and 
arranged by Sahib Rai Surdaj, 1688-89. 
Bodl. Walkar 104. 

Malikzada. Lithographed, Nawal Kishore, 1882. 
A very important collection of letters and 
administrative documents. 

A servant of Aurangzlb’s mother-in-law 
Naur as Banu and afterwards faujddr of 
Malwa. 

Faujddr of Mandu, later governor of Kashmir. 

Lithographed letters of Mu’izz-ud-dm and 
others. 

Maulana Abu’l-Hasan, a civil officer in Bengal 
and Orissa, 1655-67. Rampur State Library, 
Insha, No. 182. 

Letter to and from Bidar Bakht, from Mukhlis 
Khan, Ruhullah Khan Asad Khan to Mu- 
hummad Murad Khan etc. Rampur State 
Library, Insha, No. 176. 

Miscellaneous collection of letters of the reigns 
of Aurangzlb and Bahadur Shah, including 
five letters from ShivajI, R.A.S. Morley 81 
(Pers. Cat. 71). 

Collection of letters, called “Reports from the 
Deccan” in the Lindesiana Catalogue but 
actually correspondence between Mewar 
and the Mughul Court, etc., John Rylands 
Library, MSS. 353. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


857 


Parasanis MS. 


Shiva-Chhatra - 
patichen Charitra 


Jedheyanchi 
Shakdvali 
Il-Qalmi Bakhar 


Chhatra-prakash 


Kdmrupar 
Buranji 
Purdni Asdm 
Buranji 

Annals of Delhi 
Pddshdhat 


Frangois Bernier 


Jean Baptiste 
Tavernier 
Thomas Bowrey 


Nicholo Manucci 

Strerynsham 

Master 

H. Yule (ed.) 

S. N. Sen (ed.) 
John Marshall 


English Factory at Surat, Persian correspond¬ 
ence, 1695-97, I.O.L. 150. 

Letters from Shivaji, Murad Baksh, etc. Mara¬ 
thi translation published by Raj wade; and 
English translation (in MS.) in Parasanis 
collection, Satatfa. 

E. Marathi 

Krishnaji Anant Sabhasad, ed., K. N. Sane 
(3rd edn. 1912), translated by Mankar 
(1884 and 1886) and by S. N. Sen (2nd edn. 
1925). 

Text in Shiva-charitra-Pradip, Translated by 
J. N. Sarkar in Shivaji Souvenir, 1927. 

Dattaji and transcribed by K. R. Malkare, edi¬ 
ted by Raj wade and Parasanis. See also chap¬ 
ter IX. 

F. Hindi 

Lai Kavi. Text ed., W. Price, Calcutta, 1829; 
Translated in Pogson’s History of the Boon- 
delas, 1830. 

G. Assamese 


Edited by S. K. Bhuyan, Assamese Text. 

Gauhati, 1930. 

Assamese chronicle, tr. by S. K. Bhuyan, Gau¬ 
hati, 1947. 

H. European Sources 

Travels in the Mogul Empire, 1656-68; tr. A. 
Constable, 2nd edn. revised by V. A. Smith, 
London, 1916. 

Travels in India, 1640-67, t'r. V. Ball, 2 Vols., 
London, 1889. 

A Geographical Account of Countries Round 
the Bay of Bengal, 1669-79, ed., R. C. Tem¬ 
ple, Cambridge, 1905. 

Storia do Mogor, 1653-1708, tr. and ed., W. 
Irvine, 4 Vols., London, 1907-8. 

The Diaries of Streynsham Master, 1675-80, 
ed. R. C. Temple, 2 Vols., London, 1911. 

The Diary of William Hedges, 3 Vols., Hakluyt 
Society, London, 1887-89. 

The Indian Travels of Thevenot and Careri, 
New Delhi, 1949. 

Notes and observations on East India, ed., S. 
A Khan, John Marshall in India, London, 
1927. 


858 

John Fryer 


J. Ovington 

English Factories in 
India 


Diary and Consulta¬ 
tion Books of 
Fort St. George 
Early Annals of the 
English in Bengal 
Edward Barlow 

Alexander 
Hamilton 
Charles Lockyer 
Martin Francois 

Gautier Schouten 

J. S. Stavorinus 

W. Ph. Coolhas 
(ed.) 


Ali, M. Athar 


Bhuyan, S. K. 


Bhuyan, S. K. 


Chatter jee, 

An j ali 
Das, H. H. 

Faruki, M. 
Qanungo, K. 
Lane-Poole, 
Stanley 

Naumani, 

Maulana Shibli 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

A New Account of East India and Persia. Be¬ 
ing Nine Year’s Travels, 1672-81, ed., W. 
Crooke, 3 Vols., Hakluyt Society, 2nd Series, 
London, 1909-15. 

A Voyage to Surat in the year 1689, ed. H. G. 
Rawlinson, London, 1929. 

See chapter VII, (1655-60) 1921, (1660-64) 
1923, (665-67) 1925, (1668-69) 1927. New 
Series, 1670-84, 4 Vols., edited by C. Faw¬ 
cett, Oxford, 1936-55. 

1681-85; edited by A. T. Pringle, 5 Vols., 
Madras, 1893-95. 

C. R. Wilson, 3 Vols., Calcutta, 1895-1917. 

Barlow’s Journal, 1670-97, 2 Vols., London 

1934. 

A New Account of the East Indies, 2 Vols., 
ed., W. Foster, London, 1930. 

An Account of Trade in India, London, 1711. 

Memoires de Fr.angois Martin, 1665-1696, ed., 
A. Martineau, Paris, 1931. 

Voiage de Gautier Schouten aux Indes Orien- 
tales, 1658-1665, Amsterdam, 1707. 

Voyage in the East Indies, Trans., S. H. Wil- 
cocke, Vol. 3, London, 1798. 

Generale Missiven, (Der V.O.C.), Deel III, 
1655-1674, The Hague, 1968. 

2. Secondary Works 

The Mughal Nobility under Aurangzib, Asia, 
Dept, of History, Aligarh Muslim Univer¬ 
sity, 1966. 

Lachit Barphukan and his times; a history of 
the Assam-Mughul conflict of the period, 
1667-1671, Gauhati, 1947. 

Atan Burangohian and his times, a history of 
Assam from the invasion of Nawab Mir 
Jumla in 1662-63 to the termination of 
Assam-Mughul conflicts in 1682; compiled 
chiefly from indigenous Assamese sources, 
Gauhati, 1957. 

Bengal in the Reign of Aurangzib, Calcutta, 
1967. 

The Norris Embassy to Aurangzib, Calcutta, 
1959. 

Aurangzeb and his times, Bombay, 1935. 

Dara Shukoh, Calcutta, 1952. 

Aurangzeb and the Decay of the Mughul Em¬ 
pire, Delhi, (n.d.). 

Aurangzeb Alamgir per Ek Nazar. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


859 


Sarkar, J. N. 


Sarkar, 
Jagadish 
Narayan 
Sharma, S. R. 


Abbas, S. Ali 

Chandra, Jnan 
-do- 
-do- 
-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

Deshpande, Y. K. 


Jaffar, S. M. 


Jalal-uddin 


Khan, 

Yar Muhammad 

Madhava Rao, 

P. Setu 


Rahim, M. A. 


Sarkar, 

Jagadish 

Narayan 

-do- 


History of Aurangzib, 5 Vols., Calcutta, 1912- 
25. Studies in Aurangzib’s reign, Calcutta, 
1933. Anecdotes of Aurangzib, 2nd edn.; Cal¬ 
cutta, 1925. India of Aurangzib, Calcutta, 
1901. Studies in Mughal India, 2nd edn., Cal¬ 
cutta, 1919. 


The life of Mir Jumla, Calcutta, 1951. 

Religious Policy of Aurangzeb, Calcutta (n.d.). 

3. Articles 

‘Aurangzeb and the Mughal Decline, a critical 
study’, Journal of the Punjab Historical 
Society, 14, June 1962, 1-25. 

‘Alamgir’s Attitude towards Non-Muslim Insti¬ 
tutions’, J.P.H.S., 7, 1959, 36-39. 

‘Aurangzeb and Hindu Temples’, JPHS, 5. 
Oct. 1957, 247-54. 

‘Alamgir’s grants to Hindu Pujaris’, JPHS, 6, 
1958, 55-65. 

‘Alamgir’s Patronage to Hindu Temples’, 
JPHS, 6, 1958, 208-13. 

‘Alamgir’s Tolerance in the light of contem¬ 
porary Jain Literature’, JPHS, 1958, 269-72. 

‘Freedom of Worship for the Hindus under 
Alamgir’, JPHS, 6, 1958, 124-25. 

‘Revenue Administration of Berar in the Reign 
of Aurangzeb, (1679 A.D.),’ Proceedings of 
the Indian Historical Records Commission, 
1929, 81-87. 

‘An estimate of Aurangzeb’, Journal of the 
Punjab University Historical Society, 12, 
June 1961, 17-26. 

‘A study of Madad-i-Ma‘ash grants and forma¬ 
tion of its rule by Emperor Aurangzeb’, 
Indo-Iranica, 21, No. 3, Sept. 1968, 35-37. 

‘An analysis of Aurangzeb’s attitude towards 
Qutb-Shah’, Punjab Journal of Research, 
Vol. I, No. 2, July 1966, 87-102. 

‘Inshae Madhoram—a Persian source of 
Mughul-Maratha conflict (1690-1700)’, JIH, 
VoL XLIV, pt. 1, April 1966, ser. No. 130, 
269-88. 

‘Emperor Aurangzeb’s Annexation of Jodh¬ 
pur and Rajput Rebellion’, J.A.S.P ., 
Dacca, April 1965, 65-90. 

‘The Haft Anjuman of Udairaj alias Tab’yar, 
Munshi of Mirza Raja Jai Singh’, BPP, 82, 
Jan. 1963, 65-73, Jan. 1964, 43-55. 

‘New Light on Mirza Raja Jai Singh’s Policy 
in Bijapur’, JIH, Vol. XLIII, pt. Ill, Dec. 
1965, Serial No. 129, 747-61. 


860 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Siddiqi, M. H. 
Sinha, S. N. 

Topa, Ishwara 


Shiva-Chhatra- 
patichen Charitra 

Jedhe-yanchi 

Shakavali 

Sanads and Letters 

Powiadas or 

Marathi Ballads 

Savant-vadi- 

Samsthanchd 

Itihas 

Il-Qalmi Bakhar 


Marathyan-chya- 

Itihasachin- 

Sadhanen 


Shiva 1 Bharat 

P amah-par vat- 
grahan- 
dkhydnam 
Shwa-raj- 
Rajyavishek- 
Kalpataru 


Chhatra-prakash 


‘The Muhtasib under Aurangzeb’, Medieval 
India Quarterly, 5, 1963, 113-119. 

‘The Subah of Allahabad under Aurangzeb, 
1659-1707’, Islamic Culture, 37, Oct. 1963, 
247-59. 

‘Political Views of Aurangzeb—based on his 
Letters’, Islamic Culture, 39, April 1965, 
111-136. 


CHAPTER IX 
SHIVAJI 

1. Original Sources 

A. Marathi 

by KrishnajI Anant Sabhasad, ed., K. N. Sane 
(3rd edn., 1912). Translated by Mankar 
(1884, 1886), S. N. Sen (2nd edn., 1925). 
Text in Shiva-charitra-Pradip. Trans, by J. N. 

Sarkar in ShivajI Souvenir, 1927. 

Ed. P. V. Mawjee and D. B. Parasanis, 1913. 
Collected by H. A. Acworth and S. T. Shali- 
gram, 3rd edn., 1911. Eng. trans. of ten of 
the ballads by Acworth, Longmans, 1894. 


V. P. Pingulkar, 1911. 

by DattajI, transcribed with modifications by 
KhanddjI K. R. Malkare. Edited by Raj wade 
and Parasanis. Rough translation by Frissel, 
as “the Raigarh Life” in Forrest’s Selections. 

Maratha Series. Expanded Persian ver¬ 
sion, Tarlkh-i-Shlvajl (I.O.L. 1957, also 
Rieu, i, 327), by Jadunath Sarkar in Modern 
Review, 1907 and 1910. 


ed., V. R. Raj wade and others. 

B. Sanskrit 

by Paramanand, ed. with a Marathi transla¬ 
tion by S. M. Divekar, 1927. 

by Jayaram, ed. by S. M. Divekar, 1923. 


Asiatic Society of Bengal, MSS. 3088. 

C. Hindi 

by Lai Kavi, Nagri Pracharani Sabha, Bena¬ 
res. English translation in Pogson’s History 
of the Boondelas, Calcutta, 1826. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


861 


D. Persian 

For Padshah-nama, ‘Amal-i-Salih, see chapter VII. 

For ‘Alamgir-nama, Maasir-i-‘Alamgiri, Muntakhab-ul-Lubab, 
Basatin-us-Salatm, Nuksha-i-Dilkhusa, Fatuhat-i-‘AlamgIri, Akhbarat- 
i-Darbal , -i-mu’alla, Adab-i-‘AlamgirI, Haft Anjuman, Faiyyaz-ul- 
qawanin, Khatut-i-ShivajI, Ahkam-i-‘Alamgin, Ruq^t-i-'Alamglri, 
Parasanls Ms., see chapters VIII & X. 


Muhammad-nama 
Tarikh-i- Ali- 
‘Adil Shdht 
Tdrikh-i- 
Shivaji 


by Muhammad Zahur. 
by Sayyid Nurullah. 

I.O.L. 1957, Translated by J. N. Sarkar, 
Modern Review, 1907 & 1910. 


English Factories in 
India 


Records of Fort St. 
George: Diary 
and Consultation 
Books, Letters 
from Fort. St. 
George 


E. European Sources 

See chapter VII (1655-60) 1921, (1660-64) 

1923, (1665-67) 1925, (1668-69) 1927; New 
Series, 4 Vols., 1670-80, see chapters VIII & 
X. 


Madras, 1912-25. 


Memoires de 
Francois Martin 
La Compagnie 
Indes Orientates 
et Francois 
Martin 

Histoire de Sevagi 
et de son sue - 
cesseur 
Portugueses e 
Maratas, i. 
Shivaji 

Storia do Mogor 


ed., A. Martineau, Paris, 1931. 


par Paul Kaeppelin, Paris, 1908. 

par J. D’Orleans, S. J., appended to Histoire 
des Deux conquerans Tartares, Paris, 1688. 


by Panduranga Pissurlencar. 
See chapter VIII & X. 


For travels of Bernier, Tavernier, Thevenot and Careri, John 
Fryer, and Ovington, see chapters VIII and X. 


Behere, N. K. 

Duff, Grant 

Gune, V. T. 

Kishore, Brij 
Kulkarni, A. R. 

Mahaley, K. L. 


2. Secondary Works 

The Background of the Maratha Renaissance 
in the 17th Century, Bangalore, 1946. 

A History of the Mahrattas, 3 Vols., London, 
1826. 

The Judicial System of the Marathas, 1600- 
1808 A.D., Poona, 1953. 

Tara Bai and her Times, Bombay, 1963. 
Maharashtra in the Age of Shivaji, Poona, 
1969. 

Shivaji the Pragmatist, Nagpur, 1969. 


862 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Malgaonkar, M. 


-do- 

Muddachari, B. 

Nadkarni, R. V. 

Pawar, A. G. 

Ranade, M. G. 

Rawlinson, H. G. 

Sardesai, G. S. 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

Sharma, S. R. 
Sen, S. N. 

-do- 

-do- 


-do- 

Tatakhav, N. S. 


Waring, E. S. 


De, J. C. 
Gokhale, B. G. 

Joshi, T. D. 


Kanhaji Angrey, Maratha Admiral; an account 
of his life and his battles with the English, 
Bombay, 1959. 

Chhatrapatis of Kolhapur, Bombay, 1971. 

The Mysore-Maratha Relations in the 17th 
Century, Mysore, 1969. 

The Rise and Fall of the Maratha Empire, 
Bombay, 1966. 

Tarabai Papers, a collection of Persian letters, 
Kolhapur, 1971. 

Rise of the Maratha Power and other essays, 
Bombay, 1961. 

Shivaji the Maratha: his life and times, 
Oxford, Clarendon, 1915. 

The Main Currents of Maratha History, rev., 
Bombay, 1949. 

New History of the Marathas, Vol. I, Shivaji 
and his time, (1600-1707), Bombay, 1957. 

Shivaji and his Times, 3rd edn., Calcutta, 1929. 

House of Shivaji, 3rd edn., Calcutta, 1955. 

Studies in Aurangzeb’s Reign, Calcutta, 1933. 

History of Aurangzeb, 5 Vols., Calcutta, 1912- 
25. 

Anecdotes of Aurangzeb, 2nd edn., Calcutta, 
1925. 

India of Aurangzeb, Calcutta, 1901. 

Studies in Mughal India, 2nd edn., Calcutta, 
1919. 

Maratha History, Re-examined, (1295-1707), 
Bombay, 1944. 

Siva Chhatrapati, a translation of Sabhasad 
Bakhar with extracts from Chitnis and Siva- 
digvijaya, Calcutta, 1920. 

Foreign Biographies of Shivaji, Calcutta, 1927. 

The Military System of the Marathas, Bombay, 
1958. 

The Administrative System of the Marathas, 
Calcutta, 1928. 

The Life of Shivaji Maharaj, adopted from ori¬ 
ginal Marathi work written by K. A. Kelus- 
kar, Bombay, 1921. 

A History of the Mahrattas; to which is pre¬ 
fixed an historical sketch of the Deccan, 
London, 1810. 

3. Articles 

‘Shivaji’s Surat Expedition of 1664’, Indian 
Culture, Vol. 6, No. 4. 

‘Bombay and Shivaji’, 1668-80, Journal of the 
Asiatic Society of Bombay, n.s., 33, 1958, 69- 
79. 

‘The People of Gujarat and Shivaji’, Journal 
of the Gujarat Research Society, Bombay, 
30, Oct. 1968, 256-58. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


863 


Moraes, George 


Morrison, B. M. 
Sarkar, Jadunath 
Sarkar, Jagadish, N. 


Bichitra Natak 
The Dahistan 
The Adi Granth 
Guru Granth 
Ratnavali 
Tuzuk-i-Bdburi 
Tuzuk-i- 
Jahdngirl 
Pddshdh-ndma 
e Amal-i-Sdlih 
M.untakhab-ul- 
Lubdb 
Kalimdt-i- 
Tayyibdt 
Makhiz-i- 
Tawdrikh-i- 
Sikhdn 
Zafar-ndma 


Banerjee, 

Indu Bhusan 
Cunningham, 

J. D. 

Grewal, J. S. 

-do- 

Gupta, Hari Ram 
Macgregor, W. L. 

Macauliffe, M. 


Narang, G. C. 


-do- 


‘Shivaji and the Portuguese’, Journal of the 
Asiatic Society of Bombay n.s., 34/35, 

1955/60, 172-184. 

‘A History of Shivaji’, an 18th century French 
account, JIH, 42, April 1964, 49-76. 

'The Last Campaign of Shivaji’, Indian Histo¬ 
rical Quarterly, Vol. 4, No. 4. 

‘Mirza Raja Jai Singh and Shivaji’, JIH, 42, 
April 1964, 251-264. 

CHAPTER XI 
THE SIKHS 
1. Original Sources 

Mohsin Fani. 

Granth Sahib, 2nd edn., New Delhi, 1970. 

Guru Granth Sahib, Patiala, 1972. 

See chapter II. 

See chapter VI. 

See chapter VII. 

See chapter VII. 

See chapter VIII. 

See chapter VIII. 


ed. Ganda Singh. 

See chapter VIII. 

2. Secondary Works 

Evolution of the Khalsa, 2 Vols., 3rd edn., 
Calcutta, 1972. 

A History of the Sikhs, London, 1897. 

Guru Nanak in History, Chandigarh, 1969. 
From Guru Nanak to Maharaja Ranjit Singh , 
essays in Sikh History, Amritsar, 1972. 
History of the Sikhs. 

The History of the Sikhs, 2 Vols., London, 
1846. 

The Sikh Religion; its gurus, sacred writings 
and authors, 6 Vols., Oxford, Clarendon, 
1909. 

Glorious History of Sikhism, 6th edn.. New 
Delhi, 1972. 

Transformation of Sikhism, 5th edn., New 
Delhi, 1960. 

Origin of the Sikh Power, 3rd edn., London, 
1915. 


Payne, C. H. 


864 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Prinsep, H. T. 

Ray, Nihar Ran j an 

Sinha, N. K. 

Singh, Ganda (ed.) 

Singh, Harbans 
Singh, Khuswant 


Oriqin of the Sikh Powder in the Panjab. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1834. 

The Sikh Gurus and Sikh Society; a study in 
social analysis, Patiala, 1970. 

Rise of the Sikh Power, 3rd edn., Calcutta, 
1960. 

Early European Accounts of the Sikhs, Cal¬ 
cutta, 1962. 

The Heritage of Sikhs, London, 1965. 

A History of the Sikhs, Princeton, 1963, Vol. 
I, 1469-1839. 

The Sikhs, London, 1953. 

See also Bibliography, Chapter XX, Sikhism. 


CHAPTER XII 

HINDU RESISTANCE TO MUSLIM DOMINATION 
For original sources mentioned in the text—Tuzuk-i-Baburi, 
Tarlkh-i-Sher Shahl, Ain-i-Akbari, Akbarnama, Muntakhab-ut- 
Tawarikh, Tuzuk-i-Jahang&T, Maasir-ul-Umara, Maasir-i-‘Alamgiri 5 
Fatuhat-i-‘Alamgiri—see earlier chapters. 


Banerjee, A. C. 
Bhargava, V. S. 

Kaviraj, 

Shyamaldas 
Ojha, G. S. H. 
-do- 


-do- 

Qanungo, K. R. 
Reu, B. N. 
Sarkar, J. N. 

Sharma, G. N. 
Tod, James 


Bir Singh Deo 
Charitra 
Chhatra-prakash 


N ukshcL-i-Dilkusha 
Madsir-ul-Umara 


Secondary Works 

A. Mewdr and Marwar 

Rajput Studies, Calcutta, 1944. 

Marwar and the Mughal Emperors, 1526-1748, 
Delhi, 1966. 

Vir Vinod, 4 Vols. 

Rajputanae Ka Itihas, Vol. Ill, Ajmer, 1937. 

Udaipur Rajya Ka Itihas, 2 Vols., Ajmer, 
1955. 

Jodhpur Rajya-ka-Itihas, 2 Vols. 

Studies in Rajput History, 1960. 

Marwar Ka Itihas, Jodhpur, 1938. 

History of Aurangzeb, 5 Vols., Calcutta, 1912- 
25. 

Mewar and the Mughal Emperors, Agra, 1951. 

Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan , 2 Vols., 
1829-32. 

B. Jdts and Bundelds 

Keshav Das. 

Lai, Hindi Text, ed., W. Price, Calcutta, 1829, 
and Shyamsundar Das and K. B. Varma, 
Benares, 1916; translated in Pogson’s History 
of the Boondelas, Calcutta, 1830. 

Bhimsen, see chapters VIII & X. 

Shah Nawaz Khan, ed., Abdur Rahim and 
Ashraf ‘Ali, Bib. Ind., 3 Vols., Calcutta, 1888- 



GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


865 


Tdrlkh-i- 
Bundelkhand- 
wa-Jalaun 
Crooke, W. 

Elliot, H. M. 


Ibbetson, D. 
Irvine, W. 

Prodhan, M. C. 

Qanungo, K. R. 
Silberrard, C. A. 


Sarkar, J. N. 
Tiwari, Gorelal 


Pandit Krishna Narayan, 1853. 

The Tribes and Castes of the North Western 
Provinces and Oudh, 4 Vols., Calcutta, 1896. 

Memoirs on the ... Races of North-Western 
provinces of India, being an amplified edi¬ 
tion of the original Supplemental Glossary, 
revised by John Beames, 2 Vols., London, 
1869. 

Punjab Castes, Lahore, 1916. 

Later Mughals, ed. and continued by J. N. 
Sarkar, 2 Vols., Calcutta, 1921-22. 

The Political System of the Jats of Northern 
India, Bombay, 1966. 

History of the Jats, Calcutta, 1925. 

‘A Contribution to the History of Western 
Bundelkhand’, being an English translation 
of Majbut Singh’s Hindi History of Bundel- 
khand, Journal of Asiatic Society of Bengal, 
Vol. 71, 1902. 

History of Aurangzeb, Vol. 3, Calcutta, 1912, 
Vol. 5, Calcutta, 1925. 

Bundelkhand Ka Sanskshipt Itihas, Benares, 
1933. 


C. Mardthas 

See Bibliography, chapter IX. 


CHAPTER XIII 

MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM—I 

A. Gujarat 
1. Original Sources 


Mirdt-i-Ahmadi 

Mirdt-i-Sikandan 


Tank h-i-Guj ardt 


‘Ali Muhammad Khan, see chapters VIII & X. 
Sikandar bin Muhammad, tr., E. C. Bay ley 
under the title, The Local Muhammedan 
Dynasties, Gujarat, London, 1886. 

Mir Abu Turab Vail, ed., E. Denison Ross, Bib. 
Ind., 1909. 


Zafar-ul-Walih Abdulla Muhammad bin ‘Umar al-Makkl, ed., 

E. D. Ross, 3 Vols., London, 1910-29. 
Tdrikh-i-Sordth Diwan Ranchodji Amarji, tr., E. Rehtsek, and 

J. Burgess, Bombay, 1882. 

For Ain-i-Akbairl, Humayun-nama etc. referred to in the text, 
see earlier chapters. 


2. Modern Works 

Briggs, H. G. The Cities of Gurjarashtra, Their Topography 

and History, Bombay, 1849. 

Commissariat, M. S. A History of Gujarat, Vol. II, 1573-1758, Re¬ 
print, Orient Longmans, 1957. 


M.E. 


866 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


-do- 

Danvers, F. C. 
Forbes, A. K. 


Studies in the History of Gujarat, Bombay, 
1936. 

The Portuguese in India, London, 1894. 

Ras Mala: Hindoo Annals of the Province of 
Goozerat, ed., H. G. Rawlinson, 1924. 


Banerjee, S. K. 
-do- 

Hussain, M. H. 

Jhaveri, K. M. 
Quraishi, M. A. 

Sternbach, L. 
Tirmizi, S. A. A. 


3. Articles 

‘Bahadur Shah of Gujarat’, IC, III, 329-41. 

‘Sultan Bahadur Shah of Gujarat and the 
Princely Refugee from the Mughal Empire 
(1534)’. IC, III, 413-20. 

‘Imperialism of Bahadur Shah of Gujarat’, 
D. R. Bhandarkar Commemoration Volume, 
91-96. 

‘Some observations on the Mirat-i-Ahmadi’, 
AIOC, VII, 629-33. 

‘A Glimpse of Muslim Education and Learn¬ 
ing in Gujarat’, Journal of Maharaja Sayaji- 
rao University of Baroda, 17, April 1968, 45- 
56. 

‘Gujarat as known to medieval Europe’, PIHC, 
VII, 292-95. 

‘The Contemporary Persian Chronicles of the 
Sultans of Gujarat; A study’, Islamic Cul¬ 
ture, XXXII, 1958, 121-34. 


B. Kashmir 

1. Original Sources 

Tarikh-i-Rashidi See chapter II. 

Tdrikh-i-A‘zaml Mulla Muhammad A‘zami. 

Tarikh-i-Kashmir Haidar Malik. 


For Ain-i-Akbari, Tabaqlat-i-Akbari referred to in the text, see 
chapter V. 


Dutta, J. C. 

Husain, M. 
Sufii, G. M. D. 


Haig, W. 


Khan, H. H. 
Majumdar, A. K. 


Rahman, S. S. A. 


2. Secondary Works 

Kings of Kashmir, Tr. of Rajatarangini, 3 
Vols., Calcutta, 1879-88. 

Kashmir under the Sultans, Calcutta, 1959. 
Kashmir, A History of Kashmir, 2 Vols., 
Lahore, 1948-49. 

• 'V 

3. Select Articles 

‘The Chronology and Genealogy of the Muham¬ 
madan kings of Kashmir’, JRAS, 1918, 451- 
68 . 

‘Some Aspects of Kashmir under the Shah 
Mirs and the Chaks’, PIHC, XVI, 194-200. 
‘A Note on the Chronology of the Sultans of 
Kashmir in the ‘Ain-i-Akbari’, JASBL, 
XXII, 1956, 1-12. 

‘Kashmir in Indo-Persian Literature’, Indo- 
Iranica, Vol. 19, No. 2, June 1966, 1-22. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


867 


CHAPTER XIV 

MUSLIM RESISTANCE TO MUGHUL IMPERIALISM—II 
THE FIVE SULTANATES OF THE DECCAN 

1. Original Sources 

Burhan-i-Madsir ‘Ali bin Azizullah Tabataba. History of the 

Bahamanis and Nizamshlahls of Gulbarga, 
Bidar and Ahmadnagar completed in or 
shortly after 1004/1596. The Deccan cam¬ 
paigns of the Mughuls are described in the 
work. Published at Hyderabad (Dn.), 1936; 
fransl., Sir W. Haig, Bombay, 1923. 

Tazkirat-ul-Muluk Rafl-ud-dln Shlrazi, B.M. Addl. 23,883. Trans¬ 
lated by J. S. King under the title The His¬ 
tory of the Bahmani Dynasty, London, 1900. 

Tankh-i- 


Muhammad 
Qutb Shahi 
Basatin-us-Salatin 
Muhammad-ndma 


Tdrikh-i- Ali- 
‘Adil-Shdh-Sdni 
Hadiqat-us- 
Saldtin 

Hadiqat-uVAlam 

Futuhdt-i-‘Adil 

Shahi 


Habib-ullah; an account of the Kingdom of 
Golconda to 1617 A.D. 

See chapters VIII & X. 

Zahur-bin-Zahuri. A valuable account of ‘Adil 
Shahi Kingdom of Bijapur. 

A history of Bijapur. 

A history of the reign of ‘Abdullah Qutb Shah 
of Golconda. 

Mir Abu-’l Qasim, Mir ‘Alam; a history of the 
Sultans of Golconda. 

FizunI Astrabadl. 


For Tarlkh-i-Firishta, Akbar-nama, Tuzuk-i-Jahianglrl, Iqbal- 
nama-i-Jahanglrl, Padshah-nama, Muntakhab-ul-Lubab, Maasir-i- 
Rahlml, see earlier chapters. 


Chowdhury, J. N. 
Cousens, H. 

Haig, W. 

Husain, M. Agha 

Qadir, A. S. 

Sherwani, H. K. 

-do- 

Sinha, S. K. 

Taylor, M. 

& 

Fergusson, J. 
Yazdani, G. 


2. Secondary Works 

Malik Ambar. 

Bija'pur and its Architectural Remains , Bom¬ 
bay, 1916. 

Historic Landmarks of the Deccan, Allaha¬ 
bad, 1907. 

Khandesh in New Light ; based on Persian and 
Arabic sources, 1963. 

Memoirs of Chand Bibi, the princess of Ahmad¬ 
nagar, Hyderabad, 1937. 

The Bahamanis of the Deccan, Hyderabad, 
1953. 

Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah, Founder of Hai- 
derabad, London, 1968. 

Medieval History of the Deccan, Vol. I, Bah- 
manis, Hyderabad, 1964. 


Architecture at Bijapur. 

Bidar, Its History and Monuments, Oxford, 
1947. 


868 

Ahmad, Aziz 

Basu, K. K. 
Fukazawa, H. 


Joshi, P. M. 

-do- 

Sherwani, H. K. 
-do- 
-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 


Ayyangar, S. K. 


Sastri, K. A. N. 
& 

Venkatarama- 
nayya, N. 


Aiyangar, S. K. 
Heras, H. 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 
3, Select Articles 

‘Dar-al-Islam and the Muslim kingdoms of 
Deccan and Gujarat’, Cahiers d’historie Mon¬ 
diale , 7, 1963, 787-793. 

‘A Chapter from Golconda History’, JBORS, 
XXVIII. 

‘A Study of the Local Administration of Adil 
Shahi Sultanate (A.D. 1489-1688)’, Hitot- 

subashi Journal of Economics, 3, No. 2, June 
1963, 37-67. 

‘Relations between the Adil Shahi kingdom of 
Bijapur and the Portuguese at Goa during 
the 16th Century’, N1A, II (1939-40). 

‘Muhammad Adil Shah and the Portuguese’, 
JIH, 33, April 1955, 1-10. 

‘Telengana under Ibrahim Qutb Shah’, JIH, 

XXXV. 

‘Cultural and Administrative set up under 
Ibrahim Qutb Shah’, Islamic Culture, 1957. 

‘Some Cultural Aspects of the Reign of Md. 
Quli Qutb Shah’, Medieval India Quarterly 
3, Jan./April, 1958, 253-69. 

‘The Reign of Sultan Muhammad Qutb Shah’, 
JPHS , 10, April 1962, 133-160, July 1962, 

263-81. 

‘Political and Military Aspects of the Reign of 
Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah’, JIH, 39, Dec. 
1961, 503-533; April 1962, 85-128. 

‘The Reign of Abdullah Qutb Shah’, 1626-72, 
JIH, Aug. 1964, 443-70; Dec. 1964, 677-97. 

‘Administration, International Conduct and 
Social Conditions under Abdullah Qutb 
Shah’, 1626-72, JIH, April 1966, 1-27. 

CHAPTER XV 
VIJAYANAGARA 

1. Original Sources 

For Persian sources, see chapter XIV. 

Sources of Vijayanagara History, Madras Uni¬ 
versity Historical series, No. 1., Madras, 
1919. 


Further Sources of Vijayanagara History, 
3 Vols., Madras, 1946. 

See also Bibliography on chapter XII, Vol. VI 
of this Series. 

2. Secondary Sources 

South India and her Muhammedan Invaders . 
The Aravidu Dynasty of Vijayanagar, Madras, 
1927. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


869 


Mahalingam, T. K. 
-do- 
-do 

Nelson, J. H. 

Rao, C. H. 

Saletore, B. A. 

Sastri, K. A. N. 

Satyanathier, R. 

Sewell, R. 

Srinivasa- 
chari, C. S. 

Swaminathan, 

K. D. 

Vriddhagirisan, 

V. 

Vijayanagara 


Goetz, H. 
-do- 


Mahalingam, T. K. 
-do- 
-do- 


Rao, G. V. 
-do- 

Rao, T. A. 


Saletore, B. A. 


-do- 


-do- 


-do- 


Administration and Social Life under Vijaya¬ 
nagara Empire, Madras, 1951. 

Economic Life in the Vijauanaqara Empire, 
Madras, 1951. 

South Indian Polity, Madras, 1955. 

The Madura Country, Madras, 1868. 

History of Mysore, Madras, 1927. 

Social and Political Life in the Vijayanagar 
Empire, 2 Vols. 

A History of South India, 2nd end., O.U.P., 
1958. 

The Nayaks of Madura, Madras, 1924. 

A Forgotten Empire, London, 1900. 

A History of Gingee and its Rulers, Annamalai 
University, 1943. 

The Nayaks of Ikkeri, Madras, 1957. 

The Nayaks of Tanjore, Annamalai University, 

1942. 

Sexcentenary Commemoration Volume, 1936. 

3. Select Articles 

‘The Fall of Vijayanagara and Nationalisation 
of Muslim Art’, JIH, XIX, 249-55. 

‘The Jesuit Influence at the Court of Vijaya¬ 
nagara’, Quarterly Journal of the Mythic 
Society, XIV, 130-40. 

‘Virappa Nayaka and Vijayanagara’, Madras 
University Journal, Vol. XXII. 

‘Randaula Khan and the Karnatak’, Madras 
University Journal, Vol. XXL 

‘The End of Madurai Nayakship’, Indica, The 
Indian Historical Research Institute Silver 
Jubilee Commemoration Volume, Bombay, 
1953. 

‘The Status of Muslims in Vijayanagara 
Empire’, PIHC, VI, 251-56. 

‘Education in Vijayanagara Empire’, PIHC, 
VI, 218-22. 

‘Andhra Literature in the Vijayanagara Em¬ 
pire’, Journal*of the Andhra Historical Re¬ 
search Society, X. 

‘Did Tuluva Revolt after the battle of Rak- 
shasa-Tongadi?’, Thomas Commemoration 
Volume, 209-14. 

‘Some Aspects of the Overseas Trade of Vija¬ 
yanagara from the Accounts of European 
Travellers’, B. C. Law Volume, II, 114-227. 

‘The Vira Saivas and their contribution to 
Vijayanagara’, Karnatak Historical Review, 
IV, 1937. 

Vaishnavism in Vijayanagara’, D. R. Bhandar - 
kar Volume, 183-96. 


870 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Saletore, R. N. 

Srinivasa- 
chari, C. S. 

Srikantayya, S. 

Srinivasachar 


‘Town Planning in the Vijayanagara Empire’, 
Karnatak Historical Review, IV, nos. 1 & 2. 
1937. 

‘A Great Contribution of Vijayanagara to the 
Tamil Country’, Karnatak Historical Review, 
IV, Nos. 1 & 2, 1937. 

‘The Vijayanagara Empire and Hindu Policy’, 
PIHC, V, 333-34. 

‘Taxation of Vijayanagara’, IHQ, XII, 456-68. 

CHAPTER XVI 
EUROPEAN SETTLEMENTS 

1. Published Records 

Selection from the Records of the Madras 
Government : Dutch Records, ed. by A. J. 
Van der Burg, P. Groot, J. Fruictier and 
A. Galleti, 15 Vols. (1908-11). 

Memoirs of the Dutch Governors etc. of 
Ceylon, 10 Vols., Colombo, 1908-15. 

Memoirs de Francois Martin, Foudateur de 
Pondechery, by A. Martineau, 3 Vols., 
Paris, 1935. 

Catalogue des Manuscripts de anciennes 
archives, ed. by E. Gaudhart, Vol. I, 1690- 
1789, Societe de l’histoire de l’lnde Francaise. 

Generale Missiven, (Der V.O.C.), Decl. I-III, 
ed., W.Ph. Coolhas, The Hague, 1968. 

Calendar of State Papers, East Indies, 1513- 
1634, by W.N. Sainsbury, 5 Vols. London, 
1862-92. 

Calendar of the Court Minutes of the East 
India Company, ed. by E.B. Sainsbury, 
11 Vols., Oxford, 1907-38. 

Letters Received by the East India Company 
from its servants in the East, 6 Vols, ed. by 
F.C. Danvers and Foster, W., 1602-1617, 
London, 1896-1902. 

English Factories in India, 1618-1669, 13 Vols. 
Oxford, 1906-1927. 

English Factories in India, New Series, 1670- 
84, 4 Vols., edited by C. Fawcett, Oxford, 
1936-55. 

Diary and Consultation Books, Fort St. 
George, 1681-85, ed. by A.J. Pringle, 5 
Vols., Madras, 1893-5. 

Records of Fort St. George: Letters from 
Fort St. George, Despatches from England, 
Letters to Fort St. George, Sundry Books, 
etc. Madras, 1912-25. 

The Diary of William Hedges, ed., H. Yule, 
3 Vols., Hakluyt Society, London, 1887-89. 

The Diaries of Streynsham Master, ed., R.C. 
Temple, 2 Vols., London, 1911. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


871 


See Chapter I, 
III to X. 


Balkrishna 

Biddulph, J. 
Birdwood, G. 

Bruce, John 

Campos, J. J. A. 

Danvers, F. C. 

Edwardes, S. M. 
Faria Y. Souso, 
Manuel de 
Hunter, W. H. 

Jayne, K. G. 
Kaeppelin, Paul 

Khan, S. A. 

-do- 

Malabari, B. M. 
Malleson, G. B. 
Nambiar, O. K. 

Oaten, E. F. 
Panikkar, K. M. 
-do- 

Penny, F. E. 
Poonen, T. 


Early Annals of the English in Bengal, ed., 
C. R. Wilson, 4 Vols., Calcutta, 1895-1900. 

Old Fort William in Bengal, ed., C.R. Wilson, 
2 Vols., London, 1906. 

Vestiges of Old Madras, ed., H.D. Love, 3 
Vols. 1913. 

The Commentaries of the Great Affonso Dal- 
hoquerque, Second Viceroy of India, Tr. 
from the Portuguese edn. of 1774 with notes 
and introduction by Walter de Gray Birch, 
F.R.S.L., 4 Vols., Hakluyt Society, London, 
1875-84. 

Early Records of British India, J.T. Wheeler, 
Calcutta, 1878. 

2. Travellers' Accounts 
Section III, text and bibliography on chapters 
3. Secondary Works 

Commercial Relations between India and Eng¬ 
land, London, 1924. 

The Pirates of Malabar, London, 1907. 

The Dawn of British Trade to the East Indies, 
London, 1886. 

Annals of the Honourable East India Com¬ 
pany, 3 Vols., London, 1810. 

The History of the Portuguese in Bengal, 
Calcutta, 1919. 

The Portuguese in India, 2 Vols., London, 
1894. 

Rise of Bombay, Bombay, 1902. 

Asia Portuguesa, tr. Capt. John Stevens, 3 
Vols., London, 1695. 

The History of British India, 2 Vols., London, 
1899-1900. 

Vasco da Gama and his Successors, 1910. 

La Compagnie des Indes Orientales, Paris, 

1908. 

The East India Trade in the Seventeenth Cen¬ 
tury, London, 1923. 

Anglo-Portuguese Negotiations relating to 
Bombay, 1922. 

Bombay in the Making, 1910. 

History of the French in India, London, 1868. 

Portuguese Pirates and Indian Seamen, 
Mysore, 1965. 

European Travellers in India, London, 1909. 

Malabar and the Portuguese, Bombay, 1929. 

Malabar and the Dutch, Bombay, 1931. 

Fort St. George. 

A Survey of the Rise of the Dutch Power in 
Malabar, Trichinopoly, 1948. 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

English Travellers in India, Delhi, 1965. 

Affonso de Albuquerque , Watford, 1929. 

British Beginnings in Western India, Oxford, 
1920. 

The Annals of the Early English Settlement in 
Bihar, Patna, 1927. 

Jan Company in Coromandel, 1605-1690, The 
Hague, 1962. 

Madras in the Olden Times, 3 Vols., Madras, 
1861-62. 

Rise of Portuguese Pow\er in India, 1497-1550, 
1899. 

4. Select Articles 

‘Some Aspect of the Establishment and Growth 
of European settlement along the Tamil 
Coast in the Seventeenth Century’, Tamil 
Culture, 7 (Oct. 1958). 355-69. 

‘The Myth of the English East India Com¬ 
pany’s Trading Privileges in Bengal, 1651- 
1686’, BPP, Sri J. N. Sarkar Centenary 
Volume, Dec. 1970, 287-92. 

‘Foundation of the English East India Com¬ 
pany’s Trade in Bengal’, Indo-British Re¬ 
view, Madras, Vol. Ill, No. 4 & Vol. IV, No. 
1, April-Sept. 1971, 34-42. 

‘The Dutch East India Company in Bengal: 
Trade Privileges and Problems, 1633-1712’, 
IESHR, Vol IX, No. 3, 1972; 258-87. 


CHAPTER XVII 

POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION 

1. Original Sources 
A. Persian 

Ain-i-Akbari—see chapters III & V. 

Mazhar-i-Shahjahani—see chapter VII. 

Char Chaman-i-Barhaman—see chapters VII & VIII. 
Risala-i-Zira’at—Edinburgh 144. 

Dastur-al-‘Amal-i-NavIsindagi—see chapter VII. 
Dastur-al-‘Amal-i-Alamgiri—see chapters VIII & X. 
Akhbarat-i-Darbar-i-Mu‘alla—see chapters VIII & X. 

Selected Documents of Shah Jahan’s reign —see chapter VII. 
Selected Documents of Aurangzeb’s reign —see chapters VIII 
& X. 

Report (in Persian) on the Pre-British system of Administra¬ 
tion in Bengal, prepared c. 1777, B.M. Addl. MSS., 6592 ff. 75b-114b; 
6586, ff. 53a-72b. 

Miscellaneous Papers relating chiefly to revenue Administration 
in Bengal, mostly in Persian, late 18th century, B.M. Addl. MSS. 
6586, 19503, 19504. 


872 

Prasad, R. C. 
Prestage, E. 
Rawlinson, H. G. 

Ray, N. N. 

Raychaudhuri, T. 

Wheeler, J. T. 

Whiteway, R. S. 

Arasaratnam, S. 

Chaudhury, Susil 

-do- 

Om Prakash 




GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


873 


Glossary of Revenue and Administrative terms in Persian by 
Khwaja Yasin of Delhi, B.M. Addl. MSS., 6603, ft. 40-84. 

For Akbar-nama, Tarlkh-i-Sher Shahl, Tarikh-i-DaudI, Tarikh-i- 
Humayun, Muntakhab-ut-Tawarikh, Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri, Muntakhab- 
ul-Lubab, Padshah-nama, Iqbal-nama-i-Jahagirl, Mukhzan-i-Afghana, 
Tabaqat-i-Akbari, ‘Amal-i-Salih, Maasir-ul-Umara, see chapters III-X. 


B. European Travellers’ Accounts 

For Tavernier, Bernier, Palsaert, Manucci, Thomas Bowrey, 
Manrique, etc., see chapters VI-X. 

2. Secondary Works 


Akbar, M. 

Agnides, N. P. 

Ahmad, M. B. 

Ali, Athar 

Ascoli, F. D. 
Aziz, Abdul 

De, U. N. 


Habib, Irfan 
Hasan, Ibn 

Husain, Wahid 

Irvine, W. 

Jang, M. 

Khosla, R. P. 

Moreland, W. H. 

Qureshi, I. H. 

Rosenthal, 

E. I. J. 

Saran, P. 

Sarkar, J. N. 

Satish Chandra 


The Administration of Justice hy the Mughuls, 
Lahore, 1948. 

Muhammedan Theories of Finance, New York, 

1916. 

The Administration of Justice in Medieval 
India, Aligarh, 1941. 

The Mughal Nobility under Aurangzib, Asia, 
1966. 

Early Revenue History of Bengal, Oxford, 1917. 

The Mansabdari System and the Mughul Army, 
Lahore, 1954. 

The Mughul Government, A.D. 1500-1707, New 
Delhi, 1970. 

Dictionary of Islam. 

Encyclopaedia of Islam, Leyden/London, 1913- 
38; new edn., 1960-63. 

The Agrarian System of Mughal India, Bom¬ 
bay, 1963. 

The Central Structure of the Mughul Empire 
and its Practical Working up to the year 
1657, 1st edn., Oxford, 1936; 3rd edn.; New 
Delhi; 1970. 

The Administration of Justice during the 
Muslim Rule in India, Calcutta, 1934. 

The Army of the Indian Moghuls: Its Organi¬ 
zation and Administration, London, 1903. 

A Dissertation on the Administration of Justice 
and Muslim Law, Allahabad, 1926. 

Mughal Kingship and Nobility, Allahabad, 
1934. 

The Agrarian System of Moslem India, Cam¬ 
bridge, 1929. 

The Administration of the Mughul Empire, 
Karachi, 1966. 

Political Thought in Medieval Islam, Cam¬ 
bridge, 1958. 

The Provincial Government of the Mughals, 
1526-1658, Allahabad, 1941. 

Mughal Administration, Calcutta, 1920, 4th 
edn., Calcutta, 1952, 

Parties and Politics at the Mughal Court, Ali¬ 
garh, 1959. 


874 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Sen, S. N. 

The Military System of the Marathas, Calcutta, 
1928. 

-do- 

The Administrative System of the Marathas, 
Calcutta, 1925. 

Sharma, S. R. 

Organization of Public Services in Mughal 
India, Allahabad, 1937. 

-do- 

Mughal Government and Administration, 

Siddiqi, N. A. 

Bombay, 1951. 

Land Revenue Administration under the 

Tripathi, R. P. 

Mughals, 1700-1750, Asia, 1971. 

Some Aspects of Muslim Administration, Alla¬ 
habad, 1936; Reprint, Allahabad, 1956. 


3. Select Articles 


Ahmad, 

Qeyamuddin 

‘Public Opinion as a Factor in the Government 
Appointments in the Mughal State’, PIHRC, 

Ali, A. Yusuf, 

& 

XXXI, 1955, pt. ii, 142-47. 

‘Akbar’s Land Revenue system as described by 


Moreland, W. H. the Ain-i-Akbari’, JRAS, London, 1918, 1-42. 


Ansari, A. S. B. 

‘Justice under the Mughals’, Pakistan Review, 
10, Dec. 1962, 37-41. 

Banerjee, A. C. 
Basu, K. K. 

‘Islamic kingship in India’, IHQ, XIII, 432-47. 
‘Muslim kingship in Medieval India; its aetio¬ 

Beames, John 

logy and application’, PIHC, VI, 235-38. 
‘Notes on Akbar’s Subhas with reference to 

Beveridge, H. 

Ain-i-Akbari: Bengal and Orissa’, JRAS, 
London, 1896, 83-136. 

‘Aurangzeb’s Revenues’, JRAS, London, 1906, 
349-53. 

Deshpande, Y. K. 

‘Revenue Administration of Berar in the Reign 
of Aurangzeb” PIHRC, 1929, 81-87. 

Grover, B. R. 

‘Nature of Land Rights in Mughal India’, 
IESHR, 1, July 1963, 1-23. 

Hasan, S. Nurul 

‘The Position of the Zamindars in the Mughal 
Empire’, IESHR, 1, April 1964, 107-119. 

Khan, M. S. 

‘A Study in Mughal Land Revenue System’, 
Islamic Culture, 1938, 61-75. 

Qureshi, I. H. 

‘The Position of the Monarch in the Mughal 
Empire’, University Studies, 1, April 1964, 
1-18. 

Moreland, W. H. 

‘The Development of the Land Revenue System 
of the Mughal Empire’, JRAS, 1922, 19-35. 

-do- 

‘Akbar’s Land Revenue Arrangements in Ben¬ 
gal’, JRAS, 1926, 43-56. 

-do- 

‘Sher Shah’s Revenue System’, JRAS, 1926, 
447-59. 

-do- 

‘Rank in the Mogul State Service’, JRAS, 1936, 
641-45. 

-do- 

‘The Pargana Headman (Chaudhri) of the 
Mogul Empire’, JRAS, 1938, 511-21. 

Raychaudhuri, T. 

‘The Agrarian System of Mughal India’, En¬ 
quiry, n. s. 2, Spring 1965, 92-121. 

Sharma, S. R. 

‘Theocratic and Secular Elements in the Indo- 
Islamic State’, PIHC, XIII, 142-47. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


875 


Siddiqi, N. A. 
-do- 

Sinha, S. N. 


Yusuf, K. M. 


‘The Classification of villages under the 
Mughals’, IESHR, 1, Jan. 1964, 73-83. 

‘The Faujdar and Faujdari under the Mughals’, 
Medieval India Quarterly, 4, 1961, 22-35. 

‘The Administrative Set-up of Suba of Alla¬ 
habad under the Great Mughals’, 1526-1707, 
Islamic Culture, 39, April 1965, 85-109. 

‘The Judiciary in India under the Sultans of 
Delhi and the Mughal Emperors’, Indo- 
Iranica, Vol. 18, No. 4, 1-12. 


Chapter XVIII 

LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


1. Contemporary Persian Works Referred to in the Chapter 


Fatuhat-i-Firuz 

Shdhi 


Ain-i-Akbari 
Akbar-ndma 
Muntakhab-ut- 
Tdwdrikh 
Tabaqat-i-Akbard 
Tuzuk-i-Jahdngdri 
Pddshdh-ndma 
Pads hd h-ndma 
Mimt-i-A hmadi 


Persian Text and English translation by Shaikh 
Abdur Rashid and M. A. Makhdumi. N. B. 
Ray, Ed., JRASBL, VII (1941), 61-89; tr.; 
Is. C. XV; 449-69. Hindi tr. by M. Umar, 
Aligarh, 1957. 
see chapter V 
see chapter V 

see chapter V 

see chapter V 

see chapter VI 

Lahauri, see chapter VII 

Aminai Qazvlnl, see chapter VII 

see chapters VIII & X. 


2. Secondary Works 
A. General 


Coulson, N. J. 

Jang, M. 

Levy, R. 

Macdonald, D. B. 

Majid, K. 

Mez, A. 

Mulla, D. F. 

Schacht, J. 

-do- 


A History of Islamic Law, Edinburgh, 1964. 
Dictionary of Islam. 

Encyclopaedia of Islam 

A Dissertation on the Administration of Justice 
and Muslim Law, Allahabad, 1926. 

The Social Structure of Islam, Cambridge, 

1957. 

Development of Muslim Theology, Jurispru¬ 
dence and Constitutional Theory, New York, 
1903; Beirut, 1964. 

The Law of War and Peace in Islam, Luzac, 
London, 1941. 

The Renaissance of Islam, London, 1937. 
Principles of Muhammadan Law, 9th edn., 
Bombay, 1929. 

The Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence, 
1st edn., Oxford, 1950; 4th edn., London, 
1968. 

An Introduction to Islamic Law, Oxford, 1964. 


876 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


B. Works Referred to in the Chapter 


Banerjee, S. K. 
Careri, G. F. G. 

Du Jarric 

Foster, W. (ed.) 
Hasan, Ibn 

Monserrate, Fr. A. 

Roe, Thomas 
Sarkar, J. N. 


Humayun Badshah, Calcutta, 1938. 

The Indian Travels of Thevenat and Careri, 
edn., S.N. Sen, New Delhi, 1949. 
Cambridge History of India, Vol. IV, ed., 

R. Burn, Cambridge, 1937. 

Account of the Jesuit Missions to the Court of 
Akbar, tr. C. H. Payne, Akbar and the 
Jesuits, London, 1926. 

Early Travels in India, London, 1927. 

The Central Structure of the Mughul Empire, 
etc., see chapter XVII. 

Commentary on his Journey to the Court of 
Akbar, tr. J. S. Hoyland & annotated by 

S. N. Banerjee, Cuttack, 1922. 

The Embassy of Sir Thomas Roe, 1615-19, ed., 
W. Foster, London, 1926. 

History of Aurangzeb, 5 Vols., Calcutta, 1912- 


25. 


-do- Mughul Administration, Calcutta, 1924. 

Sharma, S. R. The Reliqious Policy of the Mughul Emperors, 

Calcutta, 1940. 

Srivastava, A. L. Akbar the Great, 2 Vols., Agra, 1962-1967. 


Chapter XIX 

LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE. 
1. General 


Bailey, T. G. 
Blumhardt, J. F. 
-do- 


Chatterjee, S. K. 
De Tassy, 
Grachin 
Frazer, R. W. 
Gode, P. K. 


Gokak, V. K. (ed.) 

Gowen, H. H. 
Grierson, G. A. 

Hasan, Hadi 

Santanam, K. 

Winternitz, M. 

Zaheer, Sajjad 


Studies in North Indian Languages, London, 
1938. 

Catalogue of the Hindusthani Manuscripts in 
the Library of the India Office, Oxford, 1926. 

Catalogue of Hindi, Punjabi and Hindusthani 
Manuscripts in the Library of the British 
Museum, London, 1899. 

Language and Literature of Modern India. 

Histoire de la Litterature Hindonie et Hindou- 
stanie, Paris, 1870. 

Literary History of India, London, 1898. 

Studies in Indian Literary Histdry, 3 Vols., 
Bombay, 1953-54, Poona, 1956. 

Literatures in Modern Indian Languages, New 
Delhi, 1957. 

History of Indian Literature, New York, 1931. 

The Modern Vernacular Literature of India, 
Calcutta, 1889. 

Moghul Poetry: its Culture and Historical 
Value, Madras, 1952. 

An Anthology of Indian Literatures, New 
Delhi, 1969. 

History of Indian Literature, tr. by Mrs. S. 
Ketkar, 2 Vols., Calcutta, 1927-33. 

Urdu, Hindi, Hindusthani, Bombay, 1947. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


877 


2. Arabic and Persian 


Ahmad, Aziz 
-do- 

Ahmad, Zubaid 

Ahlwardt 

Ali, Rahaman 
Arberry, A. J. (ed.) 
Arnold, T. W. 

& 

Guillaume, A. 


Azad, Ghulam Ali 
Brockelmann, C. 

Browne, E. G. 

Ethe, H. 

Ghani, A. 

Gibb, H. A. R. 
Goetz, H. 

Grierson, G. A. 

Hasan, Hadi 
-do- 

Hamid, Abdul 

Husain, Hidayat 

Husain, Yusuf 
Ikram, S. M. 
Ikram, S. M. 

& 

Spear, Percival 
Ishaq, M. 

Ivanow, W. 

Jafar, S. M. 

Khan, Bairam 

Khan, M. A. Muid 
Levy, R. 


Studies in Islamic Culture in the Indian En¬ 
vironment, Oxford, 1964. 

An Intellectual History of Islam in India, 
Edinburgh, 1969. 

The Contributions of India to Arabic Litera¬ 
ture, Jullunder, 1946. 

Catalogue of the Arabic Mss. in the Berlin 
Library, 10 Vols., 1887-99. 

Tazkira-i-Ulama-i-Hind, Lucknow, 1914. 

The Legacy of Persia, Oxford, 1953. 


The Legacy of Islam, Oxford, 1936. 

Epigraphica Indo-Moslemica, Calcutta, 1907- 
18, ed., E. Denison Ross; 1919-40, ed., G. Yaz- 
dani. 

Subhat-ul-Marjdn. 

Geschichte der Arabischen Litteratur, 2 Vols., 
1937-1942. 

A Catalogue of the Persian Manuscripts in the 
Library of the University of Cambridge. 

Catalogue of Persian Manuscripts in the India 
Office, Oxford, 1903, 1937. 

A History of Persian Language and Literature 
at the Mughal Court, Allahabad, 1929-30. 

Arabic Literature, 2nd edn., Oxford, 1963. 

The Genesis of Indo-Muslim Civilization, Cal¬ 
cutta, 1938. 

Modern Vernacular Literature of Hindustan, 
Calcutta, 1889. 

Moghul Poetry, Madras, 1952. 

A Golden Treasury of Persian Poetry, Delhi, 
1966. 

Maftah-ul-Kunuz (A hand list of Arabic Mss. 
in the Bankipore Library), 1918. 

Descriptive Catalogue of Arabic Manuscripts 
in the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal, 1939. 

Medieval Indian Culture, London, 1959. 

Muslim Civilization in India, New York, 1964. 


Cultural Heritage of Pakistan, Karachi, 1955. 

India’s Contribution to the Study of Hadith 
Literature, Dacca, 1955. 

Descriptive Catalogue of Persian Mss. in the 
Collections of Asiatic Society of Bengal. 

Some Cultural Aspects of the Muslim Rule in 
India, Peshawar, 1938. 

Persian and Turki Diwans, ed., E. Denison 
Ross, Calcutta, 1910. 

The Arabian Poets of Golconda, Bombay, 1963. 

An Introduction to Persian Literature, Re¬ 
print, New York, 1969. 


878 

Loth, O. 

Muqtadir, Abdul 
Nicholson, R. A. 

Pearson, J. D. 

Rieu, C. 


Storey, C. A. 

Storey, C. A. 

& 

Arberry, A. J. 
Shustery, A. M. 
Sherwani, H. K. 

Tarachand 


Abdullah, S. M. 


Ahmad, Aziz 

Bailey, T. G. 

Husain, Yusuf 
Latif, Sayyid Abdul 

Marahravi, Rafiq 
Sadiq, Muhammad 
Saksena, 

Ram Babu 
Sherani, Mahmud 

For the works 
Shustery, Sherwani, 
Arabic and Persian. 


Barua, B. K. 


Bhattacharyya, A. 

Chatterjee, S. K. 

Haq, Inamul 
Sen, D. C. 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

Catalogue oj j the Arabic Mss. in the India 
Office Library, 1877. 

Catalogue Raisonne of the Buhar Library. 

A Literary History of the Arabs, Cambridge, 
1930. 

Index Islamicus, Cambridge, 1958-62 and Sup¬ 
plement. 

Catalogue of Persian Manuscripts in the 
British Museum, 3 Vols., London, 1879-93; 
Supplement, 1895. 

Persian Literature, A Bio-Bibliographical 
Survey, London, 1927-58. 

Catalogue of Arabic Mss. in the India Office 
Library, 1940. 

Outline of Islamic Culture, Bangalore, 1938. 

Cultural Trends in Medieval India, Bombay, 
1968. 

Influence of Islam on Indian Culture, Allaha¬ 
bad, 1946. 

3. Urdu 

The Spirit and Substance of Urdu Prose under 
the Influence of Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan, 
Lahore, 1940. 

‘Urdu Literature’, in Ikram and Spear, The 
Cultural Heritage of Pakistan, Karachi, 1955. 

A History of Urdu Literature, Calcutta, 1932. 

Urdu Ghazal, Delhi, 1952. 

The Influence of English Literature on Urdu 
Literature, London, 1924. 

Hinduwon me Urdu, Lucknow, 1957. 

A History of Urdu Literature, London, 1964. 

A History of Urdu Literature, Allahabad, 1940. 

Punjab me Urdu, Lahore, 1928. 

of Aziz Ahmad, Goetz, Ikram, Jafar, Pearson, 
Tarachand, Yusuf Husain, see Bibliography on 


4. Assamese 

Assamese Literature, 1941. 

See also General Reference in 1. 

5. Bengali 

Bangld Mangal Kdvyer Itihasa, Calcutta, 
1357 (B.S). 

Origin and Development of the Bengali 
Language, 2 Vols., Calcutta, 1926. 

Muslim Bengali Literature, Karachi, 1957. 
Bangabhashao Sahitya, 1st edn., Calcutta, 
1896. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


879 


Sen, D. C. History of Bengali Language and Literature, 

Calcutta, 1911. 

-do- Folk Literature of Bengal, Calcutta, 1920. 

Sen, Sukumar Bang la Sdhityer Itihasa, Calcutta, 1948. 

Mukhopadhyaya, S. Prdchma Bangld Sdhityer Kalakrama, 1958. 

6. Gujarati 

Minstrels of God (I-III), Bombay, 1967. 
Indo-Aryan and Hindi, Gujarat Vernacular 
Society Research Series, No. 20, Ahmeda- 
bad, 1920. 

A Study of the Gujarati Language in the 16th 
Century, (V. S.) 1935. 

Jain Gurjar Kairo (Jain Gurjara Poets) (in 
Gujarati), Vols. I-III, Bombay, 1926-44. 
Akho Ek Adhyayan (in Gujarati), Bombay, 
1942. 

Akhand Chhappa (in Gujarati), Bombay, 1962. 
Gujarati Sdhitya-ndn Svarupo (in Gujarati) 
Baroda, 1955. 

Gujarat and its Literature, Bharatiya Vidya 
Bhavan, Bombay, 1967. 


Ras ane Garbd (in Gujarati), Bombay, 1954. 
Gujarati Sdhitya (Madhy akalln), Bombay, 

1954. 

Itihas-nl-Kedi (in Gujarati), Bombay, 1945. 
Gujarati Sdhityanun Rekhddarshana, Vol. I, 
(in Gujarati), Ahmedabad, 1951. 

Gujarati Sdhityani Ruparekhd (in Gujarati), 
Bombay, 1943. 

7. Hindi 

Indo-Aryan and Hindi, Ahmedabad, 1942. 

A History of Hindi Literature, Allahabad, 

1955. 

A History of Hindi Literature, Calcutta, 1933. 
See also General Reference. 

8. Tamil, Telegu, Kannada and Malayalam 

Aiyar, C. P. 

Venkatarama 

Basawanab, S. S. 

& 

Iyengar, K. R. 

Srinivasa 
Chenchiah, P. 

& 

Raja, M. Bhunjanga 
Rao 

Kavita Vedhi 


Kamban and his Art. 


Musings of Basava, A Free Rendering, 1940. 


A History of Telegu Literature, Oxford, 1928. 
Andhra Vanmaya Charitra Samgraham 
(Telegu). 


Bankey Behary 
Chatterjee, S. K. 


Dave, T. N. 

Desai, M. D. 
Joshi, 

Umashankar 

-do- 

Majumdar, M. R. 

Munshi, K. M. 

Pathak, R. V. 

& 

Panchal, G. 
Raval, A. M. 

Sandesara, B. J. 
Sastri, K. K. 

Vaidya, V. K. 


Chatter jee, S. K. 
Jindal, K. B. 

Keay, F. E. 


880 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Nandimath, S. C. 
Narasimha- 
charya, R. 

-do- 

Pillai, Govinda 
Pillai, K. 

Subramania 
Pillai, M. S, 
Purnalingam 
Rajagopalachari, C. 
Raju, P. T. 

Rao, C. Narayana 

Rao, T. Rajagapala 
Rao, Vanguri 
Subba 
Rice, E. P. 


Shivapada- 
sundaram, S. 
Sastri, K. A. N. 

Sitaramaiya, K. 
Somayaji, G. J. 


A Handbook of Virasaivism, Dharwar, 1942. 

History of Kannada Literature, Mysore, 1940. 
Karnataka Kavi Charite (Kannada). 

A History of Malayalam Literature. 

The Metaphysics of Saiva Siddhanta System. 

Tamil Literature, Tinnevelly, 1929. 

Bharat Milap, Delhi, 1955. 

Telegu Literature, Bombay, 1944. 

Andhra Bhasha Charitram (Telegu), 2 Vols., 
Waltair, 1937. 

A Historical Sketch of Telegu Literature. 

Andhra Vanmaya Charitram (Telegu). 

A History of Kanarese Literature, 2nd edn., 
London, 1921. 

The Saiva School of Hinduism, London, 1934. 
A History of South India (Chap. XIV), 
Madras, 1955. 

A Handbook of Telegu Literature. 

Andhra Bhasha Vikasam (Telegu). 


9. Kashmiri 

Banerjee, S. C. Cultural History of Kashmir. 

See also General Reference. 


10. Marathi 


Maharashtra Santa- 
kavi-kavya-Suchi 
Mardthd-Grantha- 
Suchi 

Ajyaonkar, J. R. 

Bhave, V. L. 

Bhide, B. A. 

Bloch, Jules 
Deshpande, Y. K. 
Konow, Sten 

Pangarkar, L. R. 


by G. K. Chandorkar, Dhulia, 1915. 

by S. G. Date, Poona, 1943. 

Mahdrdshtra-Kavi-Charitra, Vols. I-VI, Bom¬ 
bay, 1907-24. 

Maharashtra Sarasvata, 4th edn., Supplement 
by S. G. Tulpule, Poona, 1951. 

Marathi Bhashecha va Vandmayacha Itihdsa 
(Manbhava Akher), Poona, 1933. 

Formation de la langue marathe. 

Mahanubhdviya Marathi Vanmaya, 1925. 

Linguistic Survey of India, Vol. VII: Indo- 
Aryan Languages, Southern Group (Mara¬ 
thi), Calcutta, 1905. 

Marathi Vdnmaydcha Itihdsa , Vols. I-II, Bom¬ 
bay, 1932. Poona, 1935. 


11. Oriya 

See General Reference. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


881 


Amole, S. S. 
Macauliffe, M. A. 

Singh, Bawa Sudh 
Singh, Gopal 
Singh, Mohan 
-do- 


Belvalkar, S. U. 
Das Gupta, S. N. 


Das Gupta, S. N. 

& 

De, S. K. 

De, S. K. 

Dutt, B. B. 

& 

Singh, A. N. 
Diwakar, R.R. (ed.) 


Gode, P. K. 

Hukkerikar 
Kaye, G. R. 

-do- 

Keith, A. B. 

-do- 

Krishnachaitanya 

Krishna- 

machariar, M. 
Raja, C. Kunhan 
Raja, K. Kunjunni 
Raje, C. G. 
Rangachari, S. 

Rao, 

V enkat akrishna, 
U. 

Ray, P. C. 

Sastri, K. A. N. 
Schulyer, M. 

Sharma, B. N. K. 


12. Punjabi 

History of Punjabi Literature, 3 Vols., (Pun¬ 
jabi), Language Dept., Punjab, Patiala. 

Sade Purane Kavi (Punjabi). 

The Sikh Religion, 6 Vols., Oxford, Clarendon, 
1909. 

Hans Chag (Punjabi). 

History of Punjabi Literature (Punjabi). 

History of Punjabi Literature, Lahore. 

Sufian Da Kalam (Punjabi). 

13. Sanskrit 

An account of the Different Existing Systems 
of Sanskrit Grammar, Poona, 1915. 

A History of Indian Philosophy, Volume II, 
Cambridge. 


History of Sanskrit Literature, Calcutta, 1947. 
History of Sanskrit Poetics, 2 Vols., London, 


1923-25. 


History of Hindu Mathematics, Lahore, 1935. 
Bihar through the Ages. 

Epigraphica Indica. 

Studies in Indian Literary History, Vol. II, 
Bombay, 1954. 

Karnataka Darshana. 

Hindu Mathematics, Lahore, 1889. 

Hindu Astronomy, Calcutta, 1924. 

History of Sanskrit Literature , Oxford, 1928. 

Reprint 1941, 1948 and 1953. 

Sanskrit Drama, Oxford, 1924. Reprint 1954. 
A New History of Sanskrit Literature. 

History of Classical Sanskrit Literature, 
Madras, 1937. 

Survey of Sanskrit Literature. 

Contribution of Kerala to Sanskrit Literature. 
Biography and History in Sanskrit Literature. 
Outlines of the History of Classical Literature. 


A Handbook of Classical Sanskrit Literature. 
History of Hindu Chemistry, Calcutta, 1887. 
A History of South India. 

Bibliography of the Sanskrit Drama, New 
York, 1906. 

History of Dvaita School of Vedanta and its 
Literature, Vol. II. 


M.E.—56 


882 


Chakravarty, 

C H 

Habibullah, 

A. B. M. 

Hasan, Hadi 

Nadvi, 

S. Sulaiman 

Patkar, M. M. 

Rao, V. Narayana 

Vanshidhar 


Barth, A. 

Bhattacharya, 

H. D. (ed.) 
Carpenter, J. E. 
Das Gupta, S. N. 

Farquhar, J. H. 

-do- 

Hopkins, E. W. 
Konow Sten 
& 

Tuxen, Paul 
Monier-Williams, 
M. 

Oman, J. C. 

Riadhakrishnan, 

S, 

Sen, 

Kshitimohan 
Zaehner, R. C. 
Zimmer; H. 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 
Select Articles 

‘Muhammadans as Patrons of Sanskrit Learn¬ 
ing’, Sdhitya Parishad Patrika, XLIV, No. 1. 

‘Medieval Indo-Persian Literature relating to 
Hindu Science and Philosophy, 1000-1800/ 
IHQ, XIV, 167-81. 

The Unique Diwan of Humayun Badshah’, 
Islamic Culture, XXV, 1951, 212-76. 

‘Literary Progress of the Hindus under 
Muslim Rule’, Islamic Culture, XII (1938), 
424-33; XIII (1939), 401-26. 

‘Mughal Patronage of Sanskrit Learning’, 
Poona Orientalist, III (1938), 164-75. 

‘Two Muhammedan Patrons of Telegu Litera¬ 
ture in the 16th Century’, PIHC, VIII 
(1945), 296-8. 

‘Abdur Rahim Khan-i-Khanan and his Hindu 
Poetry’, Islamic Culture, XXIV (1950), 123- 
33. 


CHAPTER XX 
RELIGION 
1. General 

Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, ed. J. 

Hastings, 12 Vols., Edinburgh, 1915. 

The Religions of India, Eng. Trans, by J. 

Wood, 5th edn., London, 1921. 

‘The Religions’, Cultural Heritage of India, 
2nd edn., Vol. IV, Calcutta, 1956. 

Theism in Medieval India, London, 1926. 
History of Indian Philosophy, 5 Vols., Cam¬ 
bridge, 1932-55. 

Outline of the Religious Literature of India, 
Oxford, 1920. 

Modern Religious Movements in India , Lon¬ 
don, 1924. 

The Religions of India, Boston, 1895. 


Religions of India, Copenhagen, 1949. 
Religious Thought and Life in India, 4th edn., 
London, 1891. 

Mystics, Ascetics and Saints of India, London, 
1903. 

Indian Philosophy, 2 Vols., London, 1923-27. 
Medieval Mysticism in India, tr. by M. Ghosh, 
London, 1936. 

Hindu and Muslim Mysticism, London, 1960. 
Philosophies of India, ed. by J. Campbell, 
London, 1953. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


883 


Banerjee, J. N. 

Barnett, L. D. 
Basu, M. M. 
Bhandarkar, 

R. G. 

Chakravorty, C. H. 
De, S. K. 

Dimock, E. C. (Jr.) 


Eliot, Sir Charles 

Ghosh, A. B. 

Kane, P. V. 

Mallick, 

Kalyani 

Pillai, 

K. Subramania 
Sircar, D. C. 
Shivapada- 
sundaram, S. 
Toothi, N. A. 
Wilson, H. H. 


Huges, T. P. (ed.) 

Ali, Maulana M. 
Arberry, A. J. 

-do- 

Crooke, W. 

Gibb, H. A. R. 

-do- 

Husain, W. 
Husain, Y. 

Iqbal, Muhammad 
Macdonald, D. B. 


2. Hinduism 

Development of Hindu Iconography, 1st edn., 
Calcutta, 1942, 2nd edn., Calcutta, 1956. 

Hindu Gods and Heroes, London, 1923. 

Post-Chaitanya Sahajiya Cult of Bengal. 

Vaishnavism, Saivism and Minor Religious 
Systems, Strassbourg, 1913, Indian edn., 
Poona, 1938. 

The Tantras — Studies on their Religion and 
Literature. 

Early History of the Vaishnava Faith and 
Movement in Bengal } Calcutta, 1942. 

The Place of the Hidden Moon-Erotic Mystic¬ 
ism in the Vaishnava Sahajiya Cult of Ben¬ 
gal, University of Chicago, 1966. 

Hinduism and Buddhism, 3 Vols., London, 
1921, 2nd. edn., London, 1953. 

‘The Spirit and Culture of the Tantras’, in 
The Cultural Heritage of India, IV, p. 248. 

History of Dharmasastra, 5 Vols., Poona, 
1930-58. 

Nath Sect. 

The Metaphysics of Saiva Siddhanta System. 

The Sakta Pithas. 

The Saiva School of Hinduism, London, 1934. 

The Vaishnavas of Gujarat. 

The Religious Sects of the Hindus, London, 
1846. 

3. Islam 

Dictionary of Islam, London, 1885. 

Encyclopaedia of Islam 

The Religion of Islam, Lahore, 1936. 

Introduction to the History of Sufism, London, 
1942. 

Sufism: An Account of the Mystics of Islam, 
London, 1950. 

Islam in India. 

Mohammedanism, London, 1949. 

‘The Structure of Religious Thought in Islam’, 
in Shaw, S. J. and Polk, W. J. (ed.), Studies 
on the Civilization of Islam, Boston, Mass., 
1962. 

Conception of Divinity in Islam and Upanishad, 
Calcutta, 1939. 

Glimpses of Medieval Indian Culture, Bombay, 
1957. 

The Reconstruction of Religious Thought in 
Islam, London (Oxford), 1934. 

The Religious Attitude and Life in Islam, 
Chicago, 1906; Reprint, Beirut, 1965. 


884 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Nicholson, R. A. 
-do- 
-do- 

Seale, M. S. 


Shustery, 

A. M. A. 
Titus, M. T. 


The Mystics of Islam, London, 1914. 

Studies in Islamic Mysticism, Cambridge, 1921. 
The Idea of Personality in Sufism, Cambridge, 
1923. 

Muslim Theology: A study of Origins with Re¬ 
ference to the Church Fathers, London, 
1964. 

Outlines of Islamic Culture, Bangalore, 1938. 
Indian Islam, Madras, 1938. 


4. Sikhism 


Field, Dorothy 
Gill, P. Singh 
Macauliffe, M. and 
others 

Macauliffe, M. 


Mcleod, W. H. 

Nanak 

Sethi, A. S. 

Singh, Fauja 
& 

others 

Singh, Gopal 
Singh, Harbans 

Singh, Kartar 
-do- 

Singh, Khazan 
Singh, Taran (ed.) 

Singh, Teja 
-do- 

-do- 

Singh, Sher 


Religion of the Sikhs, London, 1914. 

The Doctrine of Guru Nanak, Jullundar, 1962. 

The Sikh Religion, Calcutta, 1958. 

The Sikh Religion,; its Growth, Sacred Writ¬ 
ings and Authors, 6 Vols., Oxford, Claren¬ 
don, 1909. 

Guru Nanak and the Sikh Religion, Oxford, 
Clarendon, 1968. 

Hymns of Guru Nanak, tr. (from the Punjabi) 
by Khuswant Singh, New Delhi, 1969. 

Universal Sikhism, New Delhi, 1972. 


Sikhism, Patiala, 1969. 

The Religion of the Sikhs, Bombay, 1971. 

Guru Nanak and Origins of the Sikh Faith, 
Bombay, 1969. 

Life of Guru Nanak, Amritsar, 1937. 

Life of Guru Govind Singh, Amritsar, 1933. 

History and Philosophy of the Sikh Religion, 
2 Vols., Lahore, 1914. 

Guru Nanak and Indian Religious Thought, 
Patiala, 1970. 

Essays in Sikhism, Lahore, 1944. 

The Sikh Religion: An Outline of its Doctrines, 
Amritsar, 1956. 

Sikhism, its Ideals and Institutions, new and 
revised edn., Calcutta, 1951. 

Philosophy of Sikhism, 2nd edn., Jullunder, 
1966. 


See also Bibliography on Sikhs, chapter XI. 


Eliot, Charles, 
N.E. 

Habib, M. 
Harley, A. H. 


5. Select Articles 


‘Hinduism in Assam’, JRAS, 1910. 

‘Indo-Muslim Mystics’, Muslim University 
Journal, Aligarh, IV, 1937. 

‘A Manual of Sufism’, JASB, XX (1924), 123- 
28. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


885 


Haq, Enamul M. 
Rao, S. H. 

Rizvi, S. A. A. 
Sen K. 


‘The Sufi Movement in India’, IC, I, 295-98, 
332-42, 573-78; II, 17-22, 435-447. 

‘Hindu Religious Movement in Medieval 
Deccan’, JIH, XV, 103-113. 

‘Mahdi Movement in India’, Medieval India 
Quarterly, 1, No. 1, 10-25. 

‘The Medieval Mysics of North India’, in The 
Cultural Heritage of India, Vol. IV. 

CHAPTER XXI 


SOCIAL LIFE 
1. Original Sources 

A. Persian 

For Tuzuk-i-Baburi, Humayun-nama, Am-i-Akbarl, Akbar-nama, 
Muntakhab-ut-Tawarikh, Iqbal-nama-i-Jahangin, Qanun-i-Huma- 
yunl, Padshah-nama, Maasir-i-Alamglri, Mirat-i-Ahmadi, Maasir- 
ul-umara, Maasir-i-Rahimi, etc. see Bibliography on chapters II to X. 
to X. 


B. European Travellers’ Accounts 
See Bibliography on chapters II to X, and Section III, chapter I. 


C. Literary Sources 

See P. N. Chopra, Society and Culture during the Mughal Age, 
second edn., Agra, 1963; P. N. Chopra, Social Life under the 
Mughals, Agra, 1963 and P. N. Ojha, Aspects of Medieval Indian 
Culture , Ranchi, 1961. 


Ahmad, Aziz 
-do- 

Ashraf, K. M. 


Aziz, Abdul 
Chopra, P. N. 
-do- 


2. Secondary Works 

Studies in Islamic Culture in the Indian En¬ 
vironment, Oxford, 1964. 

An Intellectual History of Islam in India, 
Edinburgh, 1969. 

Life and Condition of the People of Hindus - 
than, Delhi, 1959, 2nd edn., New Delhi, 
1970. 

Thrones, Chairs and Seats used by the Indian 
Mughals. 

Society and Culture during the Mughal Age, 
2nd edn., Agra, 1963. 

Social Life under the Mughals, Agra, 1963. 


Das Gupta J. N. 
Dubois, J. A. 
Husain, Yusuf 
Jafar, S. M. 

-do- 


Bengal in the Sixteenth Century, Calcutta, 

1914. 

Hindu Manners, Customs and Ceremonies , 
tr. Beauchamp, 2 Vols., Oxford, 1897. 
Glimpses of Medieval Indian Culture, Bombay 

1957. 

Some Cultural Aspects of Muslim Rule in 
India, Peshawar, 1938. 

Education in Muslim India, Peshawar, 1936. 


886 

Law, N. N. 

Mahalingam, 

T. V. 

Ojha, P. N. 

Pandey, A. B. 

Saletore, B. A. 

Sangar, S. P. 

Sarkar, J. N. 
Sharma, G. N. 

Tara Chand 

-do- 

Thomas, F. W. 

Yasin, 

Mohammad 

Ali, A. Yusuf 
Ansari, M. Azher 

-do- 

Evenfelds, V. 

Fukazawa, 

Hiroshi 

Gokhale, B. G. 
Husain, Mahdi 
Khan, 

Yusuf Husain 
Lai, K. S. 

Nadvi, S. S. 
Qureshi, M. A. 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

Promotion of Learning during Muhammedan 
Rule, London, 1916. 

Administration and Social Life under Vijaya - 
nagar, Madras, 1939. 

Aspects of Medieval Indian Culture, Ranchi, 
1961. 

Society and Government in Medieval India, 
Allahabad, 1965. 

Social and Political Life in the Vijayanagara 
Empire, 2 Vols., Madras, 1934. 

Crime and Punishment in Mughul India, 
Delhi, 1967. 

Studies in Mughal India, Calcutta, 1919. 

Social Life in Medieval Rajasthan, 1500- 
1800 A.D., Agra, 1968. 

Influence of Islam on Indian Culture, Allaha¬ 
bad, 1936. 

Society and State in the Mughal Period, 
Delhi, 1961. 

Mutual Influence of Muhammedans and 
Hindus in India, Cambridge, 1892. 

A Social History of Islamic India, 1605-1748, 
Lucknow, 1958. 

3. Select Articles 

‘Social and Economic Life in Medieval India’, 
Islamic Culture, IV (1930), 199-222. 

‘Social condition at the Court of Akbar and its 
Influence on Society’, Islamic Culture, 33 
(April 1959), 124-38. 

‘Amusement and Games of the Great 
Mughals’, Islamic Culture, 35 (Jan. 1961), 
21-31. 

‘Socio-Religious Role of Islam in the History 
of India’, Islamic Culture, XII (1939), 45-62. 

‘State and Caste System (Jati) in the Eigh¬ 
teenth Century Maratha Kingdom’, Hitot- 
subashi Journal of Economics, 9, No. 1, June 
1968, 32-44. 

‘Ahmedabad in the XVII Century’, JESHO, 
12 (April 1969), 187-197. 

‘The Hindus in Medieval India’, PIHC, III, 
712-23. 

‘Social and Economic Conditions in Medieval 
India’, Islamic Culture, 30, Jan. 1956, 1-23. 

‘Food and Drink in Medieval India’, IHQ, 
XXVIII, 192-97. 

‘Literary Progress of the Hindus under the 
Muslim Rule’, Islamic Culture, XII, (1938), 
424-33, XIII (1939), 401-26. 

‘A Glimpse of Muslim Education and Learning 
in Gujarat’, Journal of Maharaja Sayyaji 
University of Baroda, 17, April, 1968, 45-56. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


887 


Rao, M. Rama 

Rizvi, S. A. A. 

Sarkar, 

Jagadish N. 

Satish Chandra 
Yasin, Mohammad 


Ashraf, K. M. 

Bal Krishna 

Chablani, H. L. 

Chicherov, A. I. 

Glamann, K. 

Habib, Irfan 

Irwin, John 
& 

Schwartz, P. R. 
Khan, S. A. 

Kulshreshtha, 

S. S. 

Moreland, W. H. 

-do- 

-do- 

Mukherjee, R. K. 
Naqvi, 

H. Khatun 
Pant, D. 

Raychaudhuri, T. 


‘Social Conditions in Medieval Deccan’, Quar¬ 
terly Review of Historical Studies, Vol. V, 
No. 4 (1965-66), 210-14. 

‘Mahdis and Mahdawis during the Sixteenth 
Century’, Studies in Asian History, London 
1969, 77-91. 

‘Corruption in Public Life in Medieval India’, 
Quarterly Review of Historical Studies, 
Vol. VI, No. 2 (1966-67), 80-89. 

‘Jizyah and the State in India during the 
Seventeenth Century’, JESHO, Leiden, 
Sept. 1969, 322-40. 

‘Social conditions in Medieval India’, Quarterly 
Review of Historical Studies, Vol. V, No. 4 
(1965-66), 215-18. 

CHAPTER XXII 

ECONOMIC CONDITION 

1. Original Sources 
See chapter XXI 

2. Secondary Sources 

Life and Condition of the People of Hindus- 
than, Delhi 1959. 

Commercial Relations between India and 
England, London, 1924. 

The Economic Condition of India during the 
Sixteenth Century, Delhi, 1929. 

India, Economic Development in the 16th-18th 
Centuries, Moscow, 1971. 

Dutch-Asiatic Trade, 1620-1740, The Hague, 
1958. 

The Agrarian System of Mughal India, Dept, 
of History, Aligarh Muslim University, 1963. 

Indo-European Textile History, Ahmedabad, 
1960. 

The East India Trade in the Seventeenth 
Century, London, 1923. 

The Development of Trade and Industry under 
the Mughals, 1526-1707, Allahabad, 1964. 

The Agrarian System of Moslem India, Cam¬ 
bridge, 1929. 

India at the Death of Akbar, London, 1920. 

From Akbar to Aurangzeb, London, 1923. 

The Economic History of India, 1600-1800. 

Urban Centres and Industries in Upper India, 
1556-1803, Bombay, 1968. 

The Commercial Policy of the Moguls, Bombay, 
1930. 

Jan Company in Coromandel, The Hague, 
1962. 


888 

Sarkar, J. N. 

-do- 

Siddiqi, N. A. 
Thomas, Edward 
Watt, George 

Arasaratnam, S. 

-do- 

Beveridge, H. 
Chaudhuri, Susil 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

Deshpande, Y. K. 

Glamann, 

Kristof 

Gokhale, B. G. 
Gopal, S. 

Grover, B. R. 
Habib, Irfan 

-do- 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

India of Aurangzib, Calcutta, 1901. 

Studies in Aurangzib 9 s Reign, Calcutta, 1933. 

Land Revenue Administration under the 
M.ughals, London, 1970. 

Revenue Resources of the Mughal Empire in 
India, from 1593 to 1707, London, 1871. 

The Dictionary of Economic Products of India, 
6 Vols., Calcutta, 1889-96. 

3. Select Articles 

‘Aspects of the Rule and Activities of South 
Indian Merchants, c. 1650-1750’, Proceedings 
of International Conference and Seminar of 
Tamil Studies, 1st, 1966, Kualalumpur, 
1968, 582-96. 

‘Trade and Agricultural Economy of the 
Tamils of Jaffna during the later half of the 
Seventeenth Century’, Tamil Culture, 9 
(Oct. 1961), 371-86. 

‘Aurangzib’s Revenues’, JRAS, 1906, 349-53. 

‘The Rise and Decline of Hugli—A Port in 
Medieval Bengal’, BPP, Vol. LXXXVI, Part 
I, Sr. No. 161, Jan-June, 1967, 33-67. 

‘Bengal Merchants and Commercial Organiza¬ 
tion in the Second Half of the Seventeenth 
Century’, BPP, Vol. XC, Part II, Sr. No. 
170, July-Dee. 1971, 182-216. 

‘The Problem of Financing East India Com¬ 
pany’s Investments in Bengal, 1650-1720’, 
IESHR, Vol. VIII, No. 2, 1971, 109-133. 

‘English Trade in Bengal Raw Silk, 1650-1720’, 
JASB, Vol. XIII, 1971, Nos. 1-4, 153-165. 

‘Prices of Provisions in Bengal in the Second 
Half of the Seventeenth Century—Moreland 
Refuted’, PIHC, Vol. 1, 387-97. 

‘Revenue Administration of Berar in the 
Reign of Aurangzib (1679 A.D.)’, PIHRC, 
1929, 81-87. 

‘Bengal and the World Trade about 1700’, 
BPP, 76, Jubilee No. 1957, 30-39. 

‘Some Aspects of English Trade with Western 
India’, 1600-1650, JIH, 40 (Aug. 1962), 
269-86. 

‘Gujarati Shipping in the Seventeenth Cen¬ 
tury’, IESHR, Vol. VIII, No. 1, March 1971, 
31-39. 

‘Nature of Land Rights in Mughal India’, 
IESHR, 1, July 1963, 1-23. 

‘Currency System of the Mughul Empire, 
1556-1707’, Medieval India Quarterly, 4 
(1961), 1-21. 

‘Usury in Medieval India’, Comparative Studies 
in Society and History, 6, July 1964, 393-419. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


889 


Habib, Irfan 


-do- 

Irwin, John 

Karim, K. M. 

Khan, M. Sadiq 
Om Prakash 

Rashid, A. 

Ray, I. 

Raychaudhuri, T. 


Sarkar, 

Jagadish N. 

Satish Chandra 

Smith, W. C. 
Singh, M. P. 

Sinha, S. N. 
Spengler, J. J. 
Srivastava, A. L. 


‘Evidence for Sixteenth Century Agrarian 
Conditions in the Guru Granth Sahib’, 
IESHR, Jan. 1964, 64-72. 

‘Potentialities of Capitalistic Development in 
the Economy of Mughal India’, Journal of 
Economic History, March 1969, 32-78. 

‘Social Relations in the Textile Trade of the 
Seventeenth Century’, Indian Studies; Past 
and Present, 1, Jan. 1960, 380-84. 

‘Economic Conditions in Bihar and Bengal 
under Shah Jahan’, JPHS, Vol. XIV, pi. Ill 
(July 1966), 180-87. 

A Study in Mughal Land Revenue System’, 
Islamic Culture, 1938, 61-75. 

‘The European Trading Companies and the 
Merchants of Bengal’, IESHR, Vol. 1, No. 3, 
Jan.-March 1964, 1-27. 

‘Agricultural Tracts, Pastures and Woodlands 
in Medieval India’, JBRS, 53 (1967), 161-69. 

‘The French Company and the Merchants of 
Bengal’, IESHR, Vol. VIII, No. 1, March 
1971, 41-55. 

‘Patterns of Economic Organization and Acti¬ 
vity in Seventeenth Century India’, Inter¬ 
national Conference of Economic History, 
2d, Aix-en-Provence, 1962. Deuxieme Con¬ 
ference Internationale d’historie economi- 
que, Paris, Mouton, 1965, V. 2; 751-60. 

‘Monopolies and Monopolistic Controls in 
Mughal India’, Quarterly Review of Histo¬ 
rical Studies, 4, No. 4 (1964-5), 188-94. 

‘Some Aspects of the Growth of a Money 
Economy in India during the Seventeenth 
Century’, Studies in Asian History, 1969, 
368-77. 

‘The Mughal Empire and the Middle Classes’, 
Islamic Culture, 1944, 349-63. 

‘The Custom and Custom House at Surat in 
the Seventeenth Century’, Quarterly Re¬ 
view of Historical Studies, 10 (1970-71), 

80-88. 

‘Economic Condition of the Suba of Allahabad 
under the Mughals, 1526-1707’, Islamic Cul¬ 
ture, Vol. XL, No. 3, July 1966, 151-70. 

‘Comment on “Usury in Medieval India” ’, 
Comparative Studies in Society and History, 
6, July 1964, 420-23. 

‘The Economic Policy of the Mughal Govern¬ 
ment’, Quarterly Review of Historical Stu¬ 
dies, 4, No. 4 (1964-65), 186-87. 


890 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


CHAPTERS XXIII & XXIV 


ARCHITECTURE AND PAINTING 
1. General 


Cresswell, 

K. A. C. 
Dimund, M. S. 

Ethinghausen, R. 
Gray, B. 

Hill, D. 

& 

Grabar, O. 
Pope, A. U. 


A Bibliography of the Architecture, Arts and 
Crafts of Islam, Cairo, 1961. 

A Handbook of Muhammedan Art, 3rd edn., 
New York, 1956. 

Arab Painting, Lausanne, 1962. 

Persian Painting, Lausanne, 1961. 

Islamic Architecture and its Decoration, Lon¬ 
don, 1964. 

Persian Architecture, London, 1965. 


2. Architecture 

A. Original Sources 

For Babur-nama, Humayun-nama by Gulbadan Begam, Huma- 
yun-nama by Khvand Amir, Am-i-Akbari, Tuzuk-i-Jahanglrl, ‘Amal 
i-Salih, Badsha-nama referred to in the chapter, see chapters II to VII. 

Asar-us-Sanadid Sayyid Ahmad Khan, Cawnpore, 1914. 

B. Secondary Works—Indian Islamic Architecture 


Brown, Percy 
Cole, H. 

Fanshawe, N. C. 
Fergusson, J. 


Hearn, H. C. 
Keene, H. G. 
Latif, S. M. 

Sharp, H. 
Smith, E. W. 

Smith, V. A. 

Stephen, Carr 


Indian Architecture (Islamic perio^), Bom¬ 
bay, 1964. 

Illustrations of Buildings near Muttra and 
Delhi, London,1872. 

Delhi: Past and Present, London, 1902. 

History of Indian and Eastern Architecture, 
Revised by J. Burgess and Phene Spiers, 
2 Vols., London, 1910. 

The Seven Cities of Delhi, London, 1906. 

Handbook to Delhi, Calcutta, 1906. 

Agra, Historical and Descriptive, Calcutta, 
1896. 

Delhi: Its Story and Buildings, Bombay, 1921. 

Portfolio of Indian Architectural Drawings, 
London, 1897. 

A History of Fine Art in India and Ceylon, 
Second edition, 1930. 

Archaeology of Delhi, Calcutta, 1906. 


C. Secondary Works—Mughul Architecture 

Andrews, F. H. ‘Mosque of Wazir Khan’, Lahore, Journal of 

Indian Art, Vol. 1. 

Banerji, S. K. ‘The Historical Remains of the Early years of 

Akbar’s Reign’, Journal of the United Pro¬ 
vinces Historical Society, Vol. XV, part 2, 
1952. 

Brown, Percy ‘Monuments of the Mughul Period’, Cam¬ 

bridge History of India, Vol. IV, Cambrige, 
1937. 



GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


891 


Hackin, E. H. 

Havell, E. B. 
Husain, A. B. M. 


Kipling, J. L. 

Moin-ud-Din 
Muhammad 
Saraswati, S. K. 

Smith, E. W. 

-do- 

-do- 

Villiers-Stuart, 
G. H. 

Vodel, J. Ph. 


Delhi Fort, a Guide to the Buildings and Gar¬ 
dens, A.S.I., Calcutta, 1927. 

The Drawings of Geometric Patterns in Sara¬ 
cenic Art, Mem. A. S. I., No. 15, 1925. 

Handbook to Agra and the Taj, 1912. 

Fathpur Sikri and its Architecture, Dacca, 
1970. 

Journal of the Punjab Historical Society, 
Vol. I, Calcutta, 1911. 

‘The Mosque of Wazir Khan at Lahore’, 
Journal of Indian Art, Vol. II. 

History of the Taj, Agra, 1905. 

Glimpses of Mughal Architecture, Calcutta, 
N.D. 

Akbar’s Tomb, Sikandara, near Agra, Allaha¬ 
bad, 1909. 

Mughal Architecture of Fathpur Sikri, 4 parts 
A.S.I. Allahabad, 1894-98. 

Moghul Colour Decoration of Agra. Allaha¬ 
bad, 1901. 

Gardens of the Great Mughals, London, 1913. 

Tito-mosaics of the Lahore Fort, A.S.I., Cal¬ 
cutta, 1920. 


3. Painting 
A. Original Sources 

For Babur-nama, Humayun-nama, Ain-i-Akbari, Akbar-nama, 
Tuzuk-i-JahangirT, Maasir-ul-Umaiia, see chapters II to VI. 

B. Secondary Works 


Arnold, T. W. 
Arnold, T. W. 

& 

Wilkinson, 

J. V. S. 

Ashten, Sir Leigh 
(ed.) 


Barett, D. 

Barett, D. 
& 

Gray, B. 
Binyon, L. 


Brown, P. 
Chagtai, A. M. 


The Painting in Islam, Oxford, 1928. 

The Library of A. Chester Beatty: A Catalogue 
of the Indian Miniatures, 3 Vols., Oxford; 
1936. 

The Art of India and Pakistan: A Commemo¬ 
rative Catalogue of the Exhibition held at 
the Royal Academy of Arts, London, 1947- 
48, London, 1950. 

Painting of the Deccan: XVI-XVII Centuries, 
London, 1958. 


Paintings of India, Lausanne, 1963. 

A Persian Painting of the 16th Century: 
Emperors and Princes of the House of 
Timur, London, 1930. 

Indian Painting under the Mughals, A.D. 

1550-1750, Oxford, 1924. 

Painting> during the Sultanate Peroid, Lahore, 
1963. 


892 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Chandra, Moti 

Chandra, Moti 
& 

Karl Khandalavala 
Charke, 

Stanley C. 

-do- 

Coomaraswamy, 

A. K. 


Ettinghausen, R. 

Gluck, H. 

Geetz, H. 

& 

Kiihnel, E. 

Gray, B., Binyon, L. 
& 

Wilkinson, 

J. V. S. 

Grek, T. V., 
Ivanova, A. A., 
Akhmushkina, 

O. F. & 
Gyuzalyana, 

L. T. 

Ilendley, T. H. 


Karl Khandalavala 
& 

Stooke, H. J. 
Kramrisch, 

Stella 

Krishnadasa Rai 
Mehta, N. C. 

Sarveshwarkar, 

L. 

Stchoukine, I. 

Suleiman, Hamid 
Welch, S. C., Jr. 
Wellesz, E. 

Wilkinson, 

J. V. S. 

-do- 


Jain Miniature Painting from Western India, 
Ahmedabad, 1949. 

New Documents of Indian Painting—A Re¬ 
appraisal Bombay, 1969. 

Twelve Paintings of the School of Humayun 
Illustrating the Romance of Amir Hamza, 
London, 1921. 

Thirty Jahangiri Paintings in the Wantage 
Bequest, London, 1922. 

Catalogue of the Indian Collection in the 
Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Yol. V: Raj- 
pht Painting; Vol. VI: Mughal Painting, 
Boston, 1926, 1930. 

Paintings of the Sultans and Emperors of In¬ 
dia in American Collections, New Delhi, 1961. 

Die Indischen Miniaturer aus Hamsa Romanes, 
Wien, 1925. 


Indian Book Painting, London, 1926. 


Persian Miniature Painting, London, 1933. 


Alham Indiyskikh Peridskikh Miniatyur XVI 
—XVIII, VV, Moscow, 1962. 

Memorial of Jeypore Exhibition, IV: The 
Razmnama Manuscript, London, 1884. 


The Laud Ragamala Miniatures, Oxford, 1953. 

A Survey of Painting in the Deccan, London, 
1937. 

Mughal Miniatures, New Delhi, 1955. 

Studies in Indian Painting, Bombay, 1926. 

The Pictures of the Chaurapanchasika: A 
Sanskrit Love Lyric , Delhi, 1967. 

La Peinture Indienne a L’epoque des Grands 
Moghols Paris, 1929. 

Miniatures of Baburnama, 1970. 

The Art of Mughal India, New Yo'rk, 1963. 

Akbar’s Religious Thought as Reflected in 
Mughal Painting, London, 1952. 

The Lights of Canopus: Anwar-i-Suhaili, Lon¬ 
don, 1929. 

Mughal Painting, London, 1948. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


893 


Barrett, D. 

-do- 

Beach Milo, C. 

Coomaraswamy, 
A. K. 

Chandra, Pramod 
-do- 

Chandra, Pramod 
& 

Sherman Lee 
Das, Asok, K. 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

Digby, Simon 

Ettinghausen, R. 
-do- 
-do- 


Godard, Yedda A. 
-do- 


C. Articles 

‘Painting at Bijapur’, Oriental Studies IV: 
Paintings from Islamic Lands, Oxford, 1969, 
142-69. 

‘Some Unpublished Deccan Miniatures’, Lalit 
Kola, VII, 1960, 9-13. 

‘The Gulshan Album and its European 
Sources’, Bulletin of the Museum of Fine 
Arts, Boston, LXIII, No. 332, 1965, 62-91. 

‘Notes on Indian Paintings’ Artibus Asiae, II, 
1926-27. 

‘Ustad Salivahana and the Developments of 
Popular Mughal Art’, Lalit Kala, VIII, 1960, 
25-46. 

‘A Series of Ramayana Painting of the Popu¬ 
lar Mughal School’, Bulletin of the Prince 
of Wales Museum, Bombay, 1957-59, 64-70. 

‘A Newly Discovered Tutinama and the Con¬ 
tinuity of the Indian Tradition of Manu¬ 
script Painting’, Burlington Magazine, 1963, 
547-54. 

‘Mughal Royal Hunt in Miniature Paintings’, 
Indian Museum Bulletin, II, Calcutta, 1967, 
19-23. 

‘A Scene from the Jahangirnama in the Victo¬ 
ria Memorial’, Bulletin of the Victoria 
Memorial, Calcutta, II, Calcutta, 1968, 5-9. 

‘Notes on a Portrait of Prince Khurram in the 
Victoria Memorial’, Ibid, III-IV, 1969-70, 5-9. 

‘The Foundation of Mughal Painting’, Bulle¬ 
tin of the Asiatic Society, Calcutta, V, No. 
10, 1970, 8-12. 

‘Bishndas’, Chhabi, Golden Jubilee Volume of 
the Bharat Kala Bhavan, Banaras, 1971, 
183-91. 

‘The Dodo and the Mughals’, History Today, 
XXIII, London, 1973, 60-63. 

‘The Literary Evidence for Painting in the 
Delhi Sultanate’, Bulletin of the American 
Academy of Benaras, I, Varanasi, 1957, 47- 
58. 

‘Abdus-Samad’, Encyclopaedia of World Art, 
I, New York, 1959, 16-20. 

‘The Emperor’s Choice’, De Artibus Opuscule, 
XL, New York, 1961, 98-120. 

‘New Pictorial Evidence of Catholic Missionary 
Activity in Mughal India (early XVIIth Cen¬ 
tury)’, Perennitas: Festschrift fiir P. 
Thomas Micheles OSB, Munster, 1963, 385- 
96. 

‘Les Marges du Murakha Gulshan’, Athar-e- 
Iran, I, 1936, 11-33. 

‘Un Album de Portraits des Princes Timuri des 
del ‘India’, Ibid, II, 1937, 179-277. 


894 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Goetz, H. 

Karl Khandalavala 
-do- 

Karl Khandalavala 
& 

Jagdish Mittal 
Krishna Anand 

-do- 

-do- 

Pinder-Wilson, R. 

Skelton, R. 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

Staude, W. 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

Welch, S. C., Jr. 
-do- 

-do- 

Wilkinson, 

J. V. S. 


‘The Early Muraqqa’s of Jahangir’, East and 
West, VIII, Rome, 1957, 157-85. 

‘Leaves from Rajasthan’, Marg, IV, no. 3, 1950; 
2-24; 49-56. 

‘The Mrigavat of Bharat Kala Bhavan’, Chhabi, 
19-36. 

‘An Early Akbari Illustrated Manuscript of 
Tilasm and Zodiac’, Lalit Kala, XIV, 9-20. 

‘Some Pre-Akbari Examples of Rajasthani 
Illustrations’, Marg, XI, no. 2, Bombay; 1958; 
18-21. 

‘An Early Ragamala Series’, Ars Orientalis, 
IV, Washington, 1961, 368-72. 

‘A Study of the Akbari Artist Farrukh Chela’, 
Chhabi, 353-73. 

‘Three Illustrated Manuscripts of the Mughal 
Period’, Ars Orientalis, II, 1957, 413-22. 

‘Mughal Artist Farrokh Beg’, Ars Orientalis, 
II, 1957, 393-411. 

‘The Ni‘matnama: A Landmark in Malwa 
Painting’, Marg, XI, no. 3; 1959; 44-50. 

‘Bijapur’, Marg, XVI, no. 2, 1963; 34-39. 

‘Mughal Paintings from Harivamsa Manus¬ 
cript’, Victoria and Albert Museum Year 
Book, 1971, 41-54. 

‘Basawan’, Encyclopaedia of World Art, II, 
1960, 384-86. 

‘Daswanth’, Ibid, IV, 234-35. 

‘Abdus Samad, der Akbar-Maler und das Mil- 
lionen Zimmer in Schoubrunn’, Belvedere, 
1931, 151-60. 

‘Muskin’, Revne de Ars Asiatiques, V, Paris, 
1928, 169-82. 

‘The Paintings of Basawan’, Lalit Kala, X, 7-17. 

‘Miniatures from a Manuscript of the Diwan-e- 
Hafiz’, Marg, XI, no. 3, 1958; 56-62. 

‘The Emperor Akbar’s Khamsa—of Nizami’, 
Journal of the Walters Art Gallery, Balti¬ 
more, XXIII, 1960, 87-96. 

‘An Indian Manuscript of the Golestan of the 
Shah Jahan Period’, Airs Orientalis, II, 1957, 
423-25. 


CHRONOLOGY 


1026 

1192 

1300 

1318-1389 

1335-1383 

(1386?) 

1394-1460 

1411-1443 

1420-1470 

1443 

1447-1539 

1450-1525 

1458-1479 
1469-1538 
c.1470-1540 
1475-1534 


c. 1478-1581 

1479- 1531 

1480- 1564 
1480-1600 
1482-1518 

1483, February 14 
c.1486 

1486-1516 

1486-1533 

1487 


c. 1487 


1487-1517 
c. 1487-1539 
1490 

1490 


Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni raids India for the 
seventeenth time (p. 372). 

Fall of Prithviriaj Chauhan at the second battle 
of Tarain (p. 372). 

Punjabi language develops (p. 572). 

Khwaja Baha’uddin Naqshband, a Sufi refor¬ 
mer (p. 670). 

Lalla Didi (Lai Ded) Rasmirl poetess (p. 577). 

Prince Henry, the Navigator (p. 502). 

Sultan Ahmad I of Gujarat (p. 400). 

Zain-ul-‘Abidin, Sultan of Kasmlr (p. 577). 

‘Abdur Razzak, Persian Ambassador at Vijaya- 
nagar (p. 685). 

Vyasatlrtha (Vyasaraya), a pontiff of Madhva 
sect. (p. 652). 

Vasudeva Sarvabhauma, founder of the famous 
Nyiaya school of Nadia (p. 705). 

Husain Shah Sharqi (p. 805). 

Guru Nanak, (p. 572). 

!§rinatha Acharya Chudamani (p. 636). 

Khvand Amir, author of Habtb-us-Siyar and 
Humdyun-ndma, which give information 
about Babur and the first three years of 
Humayun’s reign respectively (p. 3). 

Surdas (p. 648). 

Vallabhacharya, the propagator of Pustimarga 
(p. 647). 

Purandara-dasa (p. 652). 

Vadirajatirtha, Dvaita philosopher (p. 615). 

Sultan Mahmud Shah Bahamani (p. 412). 

Birth of Babur at Farghana (p. 25). 

Birth of Farid (Sher Shah) in the paragana of 
Narnaul (pp. 68, 69). 

Man Singh, Tomara Chieftain of Gwalior 
(p. 753). 

Chaitanya, the Vaishnava saint (p. 555). 

Diego Cao voyages southwards from the mouth 
of the Congo to the modern Walvis Bay 
(p. 502). 

&ahkaradev, who introduced Vaishnavism in 
the Brahmaputra valley, is born (pp. 642, 
675). 

Sultan Sikandar Lodi (pp. 306, 733). 

Chuhungmung Svargadeo, Ahom King (p. 642). 

Malik Ahmad, gr. of Junnar, assumes indepen¬ 
dence (p. 415). 

Qasim Barld assumes independence (p. 412). 


895 


896 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


1490 

1490-1510 

1490 

c. 1490-1514 
1492 

1493- 1519 

1494- 1554 
1496-1509 


1497, November 


1497 

1497 

1498, May 21 
1498, June 
1498, August 

1498-1546 

1500, November 

1500 


.1500 
1500-1580 
1501, May 


1501 

1502 

1503, June 


1503 

1503-1553 
1504, October 

1504 


Yusuf ‘Adil Khan, the gr. of Bijapur, pro¬ 
claims independence (p. 412). 

Yusuf ‘Adil Khan, Sultan of Bijapur (p. 445). 
Fathullah ‘Imad-ul-Mulk, gr. of Berar, pro¬ 
claims independence (pp. 412, 463). 
Maharaja Dhanyamanikya of Tripura (p. 642). 
Srlpadaraya, founder of Ddskuta movement in 
Karnatak, passes away (p. 652). 

Paragal Khan, gr. of Chittagong (p. 560). 
Bhalan, Gujarati writer (p. 569). 

Guru Nanak undertakes a journey in the eas¬ 
tern parts of India (p. 656). 

Babur wrests Samarqand from Baisunqur 
Mlrza to lose again after about 100 days 
(p. 25). 

Babur loses both Farghana and Samarqand 
(p. 25). 

Vasco da Gama leaves Portugal on his eastern 
voyage (p. 503). 

Vasco da Gama reaches Calicut (p. 502). 
Babur recovers Farghana (p. 25). 

Vasco da Gama starts on his return voyage 
(p. 503). 

Mira Bai (Some give this date as 1503-1546) 
(p. 566). 

Babur wrests Samarqand for the second time 
from Shaibani Khan (p. 25). 

The second Portuguese expedition to India 
under Alvarez Cabral reaches Calicut 
(p. 504). 

Moth-ki-Masjid at Delhi is built (p. 745). 
Narasiriiha Mehta, Gujarati poet (p. 630). 
Babur is badly defeated by Shaibani Khan at 
Sar-i-pul and is forced to offer his eldest 
sister Khanzada Begam in marriage to his 
enemy (p. 25). 

A throneless Babur is forced to retire to Tash¬ 
kent to seek shelter under his maternal 
uncles—Sultan Mahmud Khan and Ahmad 
Khan (p. 25). 

A fresh expedition under Vasco da Gama 
starts for India (p. 504). 

Ahmad Tambal inflicts a crushing defeat on 
Mahmud Khan and Ahmad Khan (maternal 
uncles of Babur) at the battle of Archiyan 
(p. 26). 

A Portuguese fleet reaches Malabar coast 
(p. 504). 

Hita Harivamsa, founder of the Radha-Valla- 
bhi sect (p. 648). 

Babur crosses the Hindu Kush and captures 
Kabul from Muqim the Arghun (p. 26). 
Qasim Band passes away (p. 412). 


CHRONOLOGY 


897 


1504 

1504-1575 

1504 

1504-1530 
1505, January 

1505, May 

1505 

1506, May 5 
1506, October 26 

1506, 

December 24 

1507, June 
1507, September 

1503 

1509 

1509 

1509-1529 

1509- 1553 

1510 

1510, October 
1510 

1510 

c.1510 

1510- 1515 

1510-1534 

1511, January 


Yusuf ‘Adil Khan gains possession of the pro¬ 
vince of Gulburga held by Dastur Dinar 
(p. 446). 

Janardana Svarhi, the spiritual preceptor of 
Sant Ekanatha (p 578). 

‘Ala-ud-din ‘Imad Shah, succeeds as Sultan to 
the throne of Berar (p. 463). 

Ala-ud-din ‘Imad Shah, Sultan of Berar 
(p. 463). 

Babur makes his first invasion on Hindustan 
via the Khyber Pass, reaches Tarbila on the 
Indus and fights the Afghan tribes (p. 26). 

Babur returns to Kabul via Ghazni (p. 26). 

Francisco de Almeida is appointed the first 
Portuguese viceroy in the East (p. 504). 

Death of Sultan Husain Mlrza Baiqara of 
Herat (p. 26). 

Babur joins the two sons of Sultan Husain 
Mlrza Baiqara on the river Murghab and 
accompanies them to Herat to fight the 
Uzbegs (pp. 26, 27). 

Babur returns to Kabul from Herat (p. 27). 

Shaibani Khan captures Herat (p. 27). 

Babur sets out for the Indus and advances up 
to Mandrawar but returns to Kabul (p. 27). 

Babur suppresses the rebellion of Ullugh 
Mlrza (p. 27). 

Malik Ahmad, the Sultan of Ahmadnagar, 
passes away (p. 415). 

A Portuguese fleet defeats a combined fleet of 
the Egyptians, the Zamorin and the Sultan 
of Gujarat, off Diu and establishes naval 
supremacy (p. 505). 

Krishnadevaraya, Vijayanagara emperor (pp. 
486, 588). 

Burhan Nizam Shah, Sultan of Ahmadnagar 
(p. 416). 

Yusuf ‘Adil Khan captures Goa, which remains 
under him for a short time (p. 447). 

Yusuf ‘Adil Khan passes away (p. 447). 

Shaibani Khan is killed in a battle against Shah 
Isma‘ll, the Safavl ruler of Persia (p. 28). 

Nizam Shahi army repulses an attack by the 
Berar army (p. 463). 

Chaitanya visits the chief shrines of South 
India (p. 652). 

Guru N'anak undertakes a journey in the sou¬ 
thern parts of India (p. 656). 

Ismla‘il ‘Adil Khan, Sultan of Bijapur (p. 447). 

Babur reaches Qunduz; receives an embassy 
from Shah of Iran (p. 28). 


M.E.—57 


898 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


1511 


1512, May 


1512, November 


1512 

1512 

1514, August 
1514, November 

1514- 1595 

1515- 1517 

1516- 1576 
1517, November 
1517 

1517 

1517- 1521 

1517- 1526 

1518 

1518 

1518 

1518- 1522 


1519-1615 

1519 


1519 


Babur sends an embassy under Wais Mirza to 
the Safavi King, Shah Ismail of Iran and 
gets an assurance of friendship and help 
(p. 28). 

Babur is defeated by the Uzbegs at Kul-i- 
Malik in the vicinity of Bukhara and loses 
Bukhara and Samarqand. Babur retires to 
Hissar (p. 28). 

Babur marches against the Uzbegs to Buk¬ 
hara with the aid of Iranian army under 
Najm Beg but is defeated at Ghazdawan 
(pp. 28, 29). 

Krishnadevaraya occupies Raichur (p. 448). 

Bijapur army raids Goa but the attack is re¬ 
pulsed (p. 506). 

Shah Ismail, the Safavi king is defeated at 
Tabriz by the Uzbegs (p. 29). 

Babur returns to Kabul after an unsuccessful 
attempt to capture Bukhara (p. 29). 

Vijaymdratirtha, Madhva commentator 
(p. 615). 

Guru Nanak undertakes a journey in the nor¬ 
thern parts of India (p. 656). 

Vithalanatha, s. of Vallabhacharya (p. 647). 

Death of Sultan Sikandar Lodi (p. 70). 

Ibrahim Lodi ascends the Delhi throne (p. 29). 

Babur makes an unsuccessful attempt to cap¬ 
ture Qandahar (p. 31). 

Guru Nanak undertakes a journey in the wes¬ 
tern parts of India (p. 656). 

Ibrahim Lodi, Sultan of Delhi (p. 733). 

Sultan Qutb-ul-Mulk, the gr. of Telingana, de¬ 
clares independence (pp. 412, 468). 

Nizam Shahi army captures Pathri (p. 463). 

Mahmud Shah BahmanI passes away (p. 466). 

Farid (Sher Shah) acts as deputy to his 
father in the paraganas of Sassaram and 
Khavaspur Tanda (p. 70). 

Haridasa-svami, founder of a Vai§nava sect, 
(p. 649). 

Babur crosses the Khyber pass and advances 
up to Peshawar subduing Yusufzai Afghans 
on the way (p. 31). 

Babur raids Bajaur, conquers it and reaches 
Jhelum after crossing the Indus; sends an 
unfruitful embassy under Mulla Murshid to 
Ibrahim Lodi claiming Punjab as his here¬ 
ditary possession; (returns to Kabul, sub¬ 
duing Gakkhars on the way (pp. 30-31). 


CHRONOLOGY 


899 


1519-1526 


1519 

1520 

1520 

1520 

1520 

1520-1540 

1520-1568 

1520-1592 

1521 
1522, 

September 6 
.1523 
1524 


1524 


1525, 

November 17 
1525 


1526, April 5 
1526, April 21 


Babur’s seven raids on Hindusthan. First in 
1519, as per his own statement. Raids of 
1505 and 1507 as the first and second and 
the third in early 1519, according to Abu’-l- 
Fazl. Babur himself states he raided India 
five times. Firishta regards the two inva¬ 
sions of 1519 as the first and second inva¬ 
sions on India (pp. 30-31). 

Santiklrti, Kannada poet, writes his Sahtinti- 
thapurdna (p. 597). 

Babur invades India for the fifth time and ad¬ 
vances up to Sayyidpur but cuts short his 
advance to return to Kabul (p. 31). 

Babur makes an unsuccessful attempt to con¬ 
quer Qandahar (p. 31). 

Babur becomes master of Badakhshan on the 
death of Wais Mirza and puts Badakhshan 
under his son’s charge (pp. 31-32). 

Kri^hnadevaraya wrests Raichur from Isma‘il 
Adil Khan (p. 448). 

Malik Muhammad Jayasi composes his Padu - 
mavati (p. 567). 

Sulaiman, the Magnificent, of Turkey (p. 398). 

Appayya Diksita, a :§aiva writer on philosophy 
(p. 641). 

Babur makes another unsuccessful attempt to 
conquer Qandahar (p. 31). 

Babur captures Qandahar without opposition 
(p. 31). 

Birth of Gosvami Tulsidasa (p. 564, 565). 

Babur undertakes his sixth invasion of Hin¬ 
dustan at the invitation of Daulat Khan 
Lodi, viceroy of the Punjab, and reaches 
Lahore where he meets Ibrahim Lodi’s 
army and defeats it. Babur returns to 
Kabul (p. 32). 

Isma‘il ‘Adil Shah of Bijapur and Burhan 
Nizam Shah I of Ahmadnagar form an alli¬ 
ance to challenge Krishnadevaraya of Vijaya- 
nagar and punish Amir Band. However, this 
alliance did not come off (p. 416). 

Babur sets out on his last Indian expedition 
(p. 33). 

The combined armies of Burhan Nizam Shah, 
Amir Barld and ‘Imad Shah raid Sholapur 
but are repulsed by the Bijapur army 
(p. 416). 

Sultan Muzaffar of Gujarat passes away 
(p. 391). 

Babur defeats Sultan Ibiiahim Lodi at the 
battle of Panipat. Ibrahim Lodi is killed in 
the battle (p. 34). 


900 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


1526, April 27 
1526, May 26 

1526, December 

1526 

1526 


1526-1537 

1527, 

February 11 
1527, March 17 

1527, April 7 

1527 

1528, 

January 28 
1528, February 2 

1528, 

September 26 
1528, 

November 13 

1528 

1528 

1528 

1528 


1528 

1528 

1528-1531 


Babur becomes Emperor of Hindusthan 
(p. 35). 

The infant son of Sultan Muzaffar of Gujarat 
is raised to the throne under the name of 
Mahmud II (p. 391). 

Sultan Ibrahim Lodi’s mother makes an un¬ 
successful attempt on Babur’s life by poison¬ 
ing through royal servants (p. 36). 

Humayun captures Jaunpur, Ghazlpur and 
Kalpi (p. 35). 

Farid (Sher Shah) enters the service of Sultan 
Muhammad (Bihar Khan Lohani) who de¬ 
clared independence after the battle of 
Panipat (p. 71). 

Bahadur, Sultan of Gujarat (p. 391). 

Babur sets out on his first jihad against Rana 
Sangram Siriiha (p. 36). 

Battle of Khanua is fought in which the Raj¬ 
puts are completely routed (p. 37). 

Babur marches into Alwar, capital of Mewat 
(p. 37). 

Farid (Sher Shah) joins Mughul camp being 
deprived of his jdgir (p. 71). 

Babur besieges Chanderi and captures it the 
next day (p. 37). 

Babur sets out on an eastern campaign against 
the Afghans (p. 37). 

The battle of Jam is fought between Shah 
Tahmasp and the Uzbegs, who are defeated 
(p. 38). 

Babur advises Humayun to undertake an ex¬ 
pedition against the Uzbegs (p. 38). 

Farid (Sher Shah) gets back his jdgir, of 
which he had been deprived, in recognition 
of his services rendered to Babur (p. 71). 

Death of Sultan Muhammad (p. 71). 

Jalal, son of Sultan Muhammad, is raised to the 
throne on the latter’s death (p. 71). 

The combined armies of Muhammad I of 
Khandesh, ‘Ala-ud-dln Tmad Shah of Berar 
and Sultan Bahadur of Gujarat invest Dau- 
latabad held by Nizam Shah but have to re¬ 
tire due to stout resistance (p. 392). 

Nuno da Cunha is appointed Portuguese gr. in 
India (p. 392). 

Amir Barld, prime minister of Bahamani 
kingdom, becomes practically independent 
(p. 466). 

Ratna Singh, Rana of Mewar (p. 327). 


CHRONOLOGY 


901 


1529, May 6 


1529 

1529 

1529 

1530, 

December 30 

1530, 

December 30 

1530 

1530 

1530 

1530 

1530 

1530 

c. 1530 
1530-1542 

1530-1562 

1531, February 

1531, March 28 

c.1531, September 
1531, December 

1531 
1531 


The battle of Gog'ra (the last exploit of 
Babur) is fought between the Mughul army 
and the Bengal army, which is defeated. 
Babur becomes master of northern India and 
frustrates the last stand of the Afghans to 
oust the Mughuls (p. 38). 

Jalal becomes a vassal of Babur (p. 71). 


Farid (Sher Shah) is appointed deputy (nciib) 
to administer the principality of Jalal 
(p. 71). 


Bahadur, Sultan of Gujarat, forces ‘Ala-ud-dln 
‘Imad Shah of Berar and Burban Nizam 
Shah of Ahmadnagar to conclude peace 
(p. 392). 


Death of Babur (p. 45). 


Humayun ascends the throne (p. 45). 

Farid (Sher Shah) celebrates his second mar¬ 
riage with Gauhar Gossain (widow of N'asir 
Khan Lohani) (p. 71). 

Farid (Sher Shah) acquires the fortress of 
Chunar by his marriage with Lad Malka, 
widow of Taj Khan (p. 71). 

Muhammad Shah, ruler of Kashmir, ascends 
the throne of Kashmir for the fourth and 
last time (p. 402). 

Isma'il ‘Adil Khan gains possession of Raichur 
and Mudgal (p. 449). 

‘Ala-ud-din ‘Imad Shah of Berar passes away 
(p. 464). 

Isma‘il ‘Adil Khan restores Bidar to Amir 
Barid (p. 467). 

Jamal! mosque is built (p. 745). 

Achyutadevaraya, emperor of Vijayanagar 
(pp. 486, 608). 

Darya ‘Imad Shah, Sultan of Berar (p. 464). 

The Portuguese fleet in India bombards Diu 
and other fortifications under Bahadur Sul¬ 
tan of Gujarat (p. 392). 

Bahadur, Sultan of Gujarat, captures Mandu 
and annexes that portion of Malwa which is 
ruled by Mahmud II (pp. 47, 392). 

Humayun defeats Afghans led by Sultan Mah¬ 
mud at the battle of Dadrah (pp. 46, 72). 

Humayun invades Chunar and forces Sher Shah 
to come to terms as a vassal (p. 46, 72). 

The Mewar Rana, Ratna Singh, and Surya Mai 
die in a scuffle (p. 328). 

Rudra Pratap founds the kingdom of Bundel- 
khand with Orchha as capital (p. 376). 


902 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


1531 

1531/1532 

1531- 1536 

1532, May 10 

1532 

1532 

1532- 1623 

1533, January 

1533, March 24 
1533, August 


1533 

1533 

1533-34 

1533-1536 

1533-1599 
1534, July 

1534, November 

1534, November 
1534, December 

1534 

1534 

1534 


Hostility breaks out between the Sultans of 
Bidar and Bijapur for the possession of 
Kalyani and Qandahar (p. 417). 

Sultan Nusrat Shah of Bengal sends an em¬ 
bassy to Bahadur, Sultan of Gujarat 
(p. 394). 

Vikramaditya, Rana of Mewar (p. 328). 

Silhadi’s army fights against Bahadur’s army 
but is defeated (p. 393). 

Bahadur Shah of Gujarat annexes to his king¬ 
dom Raisen, Chanderi, Bhilsa and captures 
Ranthambhor (p. 47). 

Mirza Sikandar invades Kashmir (p. 402). 

Tulsidasa (p. 649). 

Bahadur Shah of Gujarat lays siege to Chitor 
(pp. 47, 329). 

Sultan Bahadur raises siege of Chitor on cer¬ 
tain conditions and returns to Gujarat 
(pp. 329, 394). 

Humayun lays the foundation for a new city 
in Delhi known as Dinpanah. Some believe 
this to be the site of old Indraprastha (p. 
46). 

Mirza Haidar, who had invaded Kashmir, re¬ 
tires from Kashmir after concluding peace 
with Mirza Muhammad, Shah of Kashmir 
(p. 402). 

Chaitanya, the Vaishnava Saint, passes away 
(p_. 644). 

Bahadur, Sultan of Gujarat, sends an em¬ 
bassy to Humayun (p. 395). 

Sher Shah consolidates his position in Bihar 
(p. 51). 

Santa Ekanatha (pp. 579, 630). 

Muhammad Zaman Mirza and Muhammad 
Sultan Mirza (brothers of Humayun) rise in 
revolt against Humayun, but are defeated 
and imprisoned (p. 46). 

Bahadur Shah of Gujarat again besieges 
Chitor and breaks the treaty of 1533 
(March) with Humayun (p. 47). 

Humayun undertakes an expedition to Malwa 
(p. 47). 

Bahadur, Sultan of Gujarat, and the Portu¬ 
guese conclude peace (p. 394). 

Sher Shah defeats the Bengal army at Suraj- 
garh (pp. 51, 73). 

Bahadur, Sultan of Gujarat, gives asylum to 
Muhammad Zaman Mirza (p. 395). 

Isma‘il ‘Adil Shah, Sultan of Bijapur, passes 
away (pp. 417, 449, 469). 


CHRONOLOGY 


903 


1534 


1534-1535 

1535, 

February 18 
1535, March 8 
1535, April 25 


1535, August 

1535, October 25 
1535, December 


1535 

1535 

1535 

1535- 1557 

1536, May 25 

1536 
1536 

1536 

1536 

1536 

1536- 1540 

1537, February 

1537, July 

1537 

1537 


Ghiyas-ud-din Muhammad Khvand Amir 
writes Qdnun-i-Humdyunl dealing with the 
first few years of Humayun’s reign (p. 4). 

Mallu ‘Adil Khan, Sultan of Bijapur (p. 449). 

Humayun leaves Agra to challenge Sultan 
Bahadur of Gujarat (p. 396). 

Humayun Captures Chitor (p. 47). 

Bahadur Shah of Gujarat flees towards Mandu 
when challenged by Humayun at Mandasor. 

[ MhUt-i-Sikandari gives this date as 1535, 
March 25 (pp. 47, 65, 367)]. 

Xkhtiyar Khan surrenders the fort of Cham- 
paner and thus Humlayun becomes master 
of Gujarat (pp. 48, 49). 

The Portuguese and Sultan Bahadur of Guja¬ 
rat conclude a treaty (p. 397), 

The local chiefs and people of Gujarat rise in 
rebellion against Humayun in favour of 
Bahadur Shah and the Mughul officers are 
driven away from Navsari, Broach, Surat, 
Cambay and Patan (p. 49). 

Sher Shah conquers territory of Sultan Mah¬ 
mud up to Bhagalpur (p. 73). 

Chitor falls to Sultan Bahadur of Gujarat 
(p. 331). 

Portuguese capture Diu (p. 506). 

Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah I, Sultan of Bijapur (p. 
412). 

TardI Beg Khan, Mughul governor of Gujarat, 
retreats to Mandu from Champaner and thus 
Gujarat and Malwa are lost to Humayun 
(p. 50). 

Humayun leaves Mandu for Agra (p. 397). 

Bahadur, Sultan of Gujarat, drives away 
Mughuls from Gujarat (p. 397). 

Sher Shah compels Sultan Mahmud of Bengal 
to conclude peace on payment of huge indem¬ 
nity (p. 31). 

Vikramaditya, Rana of Mewar, is murdered by 
Vanvir (p. 331). 

Hamid bin Fazullah writes his Siyar-ul-Arfln 
(p. 14). 

Vanvir, Rana of Mewar (p. 331). 

Death of Sultan Bahadur of Gujarat at Diu 
(p. 398). 

Humayun starts on an expedition to Chunar 
(p. 51). 

Sher Shah besieges Gaur under the pretext of 
non-payment of the annual tribute by Sul¬ 
tan Mahmud (p. 74). 

The Portuguese receive grant of the site of 

Hooghly (p. 201). 


904 

1537 

1537 

1537 

1538, March 
1538, April 6 
1538, May 10 


1538, June 


1538, August 15 
1538 


1538 

1538 


1538 

1538-1545 
1538-1554 
1539, March 

1539, June 26 


1539 

1539 

1539-1552 
1539-1593 
1540, May 17 


1540,October end 
1540, 

December 2 
c. 1540 

c. 1540 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

Muhammad Shah, ruler of Kashmir, passes 
away (p. 402). 

Shams-ud-din, s. of Muhammad Shah of 
Kashmir, ascends throne (p. 402). 

Sunni rising against Burhan Nizam Shah on 
his accepting Shiah faith (p. 417). 

Sher Shah loses Chunar to Humayun (p. 74). 

Mughuls capture Gaur (p. 52). 

Mahmud Khan, s. of Sultan Bahadur’s brother 
(Latif Khan), is raised to the throne of 
Gujarat under the name of Mahmud III 
(p. 398). 

The battle of Teliyagarhi is fought between 
Mughuls and Sher Shah’s army led by Jalal 
Khan and the Mughul advance party re¬ 
treats to Colgong (pp. 52, 75). 

Humayun conquers Bengal (pp. 51, 52). 

Sher Shah celebrates his coronation at Gaur 
and assumes the title of Farid-ud-duniya Wa- 
din-Abu’l MuzafTar Sher Shah (p. 75). 

Goa is made the seat of a Bishop (p. 508). 

A fleet under Turkish admiral and the fleet of 
Gujarat Sultan attack Diu unsuccessfully 
(p. 507). 

Kalimullah, the last Bahmani Sultan, passes 
away in Ahmadnagar (p. 412). 

Sher Shah Sur (pp. 18, 45). 

Mahmud II, Sultan of Gujarat (p. 398). 

Humayun sets out to his capital after the con¬ 
quest of Bengal (p. 53). 

Sher Shah attacks Humayun at Chausa and 
annihilates Mughul army. Humayun escapes 
by crossing the Ganga with the help of a 
water-carrier (p. 54, 76). 

Humayun leaves Gaur to challenge Afghan 
menace (p. 75). 

Sher Shah’s second coronation at Gaur (p. 77). 

Guru An gad, the Sikh Guru (p. 663). 

Shah Hussain, Sufi poet (p. 576). 

Sher Shah attacks Humayun on the Ganges at 
Bilgram and defeats Mughul army complete¬ 
ly. This battle is known as the battle of the 
Ganga or the battle of Bilgram. Humayun 
returns to Agra (pp. 55, 77, 78). 

Humayun leaves Lahore (p. 56). 

Mirza Haidar enters Kashmir and conquers it 
without any fight (p. 403). 

The Portuguese introduce inquisition in their 
Indian settlements (p. 507). 

Brindavanadas writes Chaitanya-Bhagavata 
( Chaitanya-mangala) (pp. 555, 644) 

Uday Singh captures Chitor from Vanvir 
(p. 332). 


1540 


CHRONOLOGY 


905 


1540 

1540 

1540-1545 
1540-1572 
1541, January 26 

1541, August 


1541, November 6 
1541 

1541-1547 

1541-1551 

1542, March 4 
1542, July 31 


1542, October 15 
1542 

1542 

1542 


1542 

1542 


1542-1580 
1543, January 
1543, June 
1543, July 11 

1543, September 

1543 

1543 

1543 


1543 


Shams-ud-din, ruler of Kashmir, passes away 
(p. 402). 

Nazuk Shah ascends the throne of Kashmir 
(p. 402). 

Humayun in exile (p. 45). 

Uday Singh, Rana of Mewar (p. 332). 

Humayun encamps at Rohri (Sind) and the 
period of his exile begins (p. 56). 

Kaji Chak enters Kashmir with a force lent by 
Sher Shah, is defeated and both Kaji Chak 
and Daulat Chak flee to India (p. 403). 

Humayun (in exile) reaches Sehwan and lays 
siege (p. 57). 

Sher Shah raids Gaur and takes Khizr Khan, 
governor of Bengal, a captive (p. 79). 

Ramavarman, ruler of Quilon (p. 611). 

Haidar Mirza enjoys an independent kingdom 
in Kashmir which is short-lived (p. 66). 

Humayun raises siege of Sehwan and retreats 
to Bhakkar (p. 57). 

Humayun reaches Bikaner with the hope of en¬ 
listing sympathy of Raja Maldev of Marwar 
(p. 57). 

Birth of Akbar (Emperor) at Umarkot (p. 58). 

Sher Shah invades Malwa and conquers it 
(p. 80). 

Ali Barid, ruler of Bidar, assumes the title of 
Shah (p. 412). 

Sholapur is restored to Bijapur Sultan by 
Amir Barid on concluding a peace treaty 
(p. 418). 

Amir Barid passes away (p. 467). 

St. Francis Xavier, the Apostle of the Indies, 
organises the Portuguese Indian Church 
(p. 509). 

‘Ali Barid, Sultan of Bidar (p. 467). 

Sher Shah invades Chanderi (p. 81). 

Sher Shah captures Raisen (p. 81). 

Humayun leaves for Sehwan and advances up 
to Shal on his way to Qandahar (p. 58). 

Sultan Quli Qutb-ul-Mulk of Golconda is 
assassinated (p. 469). 

Sher Shah invades Marwar (p. 81) 

Sher Shah conquers Upper Sind (p. 80). 

Darya Khan, a noble of Mahmud III of Guja¬ 
rat, who wants to capture power, flees to 
Burhanpur (p. 399). 

A quadruple alliance amongst Burhan Nizam 
Shah, Jamshid Qutb Shah, Darya ‘Imad 

Shah and Ramaraja of Vijayanagar is con¬ 
cluded to invade ‘Adil Shahi kingdom of 

Bijapur (pp. 418, 470). 


906 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


1543 

1543-1550 

1543- 1564 
1544, January 
1544, August 

1544, November 

1544 

1544- 1603 
1544 

1545, March 21 
1545, May 22 

1545, May 26 


1545, 

September 3 
1545, October 
1545, 

November 18 
1545 


1545 

1545-1548 

1545-1554 

1545-1554 

1545 


1546, March 
1546, April 20 
1546, 

November 11 
1546-1550 

1546-1624 


Venkata I and Tirumala I of Vijayanagara. 
(p. 487). 

Jamshid Qutb Khan, Sultan of Golconda. 
(p. 469). 

Sadashiva and Ramaraya of Vijayanagar. 
(p. 488). 

Humayun being pursued by Mirza Askarl’s men 
enters Shah Tahmasp’s territory, (p. 59). 

Humayun calls on Shah Tahmasp of Persia at 
the latter’s summer capital (p. 59). 

Sher Shah marches on Kalinjar (p. 83). 

Sher Shah invades Mewar and captures 
Chitor. (p. 82). 

Dadu, founder of Parabrahma Sampradaya. 
(pp. 567, 654). 

Kaji Chak passes away. (p. 403). 

Humayun raids Qandahar. (p. 59). 

Sher Shah is fatally wounded by gun-powder 
blast during the siege of Kalinjar and passes 
away the same night (p. 83). 

Jalal Khan, the second s. of Sher Shah, ascends 
the throne at Kalinjar on the death of Sher 
Shah and assumes the title of Islam Shah, 
(p. 90). 

Mirza ‘Askarl surrenders Qandahar fort to 
Humayun and Qandahar is made over to the 
Persians, (p. 59). 

Humayun wrests Qandahar from the Persians 
(p. 59). 

Humayun enters Kabul after exile (p. 60). 

Mahmud III, Sultan of Gujarat, forestalls a 
coup and takes the reins of government in 
his own hands (p. 399). 

Surdas compiles his Sur-sardvall (p. 648). 

Joa de Castro, Portuguese viceroy for the east 
(p. 507). 

Humayun makes preparations for recovering 
his lost dominions (p. 45). 

Islam Shah Sur (p. 90). 

Mirza Haidar, ruler of Kashmir, accepts 
Mughul suzerainty (p. 404). 

Humayun sets out on a (first) campaign of 
Badakshan (p. 60). 

Mahmud III, Sultan of Gujarat, attempts to 
recover Diu from the Portuguese (p. 399). 

The Portuguese defeat the Gujarat army at 
Diu. (p. 399). 

Vrindavana Dasa writes his Chaitanya Bhaga* 
vata (pp. 555, 644). 

Shaikh Ahmad Sirhindi, head of the Naqsha- 
bandi order (p. 309). 


CHRONOLOGY 


907 


1547, April 27 
1547 

1547 

1548, June 
1548, August 17 

1548, August 

1548 

1549, February 

1549 

1550, January 14 

1550 

1550 

1550 

1550-1580 

1551, October 

1551 

1551 

1552 
1552 
1552 

1552 

1552-1574 

1552-1610 

1553 
1553 

1553 


Mirza Kamaran escapes from Kabul when the 
fort is besieged by Humayun (p. 60). 

Ramaraya concludes a political and commer¬ 
cial treaty with the Portuguese (p. 491). 

The Tomb of ‘Isa Khan is built at Delhi (p. 
751). 

Humayun sets out on a (second) campaign 
against Badakhshan (p. 60). 

Mirza Kamaran surrenders Taliqan fort and 
submits to Humayun, who pardons him. (p. 
61). 

Ibrahim Adil Shaiah I concludes peace with 
the Portuguese (p. 450). 

Jamshid, the Qutb Shahi ruler of Golconda, 
secures release of ‘Ali Barid from Ibrahim 
‘Adil Shah I of Bijapur (p. 419). 

Humayun leads a campaign against Balkh and 
the Uzbegs, but the campaign results in a 
fiasco (p. 61). 

Birth of Malik ‘Ambar (p. 435). 

Birth of Abu-’l-Fazl Allami at Agra (p. 5). 

Humayun marches towards Ghurband to chas¬ 
tise Mirza Kamiran, but is wounded in an 
engagement (p. 61). 

Humayun captures Kabul from Mirza Kamran 

(p. 61). 

Jamshid Qutb Khan, Sultan of Golconda, passes 
away (p. 470). 

Ibrahim Qutb Shah, Sultan of Golconda (pp. 
412, 470). 

Mirza Haidar, ruler of Kashmir is fatally shot 
by an arrow in a night attack on the rebels 
(p. 404). 

Rebellion breaks out in Kashmir under the 
leadership of Husain Makri and Idi Raina 
(p. 404). 

Mirza Muhammad Haidar Dughlat composes 
Tarikh-i-Rashidi (Persian), which gives in¬ 
formation about Babur and Humayun (p. 3). 

Haibat Khan Niyazi invades Kashmir and the 
Afghans are routed (p. 404). 

Nazuk Shah, ruler of Kashmir is deposed and 
Ibrahim is set up on the throne (p. 404). 

Portuguese settlements in India are depopu¬ 
lated owing to forced conversions (pp. 508, 
509). 

St. Francis Xavier passes away (p. 509). 

Amar Das, the Sikh Guru (pp. 307, 663). 

Gokulnathji, author and commentator (p. 648). 

Humayun gets Mirza Kamran blinded (p. 63). 

Burhan Nizam Shah and Ramaraya of Vijaya- 
nagar jointly invade Bijapur (p. 420). 

Burhan Nizam Shah passes away (p. 420). 


908 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


1553-1556 

1553-1565 

1554, 

November 22 
1554, 

December 25 
1554 


1554 

1554 

1554-1556 
1554-1561 
1555, February 
1555, February 

1555, May 


1555, June 22 
1555, July 23 


1555 


1555 

1555 

1555-1556 

1555-1556 

c.1555-1587 
1556, January 26 
1556, January 
1556, 

February 14 
1556, 

November 5 


1556, 

December 7 

1557, July 25 
1557, October 5 


The Turkish Admiral Sidi Ali Rais in India 

(p. 20). 

Husain Nizam Shiah I of Ahmadnagar (p. 420). 

Islam Shah Sur passes away (p. 92). 

Humayun leaves Afghanistan on his march to 
Delhi (p. 62). 

Flruz Shah, minor son of Islam Shah Sur as¬ 
cends the throne on the death of his father, 
but is murdered by Mubariz Khan (p. 94). 

Mahmud III, Sultan of Gujarlat, is poisoned and 
meets his end (p. 400). 

Bair am Khan joins Humayun in his Indian 
campaign (p. 62). 

Muhammad ‘Adil (Adli) Shah Sur (p. 94). 

Ahmad III, Sultan of Gujarat (p. 401). 

Humayun occupies Lahore (p. 95). 

Humayun’s forces defeat Afghan troops at 
Dipalpur (p. 95). 

The battle of Machiwara is fought between the 
Mughul and the Afghan army in which the 
Afghan army is defeated (p. 63). 

Humayun’s forces defeat Sikandar Shah at the 
battle of Sirhind (p. 95). 

The victorious Humayun reaches Delhi and 
distributes offices and commands to his 
faithful servants (p. 63). 

Saif-Ain-ul-Mulk, who had joined Ibrahim 
‘Adil Shah of Biiapur, turns into a rebel 
(p. 421). 

Sikandar Shah, defeats Ibrahim Khan Sur and 
captures Delhi and Agra (p. 95). 

Humayun occupies Lahore (p. 95). 

Humayun’s restoration on the throne of Delhi 
as emperor (p. 45). 

Delhi, Agra and the surrounding areas are 
visited by a severe famine (p. 734). 

Raja Nara Narayana of Cooch Behar (p. 642). 

Humayun passes away (p. 64). 

Hlmu occupies Agra and Delhi (p. 96). 

Akbar ascends the throne (p. 104). 

Battle of Panipat is fought between Hlmu and 
the Mughul army. Hlmu is taken captive 
and both Bairam Khan and Akbar severe 
his head from the body (pp. 96, 100, 106). 

Bairam Khan sends an army under Iskandar 
Khan to deal with Sikandar Shah Sur 

(p. 106). 

Sikandar Shah Sur surrenders Mankot to 
the Mughuls (p. 107). 

Mlrza Kamran passes away on his way to 
Mecca (p. 67). 


CHRONOLOGY 


909 


1557 

1557 

1557 

1557 

1557 

1557 

1557-1580 

1558 

1558 

1558 

1558 

1559 

1559-1615 

1559-1637 

1560, October 

1560 

1560 

1561, January 31 
1561, March 29 

1561, April 

1561, November 

1561 
1561 

1561 

1561-1572 

1562 


Muhammad ‘Adil Shah Sur is defeated by 
Khizr Khan Sur of Bengal in a battle 
(p. 97). 

Isma‘il, who is raised to the throne of Kash¬ 
mir after deposing Ibrahim, passes away 
(p. 404)_. 

Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah, Sultan of Bijapur, passes 
away (p. 421). 

Husain Nizam Shah I and Ibrahim Qutb Shah 
jointly invade Gulburga, but a solution is 
found with the intervention of Ramaraya of 
Vijayanagar and peace is effected (p. 421). 

Bishoprics are created in Cochin and Malacca 
(p. 508). 

Goa is raised to the status of Archbishopric 

(p. 508). 

‘AH ‘Adil Shah I, Sultan of Bijapur (p. 451). 

A large Persian force led by Sultan Husain 
Mirza invades Qandahar and captures it 
(p. 153). 

Abu-’1-Ma‘ali with the help of Mughul and 
Kashmiri soldiers rises against Ghazi Chak, 
but the rebels are defeated (p. 405). 

‘AH ‘Adil Shah I forms an alliance with Vija¬ 
yanagar (p. 451). 

Ramaraya of Vijayanagar raids Portuguese 
territories (p. 491). 

Muhammad ‘Adil Shah Sur passes away 
(p. 97). 

Dasopahta, Marathi poet (p. 580). 

Bhai Gurdas, the Sikh writer (p. 111). 

Bairam Khan rebels, but surrenders to Akbar 

(p. 111). 

The Mughul army, raiding Kashmir under 
Mirza Qara Bahadur, is defeated by the 
forces of Ghazi Khan near Rajaori (p. 146). 

Inquisition is launched on with vigour at Goa 
by the Portuguese (p. 508). 

Bairam Khan is assassinated (p. 111). 

Akbar’s army defeats Baz Bahadur at Sarang- 
pur in a campaign against Malwa (p. 112). 

Ahmad III, Sultan of (Gujarat, is assassinated 
(p. 401). 

Akbar appoints Atga Khan his prime minister 
(Vakil) (p, 113). 

Mirza Sulaiman, r. of Badakhshan, seeks 
Akbar’s help against the Uzbegs (p. 156). 

Mughul army suppresses an uprising of the 
Afghans under Sher Khan Sur (p. 113). 

Daulat Chak, the prime minister sets up Habib 
as king of Kashmir (p. 405). 

Muzaffar III, Sultan of Gujarat (p. 401). 

Akbar decides on Rajput alliances (p. 113). 


910 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


1562 

1562 

1562 

1562 

1562 

1562 

1562 

1562 

1562- 1601 

1563, April 15 

1563 

1563 

1563 

1563- 1624 

1564, May 13 

1564, 

December 26 

1564 
1564 
1564 

1564 

1564 

1564 


Akbar overthrows Maham Anaga group (pp. 

114, 115). 

Shah Tahmasp sends an embassy to Akbar 
(p. 154). 

Darya ‘Imad Shah, Sultan of Berar, passes 
away (p. 464). 

B urban ‘Imad Shah, s. of Darya ‘Imad Shah, 
ascends Berar throne (p. 465). 

Akbar repeals the Islamic law with regard to 
the making of prisoners of war and their 
conversion with their families into slaves 
and Muslims (pp. 115, 539). 

Akbar curtails the authority of Sadr-us-Sudur 
(p. 115). 

Akbar sends an expedition against Malwa 
under Abdullah Khan, who restores Mughul 
authority in Malwa (p. 113). 

Akbar marries the daughter of Raja Bharmal 
of Ambar (p. 381). 

Akbar pursues a policy of expansion of his 
empire (pp. 115, 116). 

Birth of Guru Arjun, the Sikh Guru. 

Akbar remits the pilgrim tax on the Hindus 
(p. 539). 

Hussain Khan, br. of GhazI Khan usurps 
Kashmir’s throne (p. 405). 

Ibrahim Qutb Shah marries daughter of 
Husain Nizam Shah I (p. 423). 

Mujaddid Alf-i-SanI Shaikh Sirhandl, who 
started the Orthodox reform movement in 
India (p, 233). 

Sulaiman MIrza defeats Shah Abu-’1-Ma‘all on 
the bank of the Ghurband and delivers him 
to Muhammad Hakim, who had him hanged 
(p. 143). 

The confederate army of Deccan Sultans en¬ 
camps at Talikota to crush Viiayanagar 
(pp. 414, 424). 

Akbar abolishes the jizya on the Hindus (pp. 
115, 381, 539). 

Akbar appoints Muzaffar ‘All Turbatl as the 
finance minister (Dtw&n) (p. 115). 

Akbar lays the foundation of a township 
Nagarchain (the city of repose) near Agra 

(p. 116). 

Akbar marries daughter of Mubarak Shah, r. 
of Khandesh (p. 118). 

Taj Khan KararanI, an officer of Sher Shah, 
overthrows the Surs, who had befriended 
Akbar (p. 129). 

Akbar receives embassy from Shah Tahmasp 
(p. 154). 

Death of Rani Durgavatl (p. 633). 


1564 


CHRONOLOGY 


911 


1564-1572 
1565, January 23 


1565 


1565 

1565 

1565 

1565-1572 

1565-1573 

1565-1588 

1565-1617 

1566, 

November 16 

1566 


1566 

1566-1570 
1567, August 31 
1567, September 
1567, 

October 23 

1567 

1567 


1567 

1567-1568 

1568, 


Construction of Humiayun’s mausoleum at 
Delhi (p. 748). 

The battle of Talikota (also known as Rak- 
shasi-Tangadi) is fought between Vijaya- 
nagar and the confederate armies of Deccan 
Sultans (pp. 414, 425, 492-495). 

Akbar sends an army against the Uzbeg 
officers in his service who had shown signs 
of a rebellion. Ultimately Akbar grants am¬ 
nesty to the Uzbegs (pp. 117, 118). In 1566 
also these Uzbeg officers rose in rebellion 
against Akbar but Akbar, after quelling the 
rebellion, forgives them and re-instates 
them in their positions (p. 119). 

Shaikh 4 Abdun-NabI replaces Muhammad 
Salih of Herat as Sadr-us-Sudur (p. 115). 

Husain Nizam Shah passes away (p. 426). 

Downfall of Vijayanagar empire (p. 593). 

Revival of Bengal Sultanate under Sulaiman 
Kararam (p. 129). 

Akbar constructs the fortress palace at Agra 
(p. 756). 

Murtaza Nizam Shah I (pp. 426-428). 

Kesava-dasa, Hindi poet (p. 567). 

In response to a call for help from Muham¬ 
mad Hakim, Akbar sets out to Punjab 
(p. 143). 

Tufal Khan, the regent of Burhan ‘Imad 
Shah, purchases peace with the Bijapur 
Sultan on payment of heavy sum of money 
(p. 465). 

Akbar constructs the Delhi Gate at Agra 
(p. 756). 

Sadashiva and Tirumala of Vijayanagar 
(p. 495). 

Akbar starts on an expedition against the 
MIrzas (p. 120). 

Akbar undertakes an expedition to Chitor 
(p. 121). 

Akbar encamps opposite Chitor fort on his 
campaign against Mewar (pp. 121, 333). 

rtimad Khan, a noble of Muzaffar Shah III, 
seeks Akbar’s help against Chingiz Khan 
(pp. 125, 126). 

Akbar suppresses finally the Uzbeg rebellion; 
in a battle at Sakrawal (Mankarwal) 
on 9th June, 1567, Khan Zaman is slain and 
Bahadur Khan is taken captive and later on 
executed (pp. 119, 120, 172). 

Caesar Frederick visits Vijayanagar (p. 425). 

Ibrahim Sur passes away (p. 97). 

Jai Mai, the commander of Chitor fort is shot 


912 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


February 23 
1568, 

February 25 
1568, September 

1568 


1569, March 21 


1569, August 30 
(or September 9) 
1569 


1570, January 


1570, June 7 
1570, November 

1570 

1571 

1571 

1571 

1571 

1571 

1571 

1572, 

February 28 
1572, March 1 

1572, July 2 

1572, 

September 10 
1572, Novemb 

1572, November 


fatally by Emperor Akbar when Chitor is be¬ 
sieged (pp. 122, 333). 

Chitor falls to Akbar and Akbar orders mass 
massacre (p. 334). 

Akbar takes steps to improve administration in 
his empire (p. 122). 

Akbar posts his Ambassadors Mirza Muqim and 
Ya‘qub at the Court of Husain Shah, r. of 
Kashmir (p. 146). 

Rai Surjan Har(d)a, chief of Bundi, surrenders 
the fort of Ranthambhor and his two sons 
and accepts other conditions (p. 123). 

Birth of Salim (Jahangir) (pp. 125, 175, 195 
fn. 1). 

‘All Khan (Shah) forces his brother Husain 
Khan to abdicate Kashmir throne in his 
favour (p. 406). 

Murtaza Nizam Shah I, in alliance with ‘All 
‘Adil Shah of Bijapur and the Zamorin, un¬ 
successfully raids Portuguese possessions of 
Chaul and Goa (pp. 427, 450). 

Murad (Prince) is born (p. 125). 

Baz Bahadur surrenders to Akbar and joins 
Akbar’s service (p. 113). 

Tirumal celebrates his coronation at Penu- 
gonda (p. 497). 

Akbar decides to make Sikri his capital 
(p. 125). 

‘All Khan Chak attempts to seize the throne of 
Kashmir from ‘All Shah (p. 406). 

The Asiatic empire of Portugal is divided into 
three independent commands (p. 507). 

Purnanand writes his Saktakarma (p. 639). 

Akbar constructs Akbar! Mahal at Agra 
(p. 758). 

The tomb of Shaikh Salim Chishti is built at 
Sikri (p. 765). 

Uday Singh, Ran a of Me war, passes away 
(p. 334). 

Mahdrdnd Pratap Singh ascends Mewar throne 
(p. 335). 

Akbar sets out on a campaign of Gujarat 
(pp. 126, 401). 

Shaikh Daniyal (Prince) is born (p. 125). 

Muzaffar III, Sultan of Gujarat, submits to 
Akbar (p. 401). 

Akbar receives Yar ‘All Beg, envoy from Sul¬ 
tan Muhammad Khudabanda, gr. of Khura¬ 
san (p. 154). 

Akbar defeats Ibrahim Husain Mirza at Sarnal 
(p. 127). 


1572, December 


CHRONOLOGY 


913 


1572 

1572 

1572 

1572 

1572 

1572 

1572 

1572 

1572-1576 

1572-1585 

1572-1597 

1573, 

January 22 
1573, 

February 26 
1573, June 3 

1573, August 

1573, 

September 2 


1573, October 5 
1573 


Death of Sulaiman KararanI, Bengal Sultan 
(p. 129). 

Bayazid, s. of Sulaiman KararanI, ascends the 
throne of Bengal, but is murdered within a 
few months (p. 129). 

Daud, Sulaiman’s younger son, is raised to the 
throne of Bengal after murdering Bayazid 
(p. 129). 

‘Abdullah Khan, the Uzbeg ruler, sends to 
Akbar his first envoy HajI Altamash who is 
received coldly and ultimately dismissed 
(p. 156). 

‘Abdullah Khan, the Uzbeg ruler, objects to 
giving protection to MIrzJa Shah Rukh 
(p. 156). 

Shah Tahmasp writes Tazkimt-i-Tahmdsp, 
which gives a history of Humayun’s sojourn 
in Persia (p. 4). 

Death of Ghazall MashhadI, Akbar’s court poet 

(p. 622). 

Eknath completes his eleventh book of the 
Bhagavata Purdna (Marathi) (p. 650). 

Maharana Pratap Singh consolidates his posi¬ 
tion (p. 336). 

Srlranga, Vijayanagar ruler (p. 497). 

Maharana Pratap Singh of Mewar (p. 335). 

Mughul forces defeat the combind armies of 
Muhammad Husain MIrza, Shiah Mirzia and 
Sher Khan FuladI at Patan (p. 127). 

Surat surrenders to Akbar (p. 127). 

Akbar returns to Fathpur Slkrl after his Guja¬ 
rat campaign (p. 127). 

Muhammad Husain MIrza, Ikhtiyar-ul-Mulk 
and the sons of Sher Khan FuladI create 
fresh troubles for Akbar in Gujarat 

(p. 128). 

Akbar reaches the vicinity of Ahmad&bad to 
deal with the threat of the confederacy of 
the rebels—Muhammad Husain MIrza, 
Ikhtiyar-ul-Mulk and sons of Sher Khan 
FuladI. Akbar defeats the combined rebel 
forces and is victorious in the second cam¬ 
paign of Gujarat (p. 128). 

Akbar returns to Fathpur Slkrl after his suc¬ 
cessful second campaign of Gujarat (p. 128). 

Akbar introduces the far-reaching reforms in 
his administration such as branding system 
( dagh ), conversion of assignments (jdglrs) 
into reserved lands ( khdlisa ), fixing the 
rank ( mansab ) and the gradation of pay of 
the officers of the State (p. 129). 


914 

1573 

1573 

1573- 1595 
1574, March 

1574, June 20 

1574, April 

1574 

1574 

1574 

1574- 1581 

1575, April 12 

1575, 

September 25 

1575 
1575 

1575 

1575 

1575- 1595 

1576, April 

1576, June 21 

1576, July 12 

1576, October 11 

1576 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

Akbar despatches envoys to the Courts of 
Khandesh and Ahmadnagar (p. 161). 

Emperor Akbar crushes the Gujarat rebellion 
(p. 381). 

Five famines visit northern-India (p. 735). 

Chandra Sen, s. of Raja Mai Dev of Jodhpur 
rises against the Mughuls (p. 131). 

Akbar starts for Patna to reduce Daud, Sultan 
of Bengal (p. 130). 

Narnala is captured by Murtaza I (p. 465). 

Murtaza Niziam Shah I annexes Berar to 
Ahmadnagar kingdom (pp. 161, 413, 427). 

Bhakkar surrenders to Mughuls (p. 151). 

Gosvami Tulsi-dasa commences writing his 
Rama Charita Mdnasa (p. 565). 

Guru Ram Das, the Sikh Guru (p. 664). 

Daud, Sultan of Bengal submits to Munim 
Khan, Mughul commander at Cuttack and is 
given a fief, after his defeat at Tukaroi on 
3rd March, 1575 (p. 130). 

Mughul army under Mun‘im Khan captures 
Tanda, capital of Daud, Bengal Sultan 
(p. 130). 

Ibadat-Khana (House of Worship) is founded 
by Akbar at Fathpur Sikri (p. 134). 

Mirza Sulaiman, r. of Badakhshan, who is ex¬ 
pelled by his rebellious grandson, Mirza 
Shah Rukh, seeks Akbar’s protection 
(p. 156). 

Mirza ‘Ala-ud-daulah Qazvini writes his 
Nafdis-ul-Maasir which gives biographical 
accounts of Persian poets of Akbar’s time 
(p. 8). 

Plague visits Bengal (p. 735). 

Composition of Chaitanya Charitdmrita by 
Krishnadas Kaviraj. Some hold that this 
was written between 1612 and 1615 (p. 555). 

Akbar sends an expedition against Maharand 
Pratap Singh of Mewar under the command 
of Rajia Man Singh and Asaf Khan (Ghiyas- 
ud-din ‘All) (p. 131). 

The battle of Haldighat is fought between 
Maharand Pratap Singh and Mughul army 
and Maharand Pratap is defeated (pp. 132, 
335,336). 

Daud, Sultan of Bengal, who rises against 
Mughuls again, is defeated at the battle of 
Rajmahal, taken prisoner and executed 
(p. 131). 

Akbar leaves Ajmer for Gogunda with a large 
army against Maharand Pratap (p. 337). 

Shah Tahmasp passes away (p. 154). 


CHRONOLOGY 


915 


1576 

1577, February 


1577, July 9 
1577 

1577 

1577 

1577 

1577 

1577 

1578, March 

1578, April 4 
1578, October 


1578, October 

1578 

1578 

1578 

1578 


1578 

1578 


Vijayanagar army defeats the Bijapur army 
when the latter laai siege to Chandragiri 
(p. 452). 

Akbar despatches an expedition under Shihab- 
ud-din Ahmad Khan against Raja ‘All Khan 
of Khandesh, who refused to recognise the 
sovereignty of Akbar and pay tribute 
(p. 161). 

Two envoys of Mlrza Shah Rukh of Badakh- 
shan reach Akbar’s Court (p. 156). 

Mihr ‘All, a servant of Ibrahim Husain Mlrza 
rises in revolt against the Mughuls (p. 133). 

Akbar receives envoy from the Sultan of 
Ahmadnagar (p. 161). 

Akbar receives a second embassy from ‘Abd¬ 
ullah Khan, the Uzbeg ruler (p. 157). 

Mihr-un-nisa (Nur Jahan) is born near Qan- 
dahar (p. 184, 185). 

Hasan Beg Romulu writes his Ahsan-ut-Tawa- 
rikh, which gives a contemporary account of 
Persia (p. 7). 

Purnananda writes his Srltattva Chintamanl 
(p. 639). 

Akbar sends another expedition under com¬ 
mand of Shahbaz Khan to capture Kumbhal- 
garh (p. 338). 

The Mughuls capture Kumbhalgarh (p. 338). 

Akbar sends an expeditionary force under 
command of Shahbaz Khan against Maha- 
mna Pratap, who had started recovering his 
lost territories (p. 132). 

The Xbadat Khana (House of Worship) found¬ 
ed by Akbar becomes a Parliament of Reli¬ 
gions (p. 135). 

Dastur Mahyarjl Rana, an exponent of Zoroas¬ 
trianism, arrives at the Court of Akbar 
(p. 137). 

Muzaffar III of Gujarlat, who is in custody of 
Mughuls since 1572, escapes to Saurashtra 
(p. 145). 

Akbar sends a mission to Muhammad Hakim, 
r. of Kabul to acknowledge his sovereignty, 
but in vain (p. 144). 

Akbar sends Mulla Tshqi and QazI Sadr-ud- 
din as Mughul envoys at the Court of ‘All 
Shiah, r. of Kashmir on the acceptance of 
Mughul suzerainty by the Shah (pp. 147, 
406). 

The Portuguese viceroy of Goa sends Antonio 
Cabral as an ambassador to Akbar’s court 
(p. 159). 

Akbar sends an envoy to Mlrza Shah Rukh of 
Badakhshan (p. 156). 


916 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


1578 

1578 

1578 

1578- 1580 
1579, June 26 

1579, 

September 2 

1579 
1579 
1579 
1579 

1579- 1580 

1580, January 
1580, 

February 28 
1580, November 8 


1580 

1580 

1580 

1580 

1580 

1580 


Madhukar Shah, the Bundela chief, submits to 
Mughuls (p. 376). 

Haidar Malik writes his Tdrikh^i-Kdshmir 
(p. 12). 

Death of Jamal al-DIn Muhammad Tahir, 
Arabic writer (p^ 619). 

Haji Muhammad ‘Arif Qandaharl writes his 
Tarikh-i-Akbar Shahi, a most valuable his¬ 
tory of Akbar’s reign, (p. 4). 

Akbar recites the Kh(utba composed by Faizi 
in verse which ends with the words Allahu 
Akbar and claims that he is the agent of 
God— Khalifatu’lldh. (p. 135). 

Akbar becomes the Imam and the Mujtahid of 
the age by the famous declaration ( Mahzar ) 
which he obtained from tne Ularna. Akbar 
becomes the Khalifa (head of Islamic faith) 
in India, (pp. 135, 136, 158). 

Akbar enters into a friendly alliance with Nara 

N'arayan of Cooch Behar. (p. 184). 

All Shah, the ruler of Kashmir, passes away, 
(p. 406). 

Golconda army under Murhari Rao sacks 
Ahobalam and invades other places, (p. 471). 

The first Englishman, Thomas Stephens (a 
Jesuit), visits western India (Goa), 
(p. 512). 

Akbar revises the policy of assignment system 
introduced in 1573. (p. 129). 

Lohar Chak(k) overthrows Yusuf Shah, ruler 
of Kashmir, (p. 147). 

The first Jesuit Mission from Goa arrives at 
Akbar’s Court on an invitation from 
Emperor Akbar. (pp. 137, 159). 

Yusuf Shah, dethroned ruler of Kashmir, 
defeats Lohar Chak(k), the usurper at 
Sopur and regains his kingdom without 
Mughul assistance, (p. 147). 

Akbar sends an army under the command of 
Raja Man Singh to help Yusuf Shah to wrest 
Kashmir throne from the usurper, (p. 406). 

Mirza Hakim raids Mughul territories of the 
Punjab, (p. 144). 

Rebellion breaks out in Bengal with the slogan 
“Islam in danger .” (pp. 139, 141, 142). 

‘All Adil Shah, Sultan of Bijapur, is assassi¬ 
nated. (pp. 429, 452). 

Ibrahim Qutb Shah Sultan of Golconda passes 
away. (p. 472). 

The ‘Union of Portugal and Spain’ under Philip 
II hastens the downfall of maritime and 
commercial supremacy of the Portuguese in 
the East. (p. 510). 


CHRONOLOGY 


917 


1580 

1580 

1580 

1580 


1580-1586 

1580-1587 

1580-1612 

1580- 1627 

1581, 

February 6 
1581, February 
1581, July 12 

1581, August 10 

1581, 

December 1 

1581 

1581- 1582 

1581-1606 

1582, April 

1582 
1582 

1582 

1582 

1582 


Ceylonese rise in rebellion against the Portu* 
guese. (p. 507). 

The Spanish monopoly of the Magellan route 
is successfully challenged by Sir Francis 
Drake, (p. 510). 

Decline of Portuguese trade with India, 
(p. 510). 

Akbar permits those Hindus, who had been 
forcibly converted to Islam, to revert to the 
religion of their forefathers, and restores the 
Hindu women forcibly married to Musal- 
mans to their families, (p. 539). 

Yusuf Shah Chak, ruler of Kashmir, (p. 577). 

Ibrahim Barid Shah II, Sultan of Bidar, 
p. 468). 

Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah, Sultan of 
Golconda. (p. 472). 

Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah II, Sultan of Bijapur. 
(p. 452). 

Man Singh, Mughul commander, repulses the 
attack of Mlrza Hakim and defends Lahore, 
(p. 144). 

Akbar sets out from Fathpur Slkri to chastise 
Mlrza Hakim, (p. 144). 

Prince Murad defeats Mlrza Hakim in a battle 
near Kabul, (p. 145). 

Akbar triumphantly enters Kabul. 

Akbar returns to Fathpur Slkri after an expe¬ 
dition against Mlrza Hakim and pardoning 
him and reinstating him to the Government 
of Kabul, (p. 145). 

Akbar sends Mlrza Tahir and Salih ‘Aqil as 
envoys to Kashmir Court, (p. 147). 

Prince Salim at the age of 12 assumes nominal 
charge of government departments and mili¬ 
tary detachments, as per the Tlmurid custom, 
(p. 175). 

Arjun, the Sikh Guru. (pp. 307, 664). 

Khan A‘zam is appointed Mughul governor 
of Bengal, (p. 142). 

Akbar promulgates the Dln-i-Ildhi. (p. 138). 

Akbar receives a Jain delegation, which he 
himself had invited, (p. 137). 

Akbar effects further curtailment of power of 
Sadr-us-Sudur and appoints six provincial 
Sadrs, (p. 115). 

An English fleet attempts voyage round the 
Cape of Good Hope. (p. 510). 

Akbar withdraws from the provincial gover¬ 
nors the power of inflicting capital punish¬ 
ment. (p. 549). 


918 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


1582 


1583, February 
1583, March 
1583, September 

1583, 

November 26 

1583 

1583-1584 

1583-1591 

1584, January 

1584, March 

1584 
1584 

1584 

1585, 

December 31 

1585 

1585 

1585 


1585 

1585 

1585 

1586, 

February 24 
1586, February 


Narottam Thakur brings about a synthesis of 
different schools of Bengal Vaishnavism and 
holds a grand festival to mark this synthesis, 
(p. 645). 

Fr. Rudolf of the Jesuit Mission leaves Akbar’s 
Court, (p. 159). 

Khan A‘zam recovers Teliyagarhi, which was 
taken by the rebels, (p. 142). 

Muzaffar III raises a rebellion against the 
Mughuls and captures Ahmadabad. (p. 145). 

Shahbaz Khan, a Mughul commander, defeats 
M‘asum Khan Kabuli, a rebel leader of 
Bengal, (pp. 141-142). 

Ralph Fitch and a few other Englishmen reach 
India via the Persian Gulf. (p. 512). 

Famine visits North-Western India, (p. 735). 

Ralph Fitch, European traveller, tours India, 
(p. 734). 

Akbar sends an army under Mlrza Khan to 
quell the rebellion on Muzaffar III in Guja¬ 
rat. (p. 146). 

Mlrza Khan defeats Muzaffar III at Nandod and 
puts him to flight, (p. 146). 

Akbar adopts the solar Ilahi era. (p. 137). 

‘Abdullah Khan Uzbeg of Bukhara occupies 
Badakshan and incites the frontier tribes to 
rise against Mughuls. Mlrza Shah Rukh 
seeks refuge at Akbar’s Court, (pp. 151, 156). 

Mahdrdnd Pratap Singh recaptures many of his 
lost territories, (p. 338). 

Akbar sends an expeditionary force under 
Mlrza Shah Rukh and Raja Bhagwan Das to 
subjugate Kashmir, (p. 147). 

Bayazid passes away. His son Jalal-ud-dln be¬ 
comes the leader of the Raushanais. (p. 148). 

Kabul is annexed to Mughul empire, (p. 151). 

A party of three Englishmen—John Newbery, 
Ralph Fitch and William Leedes—arrive at 
Akbar’s Court with a letter from Queen 
Elizabeth of England (written in February, 
1583) recommending favourable reception, 
friendly treatment and suitable privileges. 

(p. 160). 

Akbar orders an expedition under Khan Azam 
against Berar which does not come off till 
1586 (p. 162). 

Rajla Jagannath attempts to crush Mahdvdna 
Pratap Singh, but in vain. (p. 338). 

The temple of Radha Vallabh is constructed at 
Vrindavana. (p. 648). 

Emperor Akbar’s army invades Kashmir and 
Yusuf Shah submits to Akbar. (p. 147, 407). 

Death of Raja Birbal. (p. 149). 


CHRONOLOGY 


919 


1586, March 11 

Akbar receives an envoy (Mir Quraish) from 

1586, April 7 

Abdullah Khan, the Uzbeg chief, (p. 157). 

Akbar refuses to recognise the treaty entered 
into with Yusuf Shah of Kashimr, and 
imprisons Yusuf Shah, although he was as¬ 
sured of safe conduct by Raja Bhagwan Das. 
(p. 148). 

1586, July 8 

Ya'qub, son of Yusuf Shah ruler of Kashmir 
challenges Mughul authority over Kashmir, 
(p. 148). 

1586, July 8 

Akbar sends an army under Qasim Khan to 
chastise Ya'qub, son of Yusuf Shah, ruler of 
Kashmir, who challenged Mughul supremacy 

1586, August 7 

over Kashmir, (pp. 148, 408). 

Ya'qub, the Kashmir rebel, surrenders to Akbar 
at Sopur. (p. 148). 

1586, October 15 

Qasim Khan, Mughul commander, defeats 
Kashmiri forces and enters Srinagar, 
(p. 148). 

1586 

Jalal-ud-din forms a confederacy of Rausha- 
nais, Yusufzais, the Mohmands, the Khalils 
and other tribes against Mughuls and raids 
Mughul territories, (p. 150). 

1586 

Ya'qub makes two ‘unsuccessful attempts to 
wrest Srinagar from the Mughuls. (p. 148). 

1586 

1586 

Mughuls besiege Sehwan. (p. 151). 

Jam Beg, ruler of Bind, offers submission to 
Akbar, but later on asserts independence, 
(p. 151). 

1586 

Mughul expedition under Khan ‘Azam against 
Berar fails and the Mughul forces have to 
retreat from the battlefield of Chandur 

1586 

against the combined opposition of Raja ‘All 
Khan and Nizam Shah. (p. 161). 

Ibriahlm ‘Adil Shah II, Sultan of Bijapur, 
marries Malika Zaman, sister of Sultan of 

1586-1600 

1586-1614 

Golconda. (p. 472). 

Rajadhara, ruler of Tripura, (p. 642). 

Venkata II, ruler of Vijayanagar. (pp. 497, 
608). 

1587 

Akbar transfers Raja Man Singh to Bihar. 

1587 

(p. 150). 

Ya'qub makes a third attempt to wrest Sri¬ 
nagar from the Mughuls, but his attempt is 
foiled by Mirza Yusuf Khan, governor of 
Kashmir, (p. 148). 

1587 

Akbar suppresses finally the revolt in Bengal 
(p. 142). 

1587 

‘Abbas Sarwani writes his Tdrikh-i-Sher Shahi 
alias Tuhfd-i-Akbar Shahi which deals with 
the reign and administration of Sher Shiah. 

(p. 8). 


920 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


1587 

1587 


1587-1591 

1587- 1629 

1588, June 14 
1588 

1588 

1588- 1589 
1588-1589 

1589, April 1 


1589, May 6 
1589, August 7 
1589, October 


1589 

1589 

1589 


1589 

1589 

1589 

1589 

1589 

1589 


Jauhar Aftabchi writes Tazkirdt-ul-Wdqui'ut, 
a wellknown chronicle of Humayun’s reign 
under Emperor Akbar’s orders, (p. 4). 

Gulbadan Begum (daughter of Babur) writes 
Humdyun nama , in Persian at Akbar’s in¬ 
stance which is a first-rate authority on the 
domestic relations of the first two Mughul 
rulers with their wives, sons, daughters, and 
other members of the royal family and on 
their social and harem life. (p. 3). 

Qasim Barid Shiah II, Sultan of Bidar. (p. 468). 

Shah Abbas, the Safavi King of Persia, (p. 473). 

Closer contacts are established between Akbar 
and Shah Abbas of Persia, (p. 154). 

Husain, son of Murtaza Nizam Shah I, mur¬ 
ders his father and succeeds to Ahmadnagar 
throne, (p. 161, 428). 

Mughul army under the command of Zain 
Khan undertakes a campaign into Swat and 
Bajaur. (p. 150). 

Narayana Bhatta composes his Ndrayamyam. 
(p. 653). 

Husain Nizam Shah II, Sultan of Ahmadnagar. 
(p. 428). 

Jaffar Beg and Asaf Khan write Tarfkh-i-Alfi 
under orders from Akbar. (p. 13). 

Husain, son of Murtaza Nizam Shah I of 
Ahmadnagar, is deposed and murdered by 
the nobles. Isma'Il, son of Burhan-ud-din, 
younger brother of Murtaza Nizam Shah I, 
is raised to the throne, (p. 161). 

Death of Miyan Tansen, the reputed singer at 
Akbar’s Court (p. 408). 

Ya'qub, Shah of Kashmir sumbits to Emperor 
Akbar. (p. 408). 

Akbar visits Kabul, (p. 150). 

Burhan-ud-dTn, the younger brother of Murtaza 
Nizam Shah I, invades Berar. (p. 162). 

Akbar visits Kashmir for the first time. (p. 153). 

Hakim Humlam, an envoy of Akbar who had 
gone to the Court of 'Abdullah Khan, the 
Uzbeg, returns to Akbar’s Court with a letter 
from ‘Abdullah Khan. (p. 157). 

Raja Bhagwan Das passes away. (p. 167). 

Raja Todar Mai passes away. (p. 167). 

Peace treaty is concluded between Ahmadnagar 
and Bijapur. (p. 429). 

Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah II builds Anand Mahal at 
Bijapur, (p. 456). 

Death of Shaikh Wajih-al-Din ‘Alawi, saint, 
scholar and writer, (p. 619). 

Mahldhara writes his Mantra-mahodadhi. 
(p. 639). 


CHRONOLOGY 


921 


1589-1591 

1590 

1590 

1590, August 


1590 


1591, 

January 4 
1591, May 


1591, August 

1591, October 

1591 

1591 

1591 

1591 

1591 

1591-1592 

1591-1595 

1591-1601 

1592, January 15 
1592, April 18 

1592, July 

1592 

1592 

1592 


Isma‘11 Nizam Shah II. (p. 429). 

The Afghans repudiate the treaty with the 
Mughuls and capture Puri. (p. 152). 

Khan Khanan ‘Abdur-Rahim invades Sehwlan. 
(p. 151). 

Mughuls conquer the kingdom of Afghan 
ruler Qutlu Khan Lohani in north-Orissa 
and the ruler’s son Naslr Khan pays homage 
to Man Singh, (p. 152). 

Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah, Sultan of Gol- 
conda, builds a new capital at Hyderabad, 
(p. 472). 

Maulavi Husain, an envoy of ‘Abdullah Khan, 
reaches Akbar’s Court, (p. 157). 

Burhan-ud-dm, younger brother of Murtaza 
Nizam Shah, deposes Isma‘11 and occupies 
the throne of Ahmadnagar as Burhan Nizam 
Shah II. (p. 162). 

Akbar sends ambassadors to the Sultans of 
Khandesh, Ahmadnagar, Bijapur and Gol- 
conda. (p. 162). 

Khan Khanan ‘Abdur-Rahim inflicts a severe 
defeat on Jani Beg and ultimately Jani Beg 
submits to Mughuls. (p. 151). 

Salim tries to seize sovereign power, (p. 166). 

Akbar receives the second Jesuit Mission at 
Lahore, (p. 159). 

Shah ‘Abbas sends his envoy Yadgar Sultan 
Rumlu to Akbar. (p. 155). 

Bijapur army led by Dilavar Khan is defeated 
by Ahmadnagar army at Dharaseo. (p. 454). 

Captain Lancaster rounds the Cape of Good 
Hope and voyages to Cape Comorin and the 
Malay Peninsula, (p. 510). 

Bayazid writes Tdrikh-i-Humdyun which gives 
history of both Humayun and Blabur. (p. 4). 

Burhan NiZam Shah II. (p.48). 

Amir Band II, Sultan of Bldar. (p. 468). 

Birth of Shah Jahan at Lahore, (p. 197). 

The Afghans and the Mughuls fight a battle at 
Benapur (in Orissa) and the Afghans are 
defeated, (p. 152). 

Akbar leaves for Kashmir to deal with Yadgar 
(cousin of Mirzla Yusuf Khan) who rebelled 
against Akbar. (p. 153). 

Jalal-ud-din, after his return from Turan, gives 
troubles to Mughuls in the N. W. Frontier re¬ 
gion. (p. 150). 

Madhukar Shah, the Bundela chief, passes 
away. (p. 376). 

Burhan Nizam Shah II raids Bijpaur. (p. 430). 


922 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


1592 

1592-1593 

1593, January 

1593 


1593 


1593 


1593 

1593 

1593 

1594 
1594 

1595, April 18 

1595, April 
1595, May 5 


1595, 

December 26 

1595 

1595 


1595 


1595 

1595 


Burhan Nizam Shah II raids Chaul, a Portu¬ 
guese fortress but ultimately has to retreat, 
(p. 430). 

Mughul campaigns against Jalal-ud-din, leader 
of a confederacy against Mughuls (p. 150). 

The Mughuls conquer Orissa (p. 152). 

Zain Khan, Mughul commander, suppresses the 
rebellion of Afghan and other tribes in N'.W. 
frontier region and receives submission of 
the rebel leaders, (p. 150). 

Muzaffar III, who is hounded like a wild beast 
by the Mughuls, is captured by Khan A‘zam, 
governor of Gujarat, but Muzaffar commits 
suicide on the way. (p. 146). 

FaizI, an envoy of Akbar, and other envoys who 
had been sent to Deccan Sultans by Akbar, 
return to Akbar’s Court without getting ac¬ 
knowledgement of Mughul sovereignty from 
the Deccan Sultans, (p. 162). 

Jam Beg is appointed governor of Multan and 
afterwards of Sind by Akbar. (p. 152). 

Shaikh Mubarak, Akbar’s counsellor, passes 
away. (p. 167). 

The Levant Company of England gets an ex¬ 
tended Charter permitting it to trade over¬ 
land with India, (p. 511). 

Akbar sends an embassy to Shah ‘Abblas of 
Persia, (p. 155). 

Isma‘il, brother of Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah II, re¬ 
bels, but the rebellion is suppressed, (p. 454). 

Akbar finally conquers Qandahar without a bat¬ 
tle when Abdullah Khan surrenders the 
fort. (pp. 151, 154). 

Burhan Nizam Shah II passes away. (p. 162). 

A Jesuit Mission (third) consisting of Fr. 
Jerome Xavier, Fr. Emmanuel Pinheiro and 
Br. Benedict de Goes arrives at Akbar’s 
Court at Lahore, (p. 159). 

Mughul forces under Prince Murad, Khan 
Khanan Abdur Rahim and Raja ‘All Khan 
besiege Ahmadnagar (pp. 163, 432). 

Akbar annexes Baluchistan (p. 151). 

Akbar annexes to his kingdom Cutch, Makran 
and territories up to the border of Qandahar 
(p. 153). 

Akbar completes conquest of northern India, 
including Baluchistan, but excluding Assam 
(p. 153). 

Faizi, the poet laureate passes away (p. 167). 

Burhan Nizam Shah II passes away (p. 430). 



CHRONOLOGY 


923 


1595 


1595 

1595-1601 
1596, March 23 


1596, May 
1596, June 14 


1596-1597 

1597, 

January 29 
1597, 

February 8/9 


1597, July 30 

1597 

1597-1620 

1597- 1689 

1598, February 

1598, November 

1598 

1598 

1598- 1650 

1599, March 11 

1599, May 12 
1599, May 


Ibrahim Nizam Shah, Sultan of Ahmadnagar, 
whose reign lasts only for a few months, 
is slain in a battle against Ahmadnagar (p. 
431). 

The first Dutch fleet passes Cape of Good Hope 
despite Portuguese defiance (p. 507). 

The Dutch complete as many as fifteen voyages 
to the East (p. 510). 

Chand Sultan, on behalf of Ahmadnagar, con¬ 
cludes peace with Prince Murad by agreeing 
to cede Berar to Mughuls (pp. 163, 433). 

Haushanais again rise in revolt against the 
Mughuls in N.W. frontier region (p. 151). 

Akbar sends his ambassadors Khvaja Ashraf 
Naqshbandl and Shaikh Husain to ‘Abdullah 
Khan, the Uzbeg (p. 157). 

‘Abdul-Haqq writes his Tarikh-i-Haqql (p. 7). 

Maharana Pratap Singh passes away (pp. 132, 
339). 

The battle of Ashti (near Sonpet) is fought 
between the Mughul forces and the forces 
of Bijiapur and Golconda who had rushed to 
the rescue of Ahmadnagar in which the 
Mughuls are victorious (pp. 163, 164, 434). 

‘Abdullah Khan, the Uzbeg, sends back Akbar’s 
envoys with his own envoy Mir Quraish to 
Akbar’s Court, who reach on April, 29, 1598 
(p. 158). 

Akbar visits Kashmir for the third and last 
time (p. 153). 

Maharana Amar Singh of Mewar (p. 340). 

Sundaradasa (p. 654). 

‘Abdullah Khan, the Uzbeg ruler, passes away 
(p. 158). 

Minuchihr Beg, envoy of Shah ‘Abbas, arrives 
at Akbar’s Court (p. 155). 

Mughul forces take Gawil, Narnala, Kherta 
and a few other forts in Berar (p. 164). 

The King of Spain instructs the viceroy of Goa 
to maintain the Jesuit Mission at Akbar’s 
Court, although Akbar could not be convert¬ 
ed to Christianity (p. 159). 

Santa Tukanama (p. 581). Some assign to 
him the date 1608-49 (p. 650). 

Mlrza ‘All Beg, envoy of Shah ‘Abbas, arrives 
at Akbar’s Court (p. 155). 

Prince Murad passes away (pp. 164, 434). 

Abu-’l-Fazl at the head of the Mughul army 
reaches Burhanpur but fails to win over 
Raja ‘All Khan to Mughul side (p. 164). 


924 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


1599, 

September 29 
1599, December 

1599 

1599 

1599 


1599 

1599-1606 
1600, January 1 

1600, March 


1600, April 8 

1600, April 21 
1600, April 

1600, June 21 
1600, July 23 

1600, August 28 
1600, 

December 9 
1600, 

December 21 
1600 

1600 

1600 


c.1600 

1600- 1632 
1601, April 

1601, August 23 

1601 

1601- 1609 

1602, May 


Akbar leaves for the Deccan with a mighty 
force (p. 164). 

Captain Lancaster leads the first voyage of the 
East India Co. to the East (p. 510). 

The Synod of Diamper (Udayampura) tries to 
suppress completely the Syrian Christianity 
of Malabar (p. 509). 

An influential body of London merchants plan 
the formation of a company to monopolise 
the eastern trade (p. 511). 

The English declare that they have a right to 
trade in all places where the Portuguese and 
the Spaniards have not established any fort, 
settlement or factory (p. 510). 

‘Usman Khan rises in rebellion in Bengal 
against Jahangir (p. 183). 

John Mildenhall tours India (p. 20). 

Prince Daniylal, who is appointed to the Deccan 
command, reaches Burhanpur (p. 164). 

Akbar sends an embassy to viceroy of Goa 
purely with a view to gaining political alli¬ 
ance (p. 159). 

Akbar reaches Burhanpur on the Deccan ex¬ 
pedition (p. 164). 

Mughuls besiege Ahmadnagar (p. 165). 

Chand Sultan is put to death (p. 165). Some 
give the date as July 1600 (cf. p. 435). 

Mughuls capture Sapan hill (p. 165). 

Salim makes an unsuccessful attempt to seize 
Agra (p. 166). 

Mughuls capture Ahmadnagar (p. 165). 

Mughuls capture Mallgarh near Asirgarh (p. 
165). 

Bahadur Shah of Khandesh comes to Akbar’s 
camp for negotiations (p. 165). 

Jalal-ud-din, leader of the Raushanais, passes 
away (p. 151). 

Akbar makes a fresh attempt to annex Mewar 
(pp. 133, 340, 386). 

Malik ‘Ambar raises Murtaza Shah Nizam-ul- 
Mulk (Murtaza II) to Ahmadnagar throne 
and makes Parenda temporary capital (p. 
436). 

Sarvajna, Kannada poet (p. 598). 

Raghunatha Nayaka, ruler of Tanjore (p. 595). 

Salim rises in revolt against Akbar (p. 166). 

Akbar returns to Agra from his Deccan cam¬ 
paign (p. 166). 

Akbar conquers Asirgarh (p. 116). 

Mirza ‘Ali Barid, Sultan of Bidar (p. 468). 

Salim sets up as an independent monarch at 
Allahabad and sends an envoy to Akbar to 
negotiate peace (pp. 166, 167). 


CHRONOLOGY 


925 


1602, August 19 
1602 

1602 

1602 

1602 

1602 

1603, October 
1603 

1603 

1603 

1603 
.1603 

1604, April 
1604, 

November 16 

1604 

1604 

1604-1605 


1605, 

October 25/26 
1605, November 3 


Bir Singh Bundela, an accomplice of Salim, 
falls upon Abu-’l-Fazl’s party and slains 
Abu-’l-Fazl (p. 167). 

Takhta Beg Mughul commander suppresses 
the revolt of Raushanais, Afridis, Pani, Ora- 
kzai and the Suri tribes led by Ahdad (p. 
151). 

Ma‘sum Khan Bhakkari, Akbar’s envoy 
reaches the Court of Shah ‘Abblas, the Safavi 
ruler (p. 155). 

The Dutch gain supremacy over the Straits of 
Sunda, the route to the Moluccas and Spice 
Islands (p. 508). 

The Dutch combine the several Indian com¬ 
panies in their State under one Dutch Unit¬ 
ed East India Co. (p. 510). 

The Dutch form a United and armed national 
trading company (p. 518). 

Salim is deputed to lead an expedition against 

Rana of Mewar but expresses his reluctance 
(pp. 168, 340). 

John Mildenhall, an English merchant, arrives 
at Akbar’s Court with a letter from Queen 
Elizabeth of England and gifts (pp. 160, 
512). 

The Persians wrest from the Mughuls Zamin 
Dawar and Garmsir which were taken ear¬ 
lier by Shah Beg Khan, Akbar’s general (p. 
154). 

Shah ‘Abbas, the Safavi king of Persia, sends 
an embassy to Muhammad Qull Qutb Shah, 
Sultan of Golconda (p. 473). 

Death of Khwaja Baqi Billah, a Sufi (p. 670). 

Muhi-ud-din ‘Abd-ur Qadir writes An-nur-us- 
Safir which contains a general history of the 
period (p. 8). 

Prince Daniyal passes away (p. 168). 

Rapproachment between Akbar and Salim (p. 
168). 

Man Bai, wife of Prince Salim, passes away 
(p. 175). 

Guru Arjun Dev compiles finally the Adi 
Granth (Granth Sahib ) which is written in 
verse in Gurumukhi script (pp. 572, 664). 

Tobacco, which was unknown in India till the 
last quarter of the 16th century and which 
was brought to Gujarat by the Portuguese, 
is introduced in Akbar’s Court (p. 728). 
Akbar, the great Mughul emperor, breathes 
his last (p. 169). 

Jahangir (Prince Salim) ascends the Mughul 
throne at Agra (p. 175). 


926 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


1605 

1605 

1605 

c.1605 

1605-1616 

1605 

1605- 1627 
1606, April 6 

1606, May 30 

1606 

1606- 1607 


1606-1644 

1607 

1607 

1608 


1608 

1608 


1608 


1608-1611 

1608-1613 

1608-1682 

1608-1695 

1609 


Jija Bai is married to Shahji Bhonsle (p. 247). 

Muhi-ud-dm ‘Abd-ur-Qadir writes Rauz&t-ut- 
Tdlnirin, which is a general history of the 
period (p. 8). 

‘Inayat Ullah completes his Takinil-i-Akbcir- 
ndma, which is a continuation of Abu-l- 
Fazl’s Akbar-ndma (p. 7). 

Death of Hakim ‘Alawl Khan JllanI, Court poet 
of Akbar (p. 617). 

Yahya-bin-‘Abdul Latif writes his Muntakhab- 
ut-Tawdrikh, which gives an account of Ba¬ 
bur, Humayun and Akbar (p. 8). 

£ Abdus Samad writes his Akhbdr-ul-Asfiya (p. 

14). 

Vlrasimha, ruler of Orchha (p. 634). 

Khusrav escapes from Agra, goes to Punjab 
and on his way raises troops (p. 179). 

Arjun Dev, the Sikh Guru, passes away (p. 
309). (Sir Jadunath Sarkar gives this date 
as June, 1606). 

Qutb-ud-dln is appointed Mughul governor of 
Bengal (p. 185). 

Mulla Muhammad Qasim Hindu Shah writes 
his Gulshan-i-Ibrdhimi alias Tarikh-i-Firi- 
shta, which is a general history of Muslim 
India up to Jahangir and history of the Dec- 
can Sultanates (p. 7). 

Har Govind, the Sikh Guru (p. 310). 

Jahangir sends an embassy to Goa (p. 189). 

Malik ‘Ambar transfers the Nizam ShahS capi¬ 
tal from Parenda to Junnar (p. 437). 

Jahangir sends the second expedition under 
Mahabat Khan to Mewar but the expedition 
is a failure (pp. 180, 341). 

Jahangir sends Khan Khanan to Deccan (p. 
181). 

Captain Hawkins arrives at Surat with a letter 
from James I, King of England, and a pre¬ 
sent of 25,000 gold pieces to JahJanglr (p. 
190). 

Captain William Hawkins goes to Mughul 
Court seeking permission to erect a factory 
at Surat for the English East India Co., but 
in vain (p. 511). 

William Finch, a European traveller tours 
India (pp. 20, 718, 734). 

William Hawkins travels in India (p. 20). 

Samartha Ramadasa Sviami! (pp. 582, 651). 
(some give the date as 1608-1681). 

Viamana Pandita, Marathi poet (p. 583). 

Cooch Behar becomes a vassal kingdom of the 
Mughul empire (p. 184). 


CHRONOLOGY 


927 


1609 

1609 

1609 

1609-1615 

1609-1619 
1609-1690 
1610, February 

1610 

1610 

1611 

1611 

1611 

1611 

1611 

1611 

1611 

1611 

1611 

1611 

.1611 

1611-1622 

1612 

1612 

1612 


Jahangir replaces Mahabat Khan by ‘Abdullah 
Khan for Mew&r campaigns, who is also sub¬ 
sequently replaced (pp. 180, 341). 

Prince Parviz is appointed governor of Khan- 
desh and Berar (pp. 181, 438). 

Har Govind, the Sikh Guru, constructs the 
Akal Takht (God’s Throne) at Amritsar 
(p. 310). 

Prince Parviz’s Deccan campaign (pp. 181, 
182). 

Amir Barid Shah III, Sultan of Bidar (p. 468). 

Muktesvara, Marathi poet (p. 583). 

Affonso de Albuqlierque conquers Goa (p. 
505). 

The Dutch establish a fortified settlement at 
Pulicat (p. 512). 

Jahangir sends an embassy to Goa (p. 189). 

The English fleet under Captain Middleton de¬ 
feats the Portuguese fleet off Bombay (p. 
508). 

The English attempt a landing at Pulicat but 
fail due to the opposition of the Dutch (p. 
514). 

The English land at Masulipatam for the first 
time (p. 514). 

Captain Middleton gets permission from the 
Mughul governor for the English East India 
Co., to trade near Surat (p. 511). 

Raja Kalyan, son of Raja Todar Mai, subdues 
Kharda (in Orissa) for Mughuls (p. 183). 

Jahangir marries Nur Jahan (p. 184). 

Captain Hawkins, who had brought a letter 
from James I of England, presents it to Mu¬ 
ghul Emperor, and returns to England with¬ 
out accomplishing his object (p. 190). 

The Shah of Persia sends a formal embassy to 
Jahangir (p. 191). 

‘Abdullah Khan (Firuz-jang) is appointed 
Mughul governor of Gujarat (p. 341). 

Eredia de Manual Godino tours Gujarat (p. 

21 ). 

‘Abdullah Muhammad bin ‘Umer al-Makki 
writes his Zaifar-ul-Walih bi Mfuzaffair wa 
Alih (p. 11). 

Nur Jahan exercises a sobering and beneficent 
influence on Mughul politics (p. 186). 

Khan Khanan is put again in charge of the 
Deccan campaign (p. 182). 

Mughuls subdue finally the Afghans in Bengal 
(p. 183). 

Arjumand Banu Begam (Mumtaz Mahall), 
daughter of Asaf Khan, is married to Prince 
Khurram (p. 186). 


928 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


1612 

1612 

1612 

1612 

1612 

1612 

1612-1626 

1613 

1613 

1613 

1613 

1613 

1613 

1613-1700 

1613-1712 

1614, 

February 18 

1614 

1614 

1615 

1615 

1615 

1615 

1615 

1615-1619 
c.1615-1674 


Har Govind, the Sikh Guru, who was held in 
captivity by Jahangir is set free (p. 311). 

‘Abdullah Khan, Mughul governor of Gujarat 
raids Nizam Shahi territory and penetrates 
up to Daulatabad but is forced to return to 
Gujarat (p. 439). 

Muhammad Qull Qutb Shah passes away (p. 
474). 

The English establish their first factory at 
Surat (p. 512). 

The Mausoleum of Islam Khan is built at SikrI 
(p. 766). 

Kamalakara Bhatta writes his Nirnayasindhu 
(p. 637). 

Muhammad Qutb Shah, Sultan of Golconda 
(p. 474). 

Mughuls conquer Kamrup (p. 184). 

Portuguese sieze four Mughul vessels near 
Surat, which leads to the defeat of Portu¬ 
guese navy by Mughuls (p. 189). 

Jahangir sends an embassy to the Shah of 
Persia (p. 191). 

Khan A‘zam Mlrza ‘Aziz Koka replaces Raja 
Basu, Mughul commander in Rajasthan (p. 
341). 

Sikandar bin Muhammad writes Mirat-i-Sikan- 
dafi (p. 11). 

Muhammad GhausI Shattari writes his Gulzdr- 
i-Abmr (p. 14). 

Samaraja, Marathi poet (p. 583). 

Bhushana, Hindi poet (p. 568). 

After concluding peace with the Mughuls, 
Maharania Amar Singh, visits Khurram’s 
camp (p. 343). 

The English again attempt a landing at Puli- 
cat but fail due to the opposition of the 
Dutch (p. 514). 

Muhammad Sadiq Kashmiri Hamadani writes 
his Kalimat-us-Sadiqm (p. 14). 

Jahangir sends an expedition to Kangra under 
Murtaza Khan and Suraj Mai (p. 183). 

Mughuls capture Khokhar (p. 183). 

Jahangir sends an unsuccessful expedition 
against Assam under the command of Say- 
yid Abu Bakr (p. 184). 

The Jesuits have reconciliation with Jahangir 
(p. 189). 

Paul Canning, an Englishman, arrives at the 
Court of Jahangir (p. 190). 

Sir Thomas Roe, the English ambassador in 
India (p. 21). 

Akho (Akha Bhagat) (Vedantakavisiromani ), 
Gujarati poet (p. 570). 


CHRONOLOGY 


929 


1616 

1616 

1617 

1617 

1617 

1617 

1617 

1618 

1618 


1618-1630 

1619 

1619 

1620, January 26 
1620, 

November 16 

1620 

1620 

1620 


1620-1628 

1620-1629 

1621 


1622 

1622 

1622 

1623 


1623 

1623 


The Nizam Shahl army led by Malik ‘Ambar 
is defeated at Rosalgarh by the Mughul army 
led by Shah Navaz Khan (p. 439). 

The English enter into commercial relations 
with the Zamorin of Calicut (p. 508). 

The ruler of Kharda who had accepted Mu¬ 
ghul suzerainty in 1611 rebels, but is sub¬ 
dued and his territory is annexed to Mughul 
empire (p. 183). 

Prince Khurram, in charge of the Deccan cam¬ 
paign, reaches Burhanpur (p. 182). 

The rulers of Navanagar and Bahara submit to 
Mughuls (p. 183). 

Fr. Xavier passes away (p. 189). 

Jahangir forbids smoking (p. 729). 

The Dutch capture Amboyna island in the 
Southern Molucass (p. 511). 

Sir Thomas Roe, the royal ambassador from 
King James I of England, gets two farmans 
issued by the Mughul Emperor and Prince 
Khurram—one for trade and the other for 
exemption from inland tolls (p. 511). 

Ramadevaraya, emperor of Vijayanagar (p. 
497). 

Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah II of Bijiapur annexes 
Bidar to his kingdom (pp. 413, 455, 468). 

The Dutch become masters of Java and Ceylon 
(p. 518). 

Death of Maharaja Amar Singh of Mewar (pp. 
344, 387). 

Kangra surrenders to Jahangir (p. 183). 

Malik ‘Ambar wins back all the territories lost 
to Mughuls (p. 182). 

Kishtwar submits to Mughuls (p. 183). 

Ladli Begam (Nur Jahan’s daughter by her for¬ 
mer husband) is betrothed to Prince 
Shahryar (p. 186). 

Karna Singh, Maharana of Mewar (p. 344). 

Pieter Van Den Broeke at Surat (p. 21). 

The relations between Bijapur and Ahmad- 
nagar become strained and both of them 
seek Mughul help (p. 182). 

Prince Khusrav is murdered by one Raza (ac¬ 
cording to De Laet) (p. 187). 

Qandahar is captured by the Persians (p. 191). 

The English capture Ormuz and establish a 
factory at Gombroon (p. 508). 

Prince Khurram rises in rebellion against 
Jahangir but the rebel forces are defeated 
near Balochpur (p. 187). 

Prince Khurram plunders Ambar (p. 344). 

Death of Gosvami Tulsi-dasa (p. 566). 


M. E.—59 


1623 


1623-1624 

1623-1659 

1623-1671 

1624 


1624 

1624-1720 

1625 

1626 
1626 
1626 
1626 

1626- 1672 

1627, April 6 
1627, September 

1627, November 7 

1627 

1627- 1656 

1628, 

January 1 
1628, 

February 24 
1628, March 

1628 
1628 

1628- 1652 

1628- 1690 

1629- 1643 
1630 

1630 

1630 

1630- 1633 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

Surat starts exporting tobacco grown in India, 
after its introduction in India by the Portu¬ 
guese (p. 729). 

Pietro Della Valle travels in India (p. 21). 

Tirumala Nayaka, ruler of Madura (p. 596). 

Raghavendratirtha, Madhva pontiff and com¬ 
mentator (p. 615). 

Malik ‘Ambar inflicts a crushing defeat on the 
combined forces of Mughuls and Bijapur at 
Bhatvadi (pp. 248, 442, 474). 

Shah Jahan demolishes the fortifications of 
Chitor (p. 345). 

Rupa-bhavanI, Kashmiri poetesss (p. 578). 

Sholapur is conquered by Nizam Shahi forces 
(p. 442). 

Malik ‘Ambar passes away at the age of 80 
(pp. 182, 443). 

Muhammad Qutb Shah, Sultan of Golconda, 
passes away (p. 475). 

Both the English and the Dutch advance from 
Surat and seize Bombay (p. 519). 

Muhammad Amin writes his Anafaul-i-Akhbdr, 
a general history of the Muslim world (p. 8). 

‘Abdullah Qutb Shiah, Sultan of Golconda (p. 
475). 

Shivaji is born at Shivner (pp. 248, 278). 

Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah II, Sultan of Bijapur, passes 
away (p. 456). 

Jahangir passes away (p. 188). 

Jujhar Singh, the eldest son of BIr Singh Bun- 
dela, ascends the throne of Orchha (p. 377). 

Muhammad ‘Adil Shiah, Sultan of Bijapur (p. 
456). 

Shah Jahan and Karna Singh, Maharana of 
Me war meet at Gogunda and exchange gifts 
(p. 344). 

Shah Jahan ascends the Mughul throne (p. 
198). 

Karna Singh, Maharana of Mewar, passes 
away (p. 344). 

The Dutch abandon Masulipatam (p. 512). 

The English abandons Masulipatam on account 
of rivalry of the Dutch (p. 514). 

Jagat Singh, Maharana of Mewar (p. 344). 

Vithal Bl$kar, Marathi writer (p. 583). 

Sebastian Manrique travels in India (p. 21). 

Fath Khan places under confinement Nizam 
Shah of Ahmadnagar (p. 207). 

The English return to Masulipatam (p. 514). 

Severe famine in Gujarat and the Deccan (p. 
735). 

Husain Nizam Shah III, Sultan of Ahmadnagar 
(p. 444). 


CHRONOLOGY 


931 


1630-1634 

1630-1641 

1631 

1631 

1631 

c.1631-1632 


1632, April 14 
1632 

1632 

1633 

1633 

c.1633 

1634 

1634-1640 

1634 

c.1634 

1635, October 
1635, October 

1635, December 

1635 

1635 

1635 


Peter Mundy travels in India (p. 21). 

Venkata III, ruler of Vijayanagar (p. 498). 

Asaf Khan, the Mughul commander lays an 
unsuccessful siege to Bijapur (pp. 207, 456). 

Fath Khan, son of Malik ‘Ambar, submits to 
the Mughuls (p. 444). 

A severe famine visits Gujarat (p. 519). 

Asad Beg writes his Wdqaya or Htil&t-i-Asad 
Beg, which is a memoir of the author and 
gives an authoritative account of the mur¬ 
der of Abu-’l-Fazl and the pursuit of his 
murderer, Bir Singh Deva Bundela and 
about the conspiracy to place Khusrav on 
the throne (p. 8). 

Shah Jahan leaves for the Deccan campaign 

(p. 208). 

Shah Jahan launches an expedition against the 
Portuguese (pp. 201, 202). 

Shah Jahan completely destroys the Portu¬ 
guese settlement at Hooghly (p. 508). 

The Mughuls secure surrender of Daulatab&d 
by bribery; the young king Husain Shah is 
condemned to life-long imprisonment at 
Gwalior and thus the Nizam Shahi meets its 
extinction (pp. 208, 444). 

Shah Jahan sends a letter of protest to Imam 
Quli of Bukhara for the invasion of Kabul 
by Nazr Muhammad Khan, br. of Imam 
Quli (p. 205). 

Year of writing of Par at an Janam-Sdkhi 
(p. 574). 

Abdal, the ruler of Little Tibet acknowledges 
supremacy of the Mughul emperor (p. 202). 

Har Govind, the Sikh Guru, repulses Mughul 
attacks (p. 314). 

Jujhar Singh raids Chauragarh, Gond capital, 
kills its ruler Prem Narayan and seizes the 
treasure (p. 377). 

Har Govind, the Sikh Guru, is attacked by the 
armies of Shah Jahan (p. 312). 

Mughuls capture Orchha, capital of Bundelas 
(p, 378). 

Devi Singh, the great-grandson of Raja Ram 
Chandra, who helped Mughuls in liquidating 
Jujhar Singh, is elevated to the throne of 
Orchha (p. 378). 

Jujhar Singh, the Bundela chief, and his son 
Bikramjit are done to death by the Gonds in 
the jungles (p.,378). 

Mughul army subdues Garhwal, but meets 
with a heavy disaster (p. 203). 

Bijapur army raids Ikkeri (p. 457). 

Death of Miyan Mir (p. 626). 


932 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


1663, March 2 
1636, May 

1636, July 21 
1636, July 

1636 

1636 

1636 

1636 

1636 

1636 


1636- 1724 

1637 

1637- 1648 

1638 

1638 

1638 

1638- 1658 

1638-1678 

1639 

1639 

1640, 

January 21 
1640, April 


Shah Jahan reaches Daulatabad in his cam¬ 
paign against Bijapur and Golconda (p. 208). 

Muhammad ‘Adil Shah, Sultan of Bijapur, on 
being defeated by the Mughul army accepts 
Mughul suzerainty (pp. 208, 457). 

Shah Jahan sets out for Mandu (p. 208). 

Aurangzib is appointed viceroy of the Deccan 

(p. 208). 

‘Abdullah Qutb Shah of Golconda accepts 
Mughul suzerainty (pp. 208, 475). 

Nizam Shahl kingdom of Ahmadnagar meets 
extinction (p. 248). (Under 1633 it is said 
that Nizam Shahi meets its extinction). 

Shahji Bhonsle, father of Shivaji, enters the 
service of Bijapur Sultan as a general 
(pp. 242, 248). 

An abortive attempt is made by Shahji with 
the assistance of Bijapur to revive Ahmad¬ 
nagar kingdom (p. 445). 

Shahji Bhonsle leaves to the care and guar¬ 
dianship of Dadaji Kondadev, his jdgir of 
Poona, Jija Bai and Shivaji (p. 249). 

Muhammad Amin Qazvini alias Aminai Qaz- 
vini completes his Padshah-nama, a Court 
chronicle written at the instance of Sh&h 
Jahan, which contains the history of the 
reign (first ten years) of Shah Jahan (p. 9). 

Premanand (p. 511). 

Bijapur army under Randaulah Khan raids 
Ikkeri (p. 457). 

Manaveda Zamorin, king of Kozhikode (pp. 
307,608). 

‘All Mardan, the deposed governor of Qan- 
dahar, surrenders Qandahar to Mughuls 
(p. 204). 

Peace treaty is concluded between the 
Mughuls and the Ahom King (p. 227). 

Shah Jahan begins construction of a new capi¬ 
tal city Shahjahanabad at Delhi (p. 787). 

The Portuguese are driven out from Ceylon 
(p. 508). 

Baz Bahadur of Almora (p. 634). 

Shah Jahan suppresses the rebellion of Jujhar 
Singh, Bundela chief (p. 199). 

A treaty of friendship is concluded between 
the ruler of Cooch Behiar and Shah Jahan 
(pp. 202, 203). 

Dara Shukoh completes writing of his Safinat- 
ul-Auliyu, containing the biographical notes 
of orthodox Caliphs, Imams, Sufis etc. 
(p. 14). 

The Mughuls capture Prithviraj, the boy-king 
of Orchha and lodge him in prison (p. 378). 


CHRONOLOGY 


933 


1640 

1640 

1640 


1640-1667 

1641 

1641 

1641 

1641 

1642, May 

1642 

1642-1643 

1642-1649 

1643 

1643 

1644, March 3 

1644, May 

1644-1658 

1644-1661 

1645 

1645, March 

1645, December 

1646, April 4 
1646, June 


Shivaji marries Saibai of Nimbalkar family 
(p. 253). 

Francis Day, a member of the Council of 
Masulipatam, builds Fort St. George (p. 
515). 

A fierce fighting ensues between Vairagis and 
the Naga Sannyiasls at Hardwar, pro¬ 
bably at the time of Kumbha Mela, wherein 
a large number of Vairagis are killed 
(p. 655). 

Jean Baptist Tavernier travels in India (p. 22). 

Jagat Singh of Man Nurpur rises against Shah 
Jahan but is subdued and forced to submit 
(p. 199). 

The Dutch capture the port of Malacca 
(p. 508). 

Zahur bin Zahurl writes his Muhammad-ndma 

(p. ID. 

Aparao Bholanath writes his Sdhibiyd (p. 14). 

Raja Pahar Singh Bundela, the younger bro¬ 
ther of Jujhar Singh, is appointed by the 
Mughuls as the ruler of Orchha (p. 378). 

‘Abdullah Qutb Shah, Sultan of Golconda cap¬ 
tures some territories of Venkata III, the 
Vijayanagar ruler (p. 475). 

Shivaji and Jija Bai meet ShahjI at Bangalore 
(p. 253). 

6riranga III, ruler of Vijayanagar (p. 498). 

Shahji Bhonsle is summoned to Bijapur Court 
for Shivajl’s (mis) conduct (p. 253). 

Ardhakathdnak is written by BanarasI Das 

(p. 16). 

Har Govind, the Sikh Guru, passes away (pp. 

314, 325). 

Aurangzib is dismissed as viceroy of the 
Deccan and deprived of his jdg^rs by Shah 
Jahan (p. 209). 

Construction of the grand Jaml‘ Mas j id at 
Delhi (p. 792). 

Har Rai, the Sikh Guru (p. 315). 

Shah Jahan captures Kahmard (p. 206). 

Mustafa Khan, the Bijapur general, gains pos¬ 
session of Udayagiri (p. 499). 

Srlranga III, ruler of Vijayanagar a, suffers de¬ 
feat at the hands of the Nayaks (p. 500). 

Srlranga III is defeated by Mustafa Khan, the 
Bijapur general near Vellore (p. 500). 

An expedition under Prince Murad leaves for 
Balkh to the help of Nazr Muhammad and 
on way captures Qunduz. Nazr Muhammad 
flees to Persia and Balkh falls into the 
hands of Mughuls (p. 206). 


934 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


1646, October 

1646-1647 

1646-1656 

1647, October 

1647 

1647 

1648, November 

1648 

1648 

1648 

1648 

1648 

1648 

1648-1674 

1649, December 

1649 

1649 

1649 

1651 

1651 

1652, April 10 

1652 
1652 
1652 
1652 
1652 


Raja Pratap, ruler of Palamau, submits to 
Mughuls (p. 203). 

A severe famine visits South India (p. 515). 

Illness of Muhammad ‘Adil Shah, Sultan of 
Bijapur (p. 242). 

Mughul forces retire to India from Balkh after 
Aurangzib concludes peace with Nazr 
Muhammad (p. 206). 

Dadaji Kondadev, Shivaji’s guardian, passes 
away (p. 255). 

Bijapur army, under Mustafa Khan, marches 
against Srlrahga III, and conquers territories 
of Vijayanagar (p. 458). 

Mustafa Khan, the Bijapur general, passes 
away (p. 458). 

The Shah of Persia starts on an expedition of 
Qandahar (p. 204). 

ShivajI starts stamping papers with his own 
seal (p. 255). 

ShivajI restores Simhagarh to Bijapur (p. 256). 

ShahjI Bhonsle is taken a captive to Bijapur 
(p. 256). 

Sah Jahan ceremoniously enters the newly 
constructed capital city—Sahjahanabad and 
formally inaugurates it (p. 787). 

Death of Muhibbullah IllahabadI, a Sufi 
writer (p. 618). 

Satyanathayati, Madhva scholar (p. 615). 

Bijapur army conquers Gingee (p. 458). 

The Persians wrest Qandahar from Mughuls 
(p. 205). 

Mughul expedition to capture Qandahar fails 
(p. 205). 

The Nayak of Tanjore submits to Bijapur 
Sultan (p. 501). 

The English establish their factory at Hooghly 
(p. 517). 

Death of Mulla Mahmud Jaunpurl, Arabic 
writer (p. 617). 

Jagat Singh, Rana of Mewar, passes away 
(p. 345). 

Mughul expedition to capture Qandahar fails 
(p. 205). 

The Dutch get possession of Cape of Good 
Hope (p. 508). 

Madras is raised to the rank of a Presidency 
(p. 515). 

iSivaprakasar composes Prabhulinga-lile 
(Tamil) (p. 587). 

Makalrrm Baba Lai wa Dara Shukoh (Dialo¬ 
gues of Baba Lai and Dara Shukoh) is com¬ 
piled (p. 15). 


CHRONOLOGY 


935 


1652-1680 

1653 

1653 

1653 


.1653 


1653-1708 

1654 

1654 

1654 


1654 

1654 

1654 

1655-1656 


1656, January 


1656, April 9 

1656, 

1656 

1656 

1658-1672 

1656-1688 


1657, April 
1657, May 
1657, November 

1657 

1657 

1657 

1657 

1657 

1657 

1657 


Maharana Raj Singh of Mewar (p. 345). 

Mughul expedition to capture Qandahar fails 
(p. 205). 

Aurangzib is sent again to the Deccan as 
Subaddr (p. 209). 

The English factors at Surat propose to the 
Directors at London to persuade the Portu¬ 
guese to take over Bombay and Bassein for 
a consideration (p. 519). 

Shivaji carves his independent kingdom with 
ministers and officials; completion of first 
phase of Shivaji’s Swiamjya (pp. 255, 257). 

Manucci travels in India (p. 22). 

Raja of Kumaim submits to Mughuls (p. 203). 

Pahar Singh, Bundela, passes away (p. 378). 

The Portuguese recognise the right of the 
English to reside and trade in all their eas¬ 
tern possessions (p. 508). 

Madras is reduced to the status of a subordi¬ 
nate agency (p. 515). 

Moti Masjid at Agra is completed (p. 786). 

‘Abd-ur-Rasul Chishti writes his Mirat-ul- 
Asrar (p. 15). 

‘Ala-ud-dln Muhammad Chishti Bar navi writes 
his Chishtiya-i-Bihishtiya (p. 15). 

Mughul forces under Prince Muhammad Sul¬ 
tan raid Hyderabad while Aurangzib lays 
siege to Golconda (p. 210). 

Aurangzib raises siege of Golconda on instruc¬ 
tions from Shah Jahan (p. 210). 

Muhammad ‘Adil Shah, Sultan of Bijapur, 
passes away (pp. 211, 258, 458). 

Shivaji conquers Javli (pp. 242, 256). 

Death of Mullla ‘Abdul Hakim Sialkuti, theolog¬ 
ical commentator (p. 617). 

‘AH ‘Adil Shah II, Sultan of Bijapur (p. 459). 

Francois Bernier travels in the Mulghul em¬ 
pire (p. 22). 

Bidar surrenders to Mughuls (pp. 211, 459). 

Kalyani surrenders to Mughuls (p. 211). 

Raj Singh, the Mewar Rana, wrests from the 
Mughuls lost territories (p. 346). 

Shah Jahan concludes peace with the Sultan 
of Bijapur (p. 211). 

Shah Jahan is indisposed (p. 214). 

Aurangzib attacks Bijapur (p. 258). 

Shivaji raids Mughul territories in Ahmad- 
nagar district and plunders Junnar (p. 243). 

Birth of Shambhuji, son of Shivaji (p. 273). 

Dilras Banu, Oueen of Aurangzib, passes awav 
(p, 300). 

Surat is constituted the sole Presidency of the 
English in India (p. 519). 


936 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


1658, 

February 14 
1658, May 5 

1658, June 8 


1658, June 18 
1658, June 25 
1658, July 31 
1658, August 18 
1658, November 


1658 

1658- 1729 
1659, January 5 

1659, February 

1659, March 
1659, June 5 

1659, August 30 

1659, September 

1659, 

November 10 

1659 
1659 
1659 

1659- 1682 

1660, June 


Sulaiman Shukoh defeats his uncle Shuja* at 
Bahadurpur near Banaras and proceeds to¬ 
wards Agra (p. 220). 

Aurangzib wins a victory over Jasvant Singh 
who had been deputed by Shah Jahan and 
Dam at Dharmat (pp. 215). (On p. 220 J. N. 
Sarkar gives this date as April 15, 1658). 

The armies of Dara and Aurangzib fight a bat¬ 
tle at Samogarh (near Agra) and Darn's army 
is defeated and Dara escapes to Agra (p. 
215). (This date is given as 29-5-58 on 

p. 220). 

Shah Jahan is imprisoned by Aurangzib at 
Agra (p. 225). 

Prince Murad is arrested and made a State pri¬ 
soner (p. 220). 

Aurangzib is formally crowned as the Mughul 
emperor at Delhi (p. 216). 

Dara flees Lahore when Bahadur Khan takes 
him by surprise at Rupar (p. 221). 

Shuja‘ with a view to release his father, from 
imprisonment, sets out from Patna and con¬ 
quers territories up to Khajuha which he 
reaches on Dec. 30, 1958 (p. 221). 

The Ahoms capture the whole of Western 
Brahmaputra valley (p. 227). 

Srldhara, Marathi poet (p. 583). 

In an encounter between Shuja* and Aurangzib 
Shuj&‘ is defeated and Shuja* flees (pp. 221, 
222 ). 

Aurangzib sends an expedition under Subha- 
karan Bundela against Champat RSi 
(p. 379). 

Aurangzib defeats Dara at Deorai (p. 222). 

Aurangzib has his coronation for the second 
time (p. 223). 

Dara is tried by the court theologians on a 
charge of apostasy from Islam, is found 
guilty and executed (p. 223). 

xAizal Khan leaves Bijapur to capture Shivaji 
dead or alive (pp. 258, 459). 

Shivaji and Afzal Khan meet below the fort 
of Pratapgarh and Afzal Khan is slain 
(p. 258). 

Aurangzib issues a number of ordinances for 
restoring Muslim Law of conduct (p. 234). 

Medhi Singh, son of Raja of Srinagar (Dist. 
Dehradun), submits to Mughuls (p. 203). 

Bijapur army captures Tan j ore (p. 460). 

Chokkanatha Nay aka, Ruler of Madura 
(p. 596). 

Mir Jumla is appointed Mughul viceroy of 
Bengal (p. 227). 


CHRONOLOGY 


937 


1660 

1660 

1660 

1660 

1661, February 

1661, October 

1661, December 4 
1661 

1661 

1661-1667 

1661- 1664 

1662, March 17 

1662, May 

1662, September 

1662 

1662 

1662- 1664 
1662-1665 

1662-1668 

1663, March 31 
1663, April 5 

1663 

1663 

1663 


Sldi Jauhar, Bijapur general, besieges Panhala 
and Shivaji is forced to evacuate it (p. 243). 

Shayista Khan, Mughul viceroy of the Deccan, 
launches campaign against Shivaji (p. 243). 

Death of Sarmad, the heterodox Sufi and Per¬ 
sian writer (p. 626). 

Goplianavallabha writes his Rasika-mangala 
(p. 646). 

Shuja‘ tries to seize the throne of his bene¬ 
factor Magh Raja of Arakan, but the con¬ 
spiracy leaks out and Shuja‘ is slain while 
on the run (p. 222). 

Champat Rai Bundela, hounded by Mughuls 
and his own kith and kin, commits suicide 
(pp. 226, 379). 

Murad is beheaded at Gwalior (p. 223). 

Daud Khan, Governor of Bihar, invades Pala- 
mau in South Bihar and conquers it (p. 226). 

Charles II, King of England, marries Princess 
Catherine of Braganza and gets Bombay 
island as part of dowry (p. 513). 

Aurangzib receives embassies from several 
Muslim countries of the west (pp. 224, 225). 

Har Kishan, the Sikh Guru (p. 315). 

Mir Jumla, Mughul viceroy of Bengal, invades 
the Ahom capital Garhgaon and the ruler 
Jayadhwaj flees (p. 227). 

Sulaimlan Shukoh, Dara’s son, is put to death 
by overdoses of opium (p. 223). 

An English fleet of five ships reaches Bombay 
to take possession of the island given over 
as part of the dowry to Charles II (p. 513). 

The raja of Cooch Behar wrests his kingdom 
from the Mughuls (p. 229). 

Death of Shaikh Nur al-Haqq, jurist and histo¬ 
rian (p. 617). 

Bhadrappa Niayaka, Ikkeri chief (p. 460). 

Sir Edward Winter, English President of 
Madras (p. 516). 

Sir George Oxenden, English governor of 
Surat. 

Mir Jumla, Mughul viceroy of Bengal, passes 
away (p. 229). 

Shivaji attacks Shayista Khan at night at 
Poona in which Shayista Khan escapes 
(p. 243). 

Raja Chhatra Sal, Jam of Navanagar, is restor¬ 
ed to his kingdom which was usurped by Rai 
Singh (p. 226). 

Bijapur army besieges Trichinopoly and plun¬ 
ders surrounding regions (p. 460). 

Nawab Shayista Khan is appointed Mughul 
governor of Bengal (p. 517). 


938 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


1664, January 1 
1664, January 9 

1664, December 


1664 

1664 

1664 

1664-1675 
1665, April 

1665, June 12 

1665, November 

1665, November 

1665 

1665 

1665 

1665 


1665 

1665-1666 

1665-1668 

1666, 

January 22 
1666, 

January 26 
1666, March 5 
1666, May 12 
1666, May 12 
1666, 

May 12 to 
August 18 
1666, August 19 

1666, 

September 12 


Shivaji starts on his Surat campaign (p. 260). 

Shivaji leaves Surat after its plunder (pp. 243, 

260 ). 

Mughul expedition under Mirza Raja Jay Singh 
and Dilir Khan leaves to subdue Shivkji 

(p. 261). 

The Raja of Cooch Behar submits to Mughuls 
(p. 229). 

Aurangzib prohibits repairs to old Hindu 
shrines and temples (p. 234). 

Shahji Bhonsle, father of Shivaji, passes away 
while on a hunting expedition (p. 248). 

Tegh Bahadur, the Sikh Guru (p. 315). 

By an edict Aurangzib levies discriminatory 
customs duty on Hindus (p. 235). 

Shiviaji concludes peace with the Mughuls at 
Purandar (pp. 244, 262). 

Shivaji joins Mughuls in a campaign against 
Bijapur (p. 262). 

Shay is t a Khan, Mughul governor of Bengal 
captures Sandwip (p. 230). 

The ruler of Little Tibet acknowledges the 
suzerainty of the Mughuls (p. 226). 

Shivaji sends a naval expedition to Malabar 
coast (p. 261). 

Mughuls raid Purandar (p. 379). 

The Mughul viceroy of Bengal completely 
annihilates the Feringhis from Eastern 
Bengal coast (p. 508). 

An English settlement grows up in Bombay 
(p. 512). 

Mughul forces led by Jay Singh raid Bijapur 
(p. 460). 

Foxcroft, English governor of Madras (p. 516). 

Shah Jahan passes away (p. 226). 

The Mughul expeditionary force under Buzurg 
Ummed Khan and Admiral Ibn Husain cap¬ 
ture Chittagong (p. 230). 

Shivaji leaves Raigarh for Agra to meet 
Aurangzib (p. 263). 

Aurangzib celebrates his accession at Agra 
(p. 263). 

Shivaji pays a visit to Aurangzib’s court at 
Agra (p. 244). 

Shivaji remains in confinement at Agra 
(p. 264). 

Shivaji escapes with his son Shambhuji from 
Agra (pp. 244, 264). 

Shivaji reaches Raigarh after his escape from 
Agra (pp. 244, 264, 279, 280). 


CHRONOLOGY 


939 


1666-1709 
1667, April 

1667, August 28 
1667 

1667 

1667 

1667 

1667 

1668, September 

1668 
1668 
1668 

.1668 

1668- 1672 

1669, April 9 

1669 

1669 

1669- 1677 

1670, February 
1670, March 

1670, April 
1670, October 

1670 
1670 


Guru Govind Singh, the last Sikh Guru 
(p, 568). 

The Yusufzais of N. W. frontier attack Mughul 
territories under their leader Bhagu but 
Kamil Khan, Mughul commandant of Attock 
beats them back (p. 231). 

Death of Jay Singh, general of Aurangzlb, at 
Burhanpur (p. 244). 

Chakradhwaj, the Ahom king, captures a few 
Mughul forts and the Mughul forces are 
driven back (p. 229). 

Aurangzlb abolishes customs duty in the case 
of Muslim traders but retains it in the case 
of Hindu traders (p. 235). 

Raja Jay Singh of Ambar passes away (p. 238). 

Mughuls raid Deogarh (p. 379). 

M. de Thevenot travels in India (p. 22). 

Bombay island is transferred to the English 
East India Co. by a royal charter (p. 513). 

Aurangzlb pensions off the Court musicians 
(p. 234). 

Aurangzlb prohibits all Hindu religious fairs 
(p. 235). 

ShivajI concludes peace with Aurangzlb who 
confers the title of R&ja on ShivajI (p. 245). 

Bijapur forces raid Ikkeri kingdom and occup}^ 
3 forts (p. 460). 

John Marshall travels in India (p. 22). 

Aurangzlb issues orders to his provincial gov¬ 
ernors to demolish schools and temples of the 
Hindus and put down their teaching and re¬ 
ligious practices (pp. 235, 265). 

The Jats under their leader Gokla rise in re¬ 
bellion against religious persecution of the 
Hindus by Aurangzlb (pp. 236, 373). 

Aurangzlb pulls down the famous Kasi Visves- 
var temple (p. 265). 

Gerald Aungier, English governor of Bombay 
and president of Surat (p. 514). 

ShivajI wrests Sinhgarh from the Mughuls 
(pp. 245, 265). 

Aurangzlb puts a stop to the custom of the 
Mughul Emperor being weighed against pre¬ 
cious metals on his birthdays (p. 689). 

ShivajI plunders many important Mughul 
towns (p. 265). 

ShivajI plunders Surat for a second time (p. 
245). 

Aurangzlb pulls down the famous temple of 
Keshab Rai (p. 265). 

Chhatra Sal Bundela offers his services to 
ShivajI (p. 379). 


940 

THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

1670-1678 

Sir William Langhorne, English governor of 

1670-1720 

1671 

Madras (p. 516). 

Upendra Bhanja, Oriya poet (p. 564). 

Aurangzib orders dismissal of all Hindu head- 
clerks and accountants from his service 

1671 

(p. 235). 

Shivaji captures Salher from the Mughuls 

(p. 266). 

1672 

Akmal Khan, the Afridi chieftain, rises in re¬ 
bellion against Mughuls (p. 231). 

1672 

The Satnamis rise in revolt against the reli¬ 
gious persecution under Aurangzib’s rule 
(p. 236). 

1672, December 

Death of Bijapur Sultan ‘Ali ‘Adil Shah II 
(pp. 245, 461). 

1672 

Bahadur Khan replaces Shah ‘Alam as Mughul 
governor of the Deccan (p. 245). 

1672 

‘Abdullah Qutb Shah, the Sultan of Golconda, 
passes away (p. 477). 

1672 

1672-1681 

Death of ‘Abdur Rashid, Arabic writer (p. 617). 
John Fryer travels through India and Persia 
(pp. 22, 514). 

1672-1686 

Sikandar ‘Adil Shah, Sultan of Bijapur (p. 
461). 

1672-1687 

Abu-’l Hasan Qutb Shah, Sultan of Golconda 
(pp. 286, 477). 

1672 

On the death of Sultans of Golconda and Bija¬ 
pur, anarchy prevails in these two king¬ 
doms (p. 270). 

1672-1686 

Sikandar ‘Adil Shiah, Bijapur Sultan (pp. 283, 
461). 

1672-1704 

Chikkadeva Raya, ruler of Mysore (pp. 598, 
709). 

1673 

1673 

1673 

1674, February 22 

Shivaji captures Panhala (p. 266). 

Dr. Fryer visits Madras (p. 516). 

Death of ‘Abdul Baqi, Arabic writer (p. 617). 
Shuja‘at Khan, who had been specially de¬ 
puted to suppress the rebellion in the N.W. 
frontier, is defeated and killed in the Karpa 
pass (p. 232). 

1674, June 6 

Shivaji has his formal coronation at Raigarh 
with great pomp and grandeur (p. 245). 

1674, June 

Jija Bai, Shivaji’s mother, passes away (p. 
267). 

1674 

Maharana Raj Singh closes the Deobari pass 
with huge walls and portals, fearing inva¬ 
sion by the Mughuls (p. 348). 

1674 

The Jam! (Bladshahi) Masj id at Lahore is 
built (p. 801). 

1674-1687 

1675. 

Ekoji, ruler of Tan j ore (p. 610). 

Tegh Bahadur, the Sikh Guru is beheaded 


CHRONOLOGY 


941 


November 11 
1675 

1675-1708 

1676, February 

1676, 

November 16 

1677, July 

1677, 

December 23 
1677 

1677 

1677 

1677- 1682 

1678, 

December 10 

1678, 

December 13 

1678- 1681 

1679, January 9 

1679, March 23 

1679, April 2 

1679, April 11 
1679, April 
1679, April 

1679, May 26 


under orders of Aurangzib (p. 316). Ac¬ 
cording to some (p. 237) this date is Dec. 
1675). 

The Mughul authority reestablished in the 
N. W. frontier region (p. 232). 

Govind Singh, the Sikh Guru (pp. 316, 665). 
(On p. 568 this date is wrongly given as 
1666-1709). 

‘Abdullah Qutb Shah of Golconda and Shivaji 
enter into a treaty (p. 271). 

Shivaji’s forces defeat Ekoji at Valiganda- 
puram (p. 272). 

The French envoy Germain visits Shivaji near 
Tanjore (p. 277). 

Buhlul Khan, prime minister of Bijapur, passes 
away (p. 283). 

Aurangzib appoints Amir Khan as governor of 
Kabul (p. 232). 

Shivaji concludes alliance with Golconda and 
conquers Gingee, Vellore and parts of 
Madras, Carnatic and Mysore territories 
(pp. 245, 478). 

The Mughuls take up the cause of the Deccani 
party and occupy Naldurg and Gulburga 
(pp. 283, 461). 

Rolt, English governor of Bombay (p. 514). 

Maharaja Jasovant Singh Rathor of Marwar 
passes away at Jamrud (pp. 238, 346). 

Shambhuji escapes from Panhala along with 
his wife and joins Mughul camp near Pan- 
dharpur (p. 273). 

Streynsham Master, the English governor of 
Madras (p. 516). 

Aurangzib sets out for Ajmer to supervise the 
annexation of Marwar (p. 346). 

Aurangzib issues a farmdn asking Raj Singh, 
Rana of Jodhpur, to send his son to the 
Court of the emperor (p. 348). 

Aurangzib re-imposes jizya on the Hindus with 
the object of spreading Islam and uprooting 
infidel practices (pp. 235, 273). 

Aurangzib receives Prince Jay Singh, son of 
Raj Singh Maharana (p. 348). 

Dilir Khan and Shambhuji together capture 
Bhupalgarh, east of Satara (p. 273). 

Aurangzib annexes Marwar to his kingdom (p. 
238). 

Aurangzib installs Indra Singh, a grand- 
nephew of Maharaja Jasovant Singh, as the 
Raja of Jodhpur (p. 347). 


942 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


1679, July 15 


1679, July 


1679, August 19 


1679, 

September 25 
1679, 

November 30 
1679, 

December 4 
1679 
1679 
1679 
1679-80 


1680, January 4 
1680, January 22 


1680, April 4 
1680, April 21 

1680, June 18 


1680-1689 

1680, October 22 

1680-81 

1680-1698 

1681, January 1 


1681, January 16 
1681, January 


Aurangzlb sends a detachment to seize the 
queen of Jasovant Singh and his infant son 
A jit, who had come to Delhi to plead their 
case, but Durga Das foils their attempt and 
takes the royal party to Jodhpur (p. 348). 
Prince A‘zam marries Shahr Banu Begam, 
sister of Sikandar ‘Adil Shah, Sultan of Bija- 
pur (p. 462). 

Mairta Rathors fight to the last man to bar 
the advance of the Mughul army and save 
the Varaha temple near Lake Pushkar 
(p. 349). 

Aurangzlb personally goes to Ajmer to sup¬ 
press the rebellion in Marwlar (p. 239). 
Aurangzlb leaves for Rajasthan to subdue the 
Rathors (p. 351). 

Shambhuji returns to Panhala after an year's 
absence after flirting with Dilir Khan 
(p. 273). 

Shivaji defeats the combined English and Sidi 
fleet in a naval engagement (p. 362). 

The Mughuls recover Gauhati by bribery 
(p. 229). 

The tomb of Aurangzib’s Queen Rabi‘a-ud- 
Daurani is built at Aurangabad (p. 801). 
Muhammad Baqa Sahananpurl writes his 
Riydz-ul-Auliyu, which contains biographi¬ 
cal notes of the first four Caliphs, Imams 
and Sufis (p. 15). 

Mughuls occupy Deobari pass (p. 350). 

Mughul army under Hasan ‘Ali Khan capture 
Udaipur and Chitor and defeats Maharana 
Raj Singh (p. 239). 

Death of Shivaji (pp. 245, 270). 

Rajaram is proclaimed king and crowned at 
Raigarh (p. 359). 

Shambhuji wrests the Maratha throne from 
Rajaram, his younger brother (p. 281). 
Some give this date as July 20, 1680 (p. 

360). 

Shambhuji, Maratha ruler (p. 359). 

Death of Maharana Raj Singh of MeWar (p. 
240). 

Shambhuji plunders Khandesh (p. 281). 
Maharana Jay Singh (p. 352). 

Prince Akbar (s. of Aurangzlb) proclaims 
himself emperor of Delhi and marches 
against Aurangzlb, who is at Ajmer (p. 240). 
Shambhuji’s coronation takes place at Raigarh 
(p. 360). 

Shambhuji makes a lightening raid on Bur- 
hanpur (p. 361). 


CHRONOLOGY 


943 


1681, February 
1681, June 14 


1681. 

November 13 
1681 


1681 

1681 

1681 

1681 

1681 

1681 

1681-1707 


1682, January 
1682, March 22 

1682, October 4 

1682, 

November 14 
1682 


1682 

1682-1600 
1683, June 

1683, November 


1683 

1684, January 5 


Mewiar army under Dayal Das is defeated by 
Prince A‘zam (p. 353). 

The Rana of Me war, Jay Singh, concludes 
peace with Prince Muhammad A‘zam and 
Mewar is restored to Jay Singh, who cedes 
some territories to the Mughuls (pp. 241, 
353). 

Aurangzib reaches Burhanpur in pursuit of 
his son. Prince Akbar (p. 241). 

Gadadhar Singh, the Ahom king, wrests Gau- 
hati from the Mughuls and thus Kamrup is 
finally lost to the Mughuls (p. 229). 

Shambhuji attempts seizure of Ahmadnagar 

(p. 281). 

Shambhuji arrives with a large force opposite 
Janjira of Siddis (p. 362). 

The conspirators on the life of Shambhuji 
are put to death by Shambhuji (p. 360). 

Prince Akbar (s. of Aurangzib) seeks asylum 
with Shambhuji (p. 362). 

William Hedges is appointed director for 
Hooghly Agency of East India Co. (p. 517). 

Jahamara Begam writes Munls-ul-Arwdh 
(p. 14). 

Marwar asserts independence and fights 
Mughul imperalism (pp. 290, 355). 

The Mughuls capture Kalian (p. 362). 

Aurangzib arrives at Aurangabad in pursuit of 
his son Prince Akbar (p. 241). 

Shambhujl’s fleet is defeated by the Siddis of 
Janjira (p. 363). 

Shambhuji captures the Portuguese island of 
Santo Estevao near Goa (p. 363). 

Aurangzib sends an expeditionary force against 
the Marathas under the command of Prince 
A‘zam (p. 284). 

The English get permission from the ruler of 
Gingee to settle and trade at Port Novo and 
Cuddalore (p. 520). 

Sir John Child, governor of Bombay (p. 514). 

Aurangzib recalls his son A‘zam from his 
Deccan campaign (p. 284). 

Prince Akbar is dissuaded from leaving for 
Persia by Durga Das and Kavi Kalash on 
behalf of Shambhuji with promise of help 
in securing Delhi throne to Prince Akbar 

(p. 282). 

Aurangzib launches fresh campaign against 
Shambhuji (p. 282). 

Mughul forces under Prince Shah ‘Alam join 
the Portuguese near Goa to oust Shambhuji’s 
forces (p. 363). 


944 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


1684, January 20 
1684, May 18 

1684, May 

1684 

1685, April 1 
1685, June 14 

1685, July 

1685 

1686, 

September 12 

1686, October 

1686 

1686 

1687, February 7 

1687, February 

1687, 

1687 

1687 

1687 

1687 

1688, July 


1689, 

February, 1 
1689, 

February 8 


Peace is concluded between the Portuguese 
and the Marathas (p. 363). 

Prince Akbar reaches Ahmadnagar after a 
fruitless campaign on the west coast (pp. 
282, 283). 

Mughuls capture Mangalvide and Sangola 
(pp. 284, 462). 

Ganga Ram Nagar rises in rebellion against the 
Mughuls in Bihar (pp. 292, 293). 

The Mughuls besiege Bijapur (pp. 284, 462). 

Prince A‘zam reaches Bijapur with a large 
army and takes over Mughul command 
(p. 284). 

Aurangzib sends an army under Shah ‘Alam 
to attack Hyderabad (pp. 286, 478). 

Pahar Singh, a Gaur Rajput, rises in rebellion 
against the Mughuls (p. 292). 

Sikandar Sultan of Bijapur submits to 
Aurangzib at Rasulpur (pp. 285, 463). 

The English East India Co. rises in arms 
against the Mughuls (p. 293). 

The local agency at Hooghly gets permission 
from the East India Co., to wage war against 
the Mughuls (p. 517). 

A severe famine visits the Deccan (p. 735) 

The Mughul army lays siege to Golconda 

(p. 286). 

Frustrated Prince Akbar, son of Aurangzib, 
leaves for Persia (p. 355). 

Golconda is annexed to Mughul empire and 
Abu-1 Hasan, the last Qutb Shah! ruler, be¬ 
comes a captive (pp. 287, 479). 

Rajaram, the Jat leader, kills Uighur Khan, the 
Mughul commander, in an engagement 
(p. 291). 

Durga Das returns to Marwiar from the Deccan 
(pp. 290, 355). 

Rajaram, the Jat leader, sacks the tomb of 
Emperor Akbar at Sikandra and makes a 
bonfire of his bones (p. 291). 

Raghunatha Tarkavagisa writes his Agama- 
tattvavildsa (p. 639). 

Rajaram, the Jat leader, is killed in an encoun¬ 
ter with the Shekhavat and Chauhan clans 
of Rajputs (pp. 29, 374). 

Shambhuji is captured at Sangameshwar by a 
Mughul officer, Muqarrab Khan (p. 288). 

Rajaram, younger brother of Shambhuji, is 
raised to the Maratha throne after capture 
of Shambhuji (p. 289). 


CHRONOLOGY 


945 


1689, March 11 

ShambhujI and Kavi Kalash, under orders of 
Aurangzlb, are put to a painful and cruel 
death (p. 289). 

1689, October 19 

Raigarh is captured by the Mughuls and 
Shambhujl’s son Shahu, is taken a prisoner 
(p. 289). 

1689, November 1 

Rajaram, the Maratha king, reaches Gingee 

1689 

(p. 289). 

Aurangzlb becomes the unrivalled lord para¬ 
mount of Northern India and the Deccan 
(p. 289). 

1690, May 25 

The Marathas capture Mughul general Sharza 
Khan near Satara (p. 295). 

1690, August 24 

Job Charnock, the English Agent settles at a 
place now known as Calcutta (p. 293). 

1690, September 

Zu-’l-Fiqar Khan, a Mughul commander be¬ 
sieges Gingee (p. 294). 

1690 

Aurangzlb receives embassy from Constanti¬ 
nople (p. 225). 

1690 

The Jat’s stronghold Sinsani submits to 

1690 

Mughuls (pp. 291, 375). 

The Mughuls and the East India Co. come to 
terms (p. 293). 

1690 

The Marathas w’rest from the Mughuls Pra- 
tapgarh, Rohira, Rajgarh and Torna (p. 295). 

1690 

Maharana Jay Singh enters into a new arrange¬ 
ment with the Mughuls (p. 354). 

1690 

Durga Dias inflicts defeat on the Mughul gov¬ 
ernor of Ajmer (p. 356). 

1692 

The Gaur Rajputs accept service under 
Mughuls and thus the risings in western 
Bundelkhand are subdued (p. 292). 

1692 

The Marathas wrest Panhala from the 

1693 

Mughuls (p. 295). 

A jit Singh, aided by Durga Dias, creates dis¬ 
turbance for Mughuls in Marwar (p. 356). 

1695, March 

Aurangzlb deprives Hindus of the use of 
palanquins, elephants, good horses and arms 
(pp. 235, 236). 

1695, May 

Aurangzlb establishes his headquarters at 
Brahmapuri to deal with the Marathas 
(p. 296). 

1695 

Santa, the Maratha general, defeats the Mughul 
general Qasim Khan and puts the Mughul 
army to rout (p. 295). 

1695 

Gemelli Careri, the Italian physician, calls on 
Aurangzlb (p. 300). 

1695 

1695-1721 

Thevenot and Careri travel in India (p. 22). 
Churaman, the Jat leader (p. 375). 


M.E — 60 


946 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


1696, May 

1696 

1696 

1696 

1696-1714 

1697, March 

1697, June 

1697 

1698, January 

1698, October 9 

1698 

1698 

1698-1709 

1699, March 30 

1699 

1699 

1700, March 2 
1700, April 3 
1700, April 21 


Rajaram and Dhana attack Santa near Conjee- 
varam in which the ruler and his general are 
defeated (p. 296). 

Saflyat-un-nisa, grand-daughter of Aurangzib, 
is delivered to the Emperor (p. 290). 

The Maratha general Santa defeats and slays 
Mughul general Himmat Khan and plunders 
his baggage (p. 295). 

Dhana (jl), the Maratha commander, is wound¬ 
ed in a fight between him and Santa (ji) 
(p. 369) 

Raja Rudra Simha of Heramba principality 
(Kachar) (p. 643). 

Santa and Dhana, the two Maratha rival gene¬ 
rals, fight with each other and Santa is de¬ 
feated and flees (p. 296). 

Santa, the Maratha general is murdered while 
taking his bath (p. 296). 

The Mughul governor of Bengal permits the 
European settlers to defend themselves 
against any aggression by the rebellious 
Afghans (p. 517). 

The Mughuls capture Gingee (p. 295). 

Mahararia Jay Singh passes away (p. 354). 

Durga Das agrees to surrender Prince Akbar’s 
son Buland Akhtar to Aurangzib in conside¬ 
ration of restoring the paraganas of Jhalor, 
Sanchor and Siwana to Ajit Singh, Maha¬ 
rana, and restoration of his own jdglr and a 
mansab in the imperial army (pp. 290, 357). 

Rajaram shifts his seat of government from 
Raigarh to Sataiia (p. 369). 

Thomas Pitt, governor of Madras (p. 521). 

Govind Singh, the Sikh Guru makes a stimu¬ 
lating oration and creates Khalsa (pp. 318, 
319). 

Rajaram, the Maratha ruler, is attacked by 
Bldar Bakht, a Mughul general, and Raja¬ 
ram is defeated near Parenda (p. 296). 

Chhatra Sal Bundela receives temporary set¬ 
back in his raids on Mughul territories 
(p, 380). 

Rajaram, the Maratha ruler, passes away (pp. 
296,370). 

Sikandar Sultan, the ex-ruler of Bijapur, dies 
in captivity of the Mughuls (pp. 285, 463). 

Sstara falls to Aurangzib (p. 297). 


I 


1700, June 

1700 

CHRONOLOGY 947 

Mughuls capture Parll (p. 297). 

The Director of the East India Co. constitutes 
Bengal into a separate Presidency and ap¬ 
point Sir Charles Eyre as the first President 
(p. 517). 

1701, May 

Panhala is captured by Mughuls (by bribery) 
(p. 297). 

1701 

The Raja of Deogarh in Gondwana rises in re¬ 
bellion against the Mughuls (p. 293). 

1702, June 

Khelna (Vishalgarh) is captured by the 
Mughuls (p. 296). 

1702-1704 

1703, April 

1704, 

December 22 
1704, 

December 27 

Plague visits the Deccan (p. 298). 

Kondhana falls to Mughuls (p. 297). 

The Mughul army besieges the camp of Guru 
Govind Singh but the Guru escapes (p. 321). 

The two sons of Guru Govind Singh, Zorawar 
Singh and Fateh Singh, are bricked up alive 
in the fort wall and then beheaded under 
orders of Aurangzlb (p. 321). 

1704 

The Mughul army, under orders from Aurang¬ 
zlb, raids Anandpur (p. 320). 

1704 

Aurangzlb concludes peace with Ajit Singh of 
Mar war (p. 290). 

1704 

Churaman, a Jat leader, wrests SinsanI from 
Mughuls only to lose again in October 1705 
(p. 292). 

1705 

Durga Dias submits to Aurangzlb and is granted 
his old mansab and post in Gujarat (p. 291, 
358). 

1705 

1705 

Mughuls wrest SinsanI (p. 292). 

Aurangzib returns to Ahmadnagar from his 
Deccan campaign (p. 297). 

1706, January 21 

Aurangzlb and Chhatra Sal Bundela come to 
terms (p. 380). 

1706 

Marwlar raises the standard of rebellion 
against Aurangzlb (p. 291). 

1706 

The Marathas raid Gurajat but are driven back 
(p. 298). 

1706-1732 

Vijayaranga Chokkanatha Nayaka, ruler of 
Madura (p. 597). 

1707, March 3 

Aurangzib, the Mughul Emperor, breathes his 
last at Ahmadnagar (pp. 298, 358). 

1707, August 

Govind Singh, the Sikh Guru, comes to Nan- 
der (d) (p. 322). 

1707 

Ajit Singh captures Jodhpur (p. 291). 


948 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


1707 


1707 


1708, August 
1708, October 7 
1710, May 12 
1739 

1740-1756 

1746 

1754 

1780 

1787-88 


Chhatra Sal of Bundelkhand resumes activi¬ 
ties for the establishment of an independent 
kingdom after severing connections with 
the Mughuls (p. 292). 

Lai Kavi writes his Chhatraprahasa (an epic 
biography of Chhatrasal, Raja of Bundel¬ 
khand) (p. 568). 

Govind Singh, the Sikh Guru, is stabbed by 
two Pathan boys (pp. 237, 322, 323). 

Govind Singh, the Sikh Guru, immolates him¬ 
self before a congregation (p. 323, 326). 

Vazir Khan of Sirhind passes away; the Khalsa 
set themselves as rulers, (p. 324). 

The Marathas wrest Bassein from the Portu¬ 
guese. (p. 509). 

Alivardi Khan of Bengal, (p. 362). 

The French, under La Bourdonnais, capture 
Madras, (p. 516). 

The tomb of Safdar Jang is built at Delhi. 

(p. 801). 

Shah Naw&z Khan completes his Maasir-ul- 
Umrd (p. 12). 

Gulam Husain Salim wrties his Riydz-us- 
Salatin. (p. 11). 




Genealogy 

Mughul Dynasty 

1. Babur (1526) 


949 


03 

rH 


$ 


•cC 

* I-3 

cc 

sh ^ 

Q *-< 

■ t- 

r d h 

0 w 


'S 

J 

CO 


'g 


•53 


O 

CO 

kO 


b " 
■b 

icd 

B 

3 

ffi 


CM 


p ^3 

C5 

£ 

<c3 

tM 

T 


CD 

lO 

U5> 


Sh ' 

a 

'X 

X 

< 


CO 


53 

- 3> 

• <s> 

■53 

Q 


t 

" 3 


*- 

rSi 

53 

p£3 

to 


8 

CD 


kT3 
CD ■ 


B 

x 

cc 

in 

Sh 

I,pH 

Of) 

.9 

'S 

l— 3 



i<s> 

s> 

SP¬ 

SS 

fa 


S> 

53 

S- 

to 

- S 
ps: 

W 


CO 

rSi 

rid 

53 

fa 

t3 

'g 

£ 


00 

»o 

CD 


N 

bo. 


Sh 

P 

< 


CD 


■53 

•C—i 

£ 

to 


rfid 

CO 

p£d 

pid 

53 

_fa 


53 


5- 

53 

-pO ■ 

X 


03 

rH 


Sh 

03 

- 

• rH 

in 

I 

0 

X 


X 

•b 

p5d 

to 


53 

M 


Hi 

o 

,v 

pS 3 

to 

.'53 

S- 

•53 

Q 


o 

It¬ 


'S 

£ 

Sh 

P 

0 

ICO 

pb 

03 

w 

a 

■ 03 


pC 

103 

p£ 

m 


’b 

53 


53 

rC 



X 

rH^ 


ICC 

pSh 



C/3 

T§ 

rSi 

'rs 

pb 

'53 

pcd 

I 

m 

to 

g 

0 

S 

-cC 

- cC 

3 

pb 

b 

a 

X 


s 

< 


CO 



rH 

rH 


.*3 

w 


S 

■ 53 

p£ 

to 


53 

fa 


Sh 

° ^ 
05 & 

i—l i—I 

P t- 

03 H 

Q w 
0 K 
? 

i+H 103 
03 rj 

fa rt 

■”3 

CM p£ 
tH ICC 

r^H 

— in 


p 

too 

• rH 

CL> 

Sh 

H-» 

o 

b 

0 

• rH 

-H> 

P 

X 

c\ 

Sh 

o 

Sh 

O 

a 

a 

w 

T3 

0) 

cc 

rjJ 

O 

CO 

cC 

£ 

#\ 

Sh 

CC 

pQ 

pW 

< 


to 

h£ 

co 

3 


IH> 

M 


CM 

iH 

t- 


X 

kCC 

X 

w 

Sh 
iCC' 

nb 

-1 

I 

0 


00 


CO 

rH 

t- 


SH 

CC 

>> 

m 

x 

X 

P 

Sh 

Sh 

CC 

fa 

/—\ 

. 

03 kO 
t- 


P 

o 

co 

-r*s Sh 

>> rt 

P 

X -rj 
H-J C /3 

|3 

(=H JpH 

o 

ft rH 

t/3 


Sh 

tiH 

OJO 

a 

- cc- 


kD 


03 

irt 

tr 


H 

a 

cC 


pa 

icC 

pTS 

C/3 


CD 


o o 

CM _ 
!>. <D 


■a <y 

I 6 

T3 Sh -M 
CCjO CC 

" § t " H X! 
p <y 
b w 

a o 
-5 

D <y 

S Q 


00 

lf3 

00 

rH 

i 

t>- 

CO 

00 


CD 

O 

00 


Sh 

CC 

X 

*< 


o5 

Sh 

- 3 
'TS 
icC 
X 

CC 

PQ 


00 

rH 

















Genealogical Table of the Peshwas 


950 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 












BHOSLES (CHHATRAPATI) 

Jija Bai=Shahaji=Tuka Bai 


GENEALOGY 


951 


00 

co 

00 


CO 

co 

00 


o 

r- 

00 


CM 

CM 

00 


cm 




Sh 

o 




o 


>> 

> 


io3 

t 

c/3 


rti 
LH |>. 

' 03 

> ^ 
• rH 

42 

c/3 


i03 

pq 

• rH 

03 

C/3 



CM 

CO 

t— 


> 


a 

> 

m »rH 

42 

C/3 


r^H 

✓—\ C/3 

os 

SI >» 

T3 
■eg ^ 
!c? & 

03 




42 

lOj 

42 

C/3 


■r 

• rH 

42 

C/3 


03 

Jh 

103 


> 

• rH 

42 

C/3 


S 

ioS 

ft 


CO 

rH 

00 


3 

-42 

S 

03 

42 

C/3 


•o3 


00 

o 


t 

• rH 

42 

C/3 


3 
42 
103 

42 

C/3 


03 

Ik— 


•cS 

•r—» 

S 


■ cd 

ft 


<u 

ft 

o 

03 


3 £ 

T§ ri 


42 

C/3 


•r» 03 

-as 


103 

42 

i03 

42 

C/3 


42 

W) 

S2 

• • rH 

C/3 

ft 

'3 

03 

Sh 

ft 


00 

o 

00 


Shahu Chhatrapati 
(1884-1922) 











MAP I 















MAP H 





























MAP III 























MAP IV 

















































































































INDEX 


‘Abbasid Caliph Ma’mun 138 
Abbas Shah 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 
169, 170, 171, 203, 204, 206, 225 
Abbdalis 207 
Abbot, Justin, G. 676 
Abdal 202, 203, 406 
Abdal Makri 402, 403 
‘Abd-ul-‘Aziz 34, 710 
‘Abdul-Baqi Nihkwandi 173, 617, 623 
‘Abdul-Hamid Lahaurl 9, 325, 534, 

626, 785, 786, 790 
‘Abdul-Haqq 7 

‘Abdul Karim Buhlul Khan 461 
‘Abdul Muhammad 461 
‘Abdul-Mumm 158 
‘Abdul Qadir 203 
‘Abdul Rashid Tattawl 626 
Abdul (r)-Razzaq (Persian Ambassador) 
685, 733 

‘Abdul Wahhab al Muttaqi 616 
‘Abdul-Wahhab Bohra 548 
Abdulla 324 
‘Abdullah 12 

‘Abdullah (br. of Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah 
of Bijapur) 450 

Abdullah Khan (r. of Bukhara) 140, 
158, 160, 170, 172, 180, 182, 199, 201, 
203 

Abdullah Khan (Firuz-jang) 341, 438, 
439 

‘Abdullah Khan Uzbeg 6, 113, 117, 
118, 149, 151, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 
189 

‘Abdullah Muhammad bin ‘Umar al- 
Makki 11 

Abdullah Pani alias Sardar Khan 257, 
479 

‘Abdullah Qutb Shall 13, 208, 270, 271. 
275, 475-77, 482, 620, 624 
—accepts Mughul suzerainty 208, 

475 

Abdullah, Dr. S. M. 628, 632 
‘Abdun-Nabi Shaikh 115, 134, 236, 667 
‘Abdus-Samad 807, 808 
‘Abdur Rahim 174, 705 
‘Abdur Rahim Khan Khannan 2, 6, 12, 
175, 410, 432, 433 , 434, 436, 437 , 438, 
622, 623, 625, 709 
—mausoleum of 780 
‘Abdur Rashid 617 
‘Abd-ur-Rasul-Chishti 15 
‘Abdur-Razzaq 26, 27 
Abdur-Razzaq Lari alias Mustafa Khan 
256, 287 

‘Abdus-Samad 14, 133, 172 
Abhang Khan 163, 164, 165, 432, 434, 
482 

Abhar 59 

Abhinavavadi Vidyananda 600 


Abu Hanifah 538 
Abu ‘Imad 624 

Abu-’l-Fazl (Abu-’l-Fazl Allami) 4, 5, 
7, 8, 9, 23, 27 , 31, 43 , 66, 68, 69, 
98, 100, 101, 102, 103, 116, 123, 134, 
137, 140, 144, 156, 164, 165, 166, 167, 
168, 171, 172, 174, 175, 198, 199, 

333, 338, 340, 376, 381, 384, 384, 385, 

404, 406, 407, 408, 409, 411, 434, 534, 

546, 620, 621, 622, 623, 624, 627, 628, 

631, 669, 680, 681, 682, 687, 690, 693, 

694, 695, 696, 697, 711, 714, 716, 719, 

720, 721, 722, 724, 726, 727, 732, 737, 

739, 755, 757, 808, 809, 810, 812 
Abu-’l-Hasan 812, 813, 814, 815, 816 
Abu-’l-Hasan Qutb Shah 210, 284, 

285, 286, 287, 453, 454, 477-79 
Abu-’1-Ma‘ali Shah 62, 63, 64, 104, 
143, 405 

Abu-’l-Qasim 110 
Abu Nasir Khvaji 155 
Abu Sa‘id Mirza 43 
Abu Sa‘id, Sultan 26 
Abu Talib Kalim 625, 706 
Abu Turab 65 
abwdbs 224, 299 

Abyssinia(n) 165, 181, 182, 225, 299, 

502 

Account of the Sixth Voyage of Sir 
Henry Middleton 21 
Achin 510, 730, 731 
Achuta Nand Das 17 
Achyutadevaraya (k. of Vijayanagar) 
449, 450, 486-87, 608, 615 
—recovers Raichur doab 486 
Achyutananda 646 
Achyutardyabhyudaya 607, 608 
Ac worth 277 
Adab al-Muridin 617 
Adab al-Sharifiyyah 618 
Addb-i-‘Alamgiri 11 
Adabiyyat-i-Fdrsl men Hinduwon kd 
Hissa 632, 712 
Adam, Olearius 22 
Adam, Sultan 61, 62, 114 
Adbhutadarpana 612 
Addanki Gahgadhar Kavi 472, 592 
Aden 225, 505, 506 
Adham Khan 109, 112, 113, 114, 116 
—tomb of 751 
Adhyatma Rdmdyanam 603 
Adi Granth 309, 314, 317, 322, 323, 

572, 573, 654, 664, 665, 677 
‘Adil Khan 90, 91 

‘Adil-Shahi dynasty of Bijapur 445- 
463 

Aditya Pur ana 600 


953 







THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


954 

‘Adll (‘Adali) Shah, see Muhammad 
‘Adil Shah 

Administration and Social Life Under 
Vijayanagar 710, 711 
Adoni 284, 285, 288, 451, 452, 496 
Advaita 644 
Advaita-siddhi 615 

Afghanistan 20, 59, 60, 62, 191, 206, 
207, 215, 231, 238, 296, 299, 303, 656 
—nationalist revival in 207 
Afghan (s) 34, 36, 44, 45, 46, 50, 53, 
54, 56, 57, 61, 63, 64, 67, 68, 71, 72, 
74, 76, 77, 78, 81, 82, 87, 89, 92, 95, 
98, 98, 99, 100, 104, 105, 106, 107, 

111, 112, 113, 118 120, 129, 130, 131, 

140, 142, 148, 149, 150, 151, 152, 157, 

166, 170, 183, 184, 194, 200, 213, 230, 

233, 517 

—army 32, 55, 72 
—chiefs 38 
—dynasty 12, 37 
—tribes 26, 29, 30, 42 
—troops 34 
Afghan Party 283, 461 
Afonso 201, 202 
Africa 502, 715, 717, 730 
Afridis 230, 231 232 
Afzal Khan 243, 257, 258, 259, 261, 
279, 459, 584 
Agama-tattvavilasa 639 
Agastya-Samhitd 637, 675 
Aghuzlu, Sultan 473 
Agra 5, 9, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 44, 46, 47, 

50, 53, 54, 55, 56, 70, 74, 76, 77, 78, 

80, 87, 90, 91, 92, 94, 95, 96, 98, 99, 

100, 105, 108, 110, 113, 116, 118, 119, 

120, 122, 124, 125, 130, 143, 154, 160, 

164, 166, 167, 168, 169, 175, 176, 179, 

187, 189, 198, 200, 208, 209, 215, 216, 

220 , 222, 224, 225, 236, 244, 258, 263, 

264, 280, 291, 298, 322, 329, 511, 512, 

532, 684, 685, 705, 713, 714, 715, 716, 

718, 719, 720, 723, ,724, 726, 733, 734, 

736, 741, 756, 757, 758, 759, 760, 770, 

778, 781, 782, 783, 784, 785, 786, 787, 

792, 793, 797 

—monuments at, 784-787, 793-799 
also see under Mughul period, 
Architecture 
Agra-dasa 566 
Agra Dist. Gazetteer 44 
Agrarian System of Moslem India 
172, 173 
Ahadis 178 
Ahdad 151 

Ahkdm-i- ( Alamgiri 11 
Ahle-Tariqat 212 
Ahl-i-Shariat 212 
Ahmad 472 
Ahmad III, Sultan 401 
Ahmadabad 49, 50, 126, 127, 128, 133, 
145, i46, 215, 222, 511, 512, 519, 
683, 705, 708, 715, 716, 717, 718, 719, 
726, 733, 802, 805 
Ahmad ‘Ali Atallq 157 


Ahmad ‘All Shauq 23 _ _ . 

al-Ahmadiyyah ji bayan al-Ayat al- 
shara'iyyah 618 
Ahmad Khan 25 
Ahmad Khan Sur 92, 94 
Ahmadnagar 30, 51, 128, 161, 162, 163, 
164, 165, 166, 181, 182, 200, 201, 207, 

208, 243, 247, 281, 282, 283, 296, 297, 

298, 412, 413, 414, 415, 416, 417, 419, 

420, 423, 429, 440, 441, 457, 475, 480, 

481, 720, 820 

—annexation to Mughul empire 435 
—faU of 207-08, 444-45 
Ahmadnagar Dist Gazetteer 483 
Ahmad Shah, Sultan 415 
Ahmad Sirhindi 194 
Ahmad I, Sultan 400 
Ahmad Tambal 25 

Ahmad Yadgar 12, 44, 66, 82, 83, 153, 
172 

Ahom(s) 17, 184, 202, 226, 227, 228, 
563, 642 

Ahsan-us-Siyar 3 
Ahsan^ut-Tawdrikh 7, 43 
Aimas 178 

Ain-i-Akbari of Abu-’l-Fazl 5, 23, 43, 
66, 85, 103, 173, 174, 409, 410, 553, 
554, 622, 623, 628, 632, 679, 680, 681, 

682, 683, 687, 690, 691, 695, 697, 698, 

709, 710, 711, 712, 720, 725, 735, 736, 

737, 738, 739, 740, 755, 757, 802 
‘Ain-ul-Mulk 142, 427, 454 
‘Aja’ib-u’s-San'ati 805 
Ajitagrantha 387 
Ajitodaya 387 

Ajit Singh (s. of Guru Govind Singh) 
321 

Ajit Singh (s. of Jasovant Singh) 
238, 290, 347, 349, 350, 356, 357, 358 
Ajmer 47, 81, 82, 84, 107, 113, 114, 115, 
122, 124, 126, 128, 133, 136, 173, 194, 

222, 238, 239, 240, 290, 298, 335, 339, 

342, 343, 350, 351, 353, 511, 692, 714, 

715, 718, 719, 720 

Ajodhya see Ayodhya 
Aka Bai 703 
Akalkot 282 
Akdl Takht 310 

Akbar, Emperor 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, 
13, 15, 16, 19, 20, 40, 58, 59, 60, 64, 
65, 67, 68, 90, 96, 97, 99 100, 101, 
104-171, 173, 175, 180, 181, 183, 184, 
185, 189, 190, 192, 193, 203, 207, 212, 

213, 224, 233, 247, 251, 262, 276, 281, 

282, 283, 288, 306, 307, 327, 332, 333, 

334, 336, 337, 340, 344, 352, 353, 376, 

384, 385, 390, 401, 405, 407, 408, 410, 

411, 429, 432, 434, 455, 512, 522, 523, 

524, 525, 527, 528, 530, 532, 533, 534, 

535, 536, 539, 540, 541, 542, 544, 546, 

547, 548, 549, 551, 552, 567, 575, 577, 

606, 610, 614, 615, 616, 617, 619, 621, 

622, 623, 624, 627, 633, 649, 651, 654, 

664, 666, 667, 668, 669, 670, 672, 673, 

677, 678, 679, 682, 683, 684, 686, 687, 

689, 690, 691, 692, 694, 696, 697, 698, 





INDEX 


955 


699, 700, 702, 705, 709, 713, 716, 717, 
718, 719, 721, 722, 724, 726, 727, 728, 
730, 734, 735, 736, 748, 750, 752, 753, 
754, 755, 756, 757, 758, 759, 760, 765, 
769, 770, 771, 772, 773, 774, 775, 776, 
777, 779, 780, 781, 782, 783, 784, 786, 
799, 800, 808, 809, 816 
—abolition of duties 721 
—administrative reforms 128, 129 
—amends Hindu Personal Law 540 
—amends Muslim Personal Law 540 
—and Bengal revolt 140-42 
—and common law for all 540-41 
—and Jain delegation 137 
—and Law of Evidence 552 
—and Ullema 665 
—as a builder, see under Mughul 
period, architecture 
—ascends the throne 104 
—as Imam and Mujtahid 135, 136 
—birth at ‘Umarkot 58 
—conquests in North India 140-53 
—conquests in the Deccan 160-66 
—death of 168 

—Declaration (Mahzar) of 135 
—defeats Himu at Panipat 106 
—early conquests 115-132 
—encouragement to painting 809, 
810, see also under Mughul period, 
painting 

—farmans of 13 
—Harem party 110, 111, 112, 113 
—split in 113, 114. 

—Hindus and Islamic Law 539-40 
—his foreign policy 153-160 
—his friendship with the Portuguese 
188, 189 

—his Gujarat campaign 125, 133, 

14 e > 410 

—his’library 809 
—his ministry 528 
—invasion of Kashmir 407, 408 
—Jesuit Mission from Goa 137 
—land revenue System 533 
—Law and legal institutions 539-40 
—leaves for Persia 364 
—layalty of Sikh Gurus 309 
—Mewar campaign 333 
—Mewar policy 381-83 
—Mujtahid-i-Asr 668 
—patronage to Sikh Gurus 309 
—period of tutelage 104 
—personality and estimate of 168-71, 
752, 753 

—policy of expansion 115, 116 
—promulgation of Dm-i-Ilahl 138, 
139, 669 

—Rajput alliances 113, 115 
—rebellion of the MIrzas 120 
—rebellion of the Uzbegs 117, 118, 
119, 120 

—religious policy 133-40, 192 
—reorganization of the mints 133 
—repeals Islamic Law with regard 
to non-Hindus 539-40 
—revolt of Salim 166-68 


—royal record office 2 
—sources of history 4, 5, 6 
—treaty with Yakub, (k. of Kashmir) 
407, 408 

Akbar, Prince (s. of Aurangzlb) 239, 
240, 281, 282, 283, 301, 349, 350, 352 s 
355, 360, 362, 363, 364 
Akbar II 792 

Akbar and the Jesuits 21, 174 
Akbar-ndma (of Abu-’l-Fazl) 5, 6, 7, 
15, 23, 65, 66, 67, 102, 103, 172, 173, 
174, 410, 411, 483, 553, 554, 623, 631, 
707, 710, 711, 712, 811 
Akbar-nama (of ‘Alahdad Faizi 
Sarhindl) 7, 483 

Akbar-ndma (of Mahesh Thakur) 15 
Akbar Shahi Srihgar Darpan 15 
Akbar f s Tomb, Sikandrah, near Agra 
18 

Akbar the Great 24, 383, 553, 554, 739, 
740 

Akbar, The Great Mogul 103, 172, 

385, 410, 738, 740 
Akhairaj 331 
Akhana Chhappa 630 
Akham-i-Alamgiri 10, 11 
Akhbdrdt-i-^darbdr-i-mlu f alla 1, 11 
Akhbar-ul-Akhyar 14, 623 
Akhbar-ul-Asfiya 14 
Akhegita 571 
Akhlaq-i-J ahangiri 625 
Akho (Akha Bhagat) 17, 570, 571 
Akho, Ek Adhyayana 630 
Akinchana-daSa 646 
Akkanna 270, 286, 477, 478 
Akmal Khan 231, 232 
‘Alahdad Faizi Sarhindl 7, 483 
Alamgirnama 10, 484, 627 
Alaol 561, 562 

‘Alam Khan ‘Ala-ud-din Lodi 32, 33, 
47, 395, 396, 398, 399 
‘Ala-ud-din Alam Khan gr. of Kalpi 
395 

‘Ala-ud-din ‘Imad ul-Mulk Shah 391. 
392, 394, 412, 416, 446, 447, 463-64, 
467, 480, 493 

‘Ala-ud-din Khalji, Sultan 88, 123, 

129, 160, 247, 324, 562, 670, 775 
‘Ala-ud-din Islam Khan 184 
‘Ala-ud-din Muhammad ChishtI 
Barnavl 15 

Albuquerque, Affonso de 447, 505, 

506, 508 

Albuquerque, Bras de 509 
‘All ‘Adil Shah I 162, 168, 421, 422, 
423, 424, 425, 426, 427, 451-52, 465, 
480, 492, 493, 495, 496, 820 
‘Ali ‘Adil Shah II 243, 245, 459-61, 630 
—patronage to Urdu literature 461 
All Barid 412, 418, 419, 422, 425, 467 
—an estimate of 467 
‘Allbin Taifura BustamI 624 
Aligarh 68, 718 

Aligarh Muslim Uni. Library 14 
‘All Haidar 576 
All Khan Chak 406 




956 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


All Khan, k. of Kashmir 406 

‘All Mardan Khan 204, 206, 703, 789 

‘All Masj id 150 

‘All Muhammad Khan 10, 11 

Ali Ndma 461 

‘All Naqi 214, 216, 223 

Ali(a)ndi 643 

‘All Quli Beg Istajlu alias Sher Afghan 
185 

‘Ali Quli Khan 63, 64, 96, 105, 106, 
107, 108, 117, 118 
‘AH Quli Salim 625 
‘Ali Shah 147, 406 
—accepts Mughul suzerainty 406 
Ali Sher Kani‘ 11 
Alivardi Khan 362 
Aliya Ramaraya, see Ramaraja 
Allahabad 76, 103, 118, 120, 124, 140, 
142, 146, 166, 167, 168, 187, 216, 264, 
270, 279, 292, 298, 684, 692, 714, 715, 
718, 719, 720, 724, 725, 759, 770 
Allahabad University Library 4, 23 
Allahu Akbar 135 
Allah Upanisad 654, 676 
‘Allama Taftazani 617 
Allasani Peddana 589 
Altekar, A. S. 712 
Almeida, Francisco de 504, 505, 506 
Alptigin 324 

Alwar 37, 46, 53, 97, 101, 106, 107, 110 
‘ Amal-i-Salih 9, 198, 325 
Amanat Khan Shirazi 797 
Amardas 137, 307, 310, 664 
Amar Kavya Vamsavali 15, 384, 385, 
387 

Amarnath 627 
Amaranayakas 496, 497 
Amar Singh, Maharana 10, 133, 180, 
336, 339, 340, 341, 342, 343, 344, 354, 
382, 386, 389 

—comes to terms with Jahangir 343 
Amar Vamshavali 16 
Ambala 33, 91, 706 
Ambaligolla 460 
Ambar Huseni 580 
Amber 113, 175, 235, 332, 684, 819 
Ambikaimalai 585 
Amboyna 510, 511 
America 299 
Amin 80, 84, 86, 93 
Amina-i-Qazwini 325, 553, 626 
Amin-i-Bdngald 80, 84 
Amin Khan 232 
Amir(s ) 29, 39, 45, 70, 99 

•Amir ‘Ali Barid 391, 394, 412, 416, 
417, 446, 447, 448, 452, 464, 466, 467, 
470, 481, 491 
Amir Barid Shah II 468 
Amir Barid Shah III 468 
Amir Fathulluh Shirazi 623 
Amir Hamza 808 
Amir Khan (gr. of Kabul) 699 
Amir Khan (s. of Khalil-ullah) 232 
Amir Khusrav Dihlavl 707, 803, 811 
Amir Nazm-ud-Din Hasan Dihlavi 812 


Amir-ul-muminin 136 
Amritodaya 613 
Amrit Rao 295 

Amritsar 106, 310, 312, 313, 314, 664 
Amuktamalyada 590 
Anahilapataka 357 
Anandakahda-champu 610 
Anandamurti 582 

Anandapur 237, 317, 320, 321, 326 
Anandatanaya 583 
Anandavana-Bhuvan 275, 582 
Anant 812 

Ananta (Vaishnava Saint) 646 
Anantadeva 634, 637 
Anantanarayana 611 
Ancient Indian Education 712 
Andarab 60, 61 
Andhra-Ramayana 607, 703 
Andhrasabdachintamani see 
Appakaviyamu 
Andugula Venkayya 594 
Anecdotes of Aurangzib 24 
Anfas al-Khawds 618 
Anfdul-i-Akbhar 8 
Angad, Sikh Guru 664 
Anhilwara 324 
Aniruddhadeva 643 
Annadamangal 559 
Annaji Datto ( Sumis ) 268, 359, 360 
Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan 
43, 44, 121, 123, 173, 649, 712 
Annual Relation 20 
Annual Reports of the Archaeological 
Survey of India , The: New Imperial 
Series 17 
An-nur-us-Safir 8 
Antri 167 

Anubharata ( Sivabharata ) 609 

Anupa Simha, Raja 610, 820 
Anupasimhagunavatara 610 
Anwar 707 

Anwar-i-Suhaili 707, 805, 811, 812 
Aparajitesvara Sataka 597 
Aparao Bholanath 14 
Appakavi 594 
Appakaviyamu 594 
Appayya Dikshita 613, 614, 641 
Apratima Vira Charite 599 
Apte, D. V. 17 
‘Aqd’id 617 

Aqa Khusrav 284, 462 
Aqa Muhammad NamI 624 
Aqa Riza 812 
‘Aqil Husain Mirza 120 
‘Aqil Khan Razi 10, 214 
Aquaviva, Fr. Rudolf 137, 158 
Araba 44 

‘Arab Bahadur 142 
Arabia 503, 506, 619, 656, 715, 716, 719, 
729 

Arabian Poets of Golconda, The 631 
Arabic 18, 69 
Arabs 504, 505 
—trade with India 503, 504 
Arail 82, 103 
Arakan 508, 561, 725, 729 













INDEX 


957 


Archaeology and Monumental Remains 
of Delhi , The 18 
Architecture 
—Bijapur 414 
—Golconda 414 
see also under Mughul period, 
architecture 

Architecture at Bijapur 483 
Archiyan, battle of 26, 29 
Ardhkatha (or Ardhkathdnak ) 16 

Arfan Habib 19 
‘Arif Qandahari 4, 66, 136, 172 
‘ Ariz-i-mumalik 84 
Arjumand Banu Begam, see Mumtaz 
Mahal 

Arjun Dev (Sikh Guru) 179, 307, 308, 
309, 310, 311, 572, 574, 664, 677 
—confiscation of property 309 
—martyrdom of 307, 309 
—tortured by Jahangir 309 
Arjun Mai see Arjun Dev 
Armagaon (Arumugam) 512, 514 
Arnold, Edwin 794 
Artha Pahchaka 599 
Arthasastrd 601 
Asad Beg 8, 167, 176 
Asad Khan (Prime Minister of 
Aurangzib) 263 

Asad Khan (Minister of Ismail Shah of 
Bijapur) 416, 449, 467 
Asafiya Library, Hyderabad 24 
Asaf Khan 13, 16, 113, 116, 118, 119, 
122, 124, 131, 132, 180, 186, 188, 197, 
207, 208, 337, 340 
Asaf Vilasa 16, 610 
Asar-i-Sharif 285 
Asar Mahal 459 
Asar-us-Sanadid 68, 802 
Ashi'dtu’l Lam’dt 623 
Ashraf (s. of Khush-hal Khan, Khattak 
leader) 232 

Ashraf Khan (a genl. of Akbar) 118, 
119, 122 

Ashraf Khan (of Arakan Court) 561 
Ashta-chhdpa-parichaya 676 
Ashtamahishikalyanamu 593 
Ashtaprabandham 587 
Ashti 163, 164 

Asiatic Society, Bombay 806 
Asiatic Society Library, Calcutta 4 
Asiatic Society of Bengal, Calcutta 5, 
6 

Asir 187 

Aslrgarh 7, 112, 116, 159, 164, 165, 174, 
181, 189 
Askaran 239 
Askari, see Mirza Askari 
Askari, Prof. Sayyid Hasan 67 
Asmani Sultani 582 
Asoka 170 

Assam 10, 83, 184, 202, 226, 227, 228, 
229, 563, 642, 643, 656, 727 
Assamese 17 
Asshafi 543 
Astarasavyakhaya 558 


Astronomical Observatories of 
Jai Singh 712 
Asva Sdstra 600 
Ataliq 71 

Atga-Khail 109, 114, 122 
Athdr al-Shabab 622 
Athivlraram Pandyan 584, 585 
A thru 273 

Atishi Qandharl 620 
Atkins, A. G. 711 
Atmarama 582 

Attock 145, 148, 149, 150, 188, 231 
Aul 152 

Aungier, Gerald 514, 519 
Aurangabad 241, 244, 245, 259, 265, 
298, 299, 362, 483, 629, 719, 801 
Aurangabad! Mahal 300, 301 
Aurangzib, Emperor 9, 10, 11, 17, 24, 
187, 196, 199. 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 

210, 211, 212, 214, 215, 216, 219, 220, 

221, 222, 223 , 225, 226, 231, 232, 233, 

235, 237, 238, 239, 243, 245, 247, 258, 

259, 261, 262, 264, 270, 272, 274, 275, 

277, 281-304, 315, 321, 322, 343, 346, 
347, 348, 349, 350. 351, 352, 353, 356, 

357, 358, 360, 362, 364, 368, 370, 372, 

373, 374, 375, 377. 387, 459, 462, 476. 

477, 478, 479, 517, 522, 523, 524, 525, 

530, 531, 532, 533, 535, 541, 542, 544, 

546, 548, 551, 552, 618, 626, 627, 628, 

630, 670, 673, 674, 678, 681, 682, 683, 

686, 687, 689, 696, 698, 703, 705, 707, 

718, 719, 723, 729, 732, 735, 737, 752, 

799, 800, 801, 813, 817, 819 
—abolition of duties, octroi, cesses 
and land revenue 224 
—accession to the throne at Delhi 
220 

—and North India 223-33, 290-93 
—and Sharl‘at 673, 674 
—and ShivajI 242-245 
—and the Deccan 281-89 
—annexation of Golconda 286, 287, 
478-79 

—annexation of Rathor state 346-48, 
350 

—annexes Bijapur kingdom 284, 

285 

—campaign against brothers 220-21, 
222 

—campaign against Maratha kingdom 
281, 282 

—capture of Agra 216, 220 
—capture of Marwar kingdom 238 
—champion of Sunni faith 233-34 
—condition in the South after his 
departure to North 290 
—confers title of Raja on ShivajI 
265 

—conquests in the South 288 
—consequences of his Deccan cam¬ 
paign 289 

—coronation (second) of 220 
—Dara, treatment to 222 
—death of 298, 358 







958 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Aurangzlb, demolition of Hindu temples 
235, 265, 349 

—discrimination in customs duty on 
Hindus and Muslims 235 
—economic condition of the people 
224 

—embassies from Muhammedan 
powers 224 

—end of hostilities with Mewar 353 
—exemption from cesses and taxes 
etc. 224 

—expedition against Assam 226, 227, 
228 

—expedition against Chittagong 230 
—extension of his empire 226, 298- 
299 

—fight with the East India Co. 293 
—fight with the Rajputs 238-241 
—foreign trade 299-300 
—general review of 298-304 
—imposts on Hindus 224 
—imposition of Jizya on all Hindus 
235, 273 

—imposition of salt tax 299 
—India at the end of his reign 303- 
304 

—lack of patronage to fine arts and 
literature 302 

—land reforms in the Deccan 209, 
210 

—loss of Assam (Kamrup) 229 
—orthodoxy, bigotry, and religious 
fanaticism 233-36, 265-66, 302, 315 
—reaction to 236-37 
—peace treaty with Chhatra Sal 292 
—peace treaty with Jay Singh 241 
—peace treaty with the English East 
India Co. 293 

—peace treaty with Ajit Singh 291 
—persecution of the Hindus 235 
—personality of 300-03 
—raids by Jats in Mughul territory 
291-92 

—raids on Portuguese territory 282 
—Rajput wars 290-93 
—rebellion of Durga Das 291 
—rebellion of Ganga Ram Nagar 292 
—rebellion of Prince Akbar (his son) 
240-41 

—rebellions in North India 289 
—relations with Afghan clans 230-31 
—relations with Persia 225 
—relations with Rathors 290 
—relations with Shah Jahan 225-26 
—risings in the N.-W. frontier regions 
231-32 

—risings of Gaur Rajputs 292 
—rising of the Satnamis 236 
—seige of Gingee fort 294, 295 
—state economy 299-300 
—suppression of Afghan clans 232 
—taxation 299 

—treaty with Ahom King 228, 229 
—treaty with Bijapur (1677) 283 
—triumph of the Marathas 293-98 
—war with Marwar 355-58 


Aurangzlb, viceroy 
—administration of the Deccan as 
Viceroy 209-10 

—attempts to Subjugate Bijapur and 
Golconda kingdoms 210, 211 
—dismissal from Viceroyship of 
Deccan 209 

—Viceroy of Deccan 208, 209 
Aurangzlb 480, 484, 485, 553, 554, 711 
Aurangzlb-nama 10 
Auzun Hasan 25 

Awadh 50, 119, 120, 140, 142, 299, 714, 
715, 718, 719, 720, 723, 724 
Ayodhya 37, 307, 726 
Azam, Prince 281, 282, 283, 284, 285, 
287, 288, 289, 303, 351, 353, 354, 462 
Ayyalaraju Ramabhadra Kavi 591 
A‘zampur 120 
Azarbaijan 28 
‘Aziz Ahmad 631, 632 
‘Aziz IChan 386 
‘Aziz Koka 387 
‘AzIz-ul-Mulk 416 

Babaj I Chaitanya 651 
Baba Lai 16, 654 
Baba Khan Qaqshal 141 
Baba Yakut of Kelsi, saint 276 
Babur 1, 2, 3, 6, 8, 13, 15, 25-44, 45, 
46, 55, 57, 63, 65, 66, 71, 100, 111, 
117, 146, 155, 156, 172, 190, 306, 307, 

324, 327, 328, 524, 528, 534, 539, 545, 

552, 620, 621, 625, 666, 678, 679, 683, 

698, 711, 713, 720, 724, 730, 731, 732, 

737, 738, 741, 742, 743, 753, 759, 772, 

803 

—assumes title of Padishah 27 
—autobiography of 2 
—battle of Archiyan 26 
—battle of Gogra 38 
—biography of 3 
—birth of 25 

—campaign against Afghans 37 
—captures Chanderi 37 
—captures Kabul 26 
—captures Qandahar 31 
—captures Samarqand 25 
—conquests of Hindustan 29-38 
—death of 39 

—declares his first Jihad 36 
—defeated by Shaibani Khan Uzbeg 
at Sar-i-pul 25 

—defeated by Uzbegs and escape to 
Hissar 28 

—defeats Ibrahim Lodi at Panipat 
34-35 

—early history of 25-29 
—escapes death from poisoning 36 
—estimate of 39-41 
—exemption from stamp duty to 
Muslims 307 

—expeditions into Indian territory 
30-33 

—first invasion of India 26 
—his artillery—nature and size of 
41-43 




INDEX 


959 


Babur, his religious beliefs 40 
—his writings 40, 44 
—Indian scene on the eve of invasion 
29-30 

—last Indian campaign 33 
—loses Bukhara and Samarqand to 
Uzbegs 25, 28 
—loses Farghana 25 
—marches against Sangram Singh 
36 

—offers his life for Humayun’s 39 
—raid on Farghana 28 
—raid on Qandahar 31 
—resolves abstinence from sin and 
wine 36 

—sends Embassy to Ibrahim Lodi 30 
—seven expeditions of Babur into 
Indian territory 30-32 
—sources for Babur’s reign 2, 3 
Bdbur-nama 41, 44, 709, 710, 713, 811, 
812 

Background of Assamese Culture 675 
Bada’i al-Inshd 621 
Badakshan 31, 33, 37, 38, 39, 56, 60, 
142, 143, 145, 151, 155, 156, 157, 158, 
730 

Badaun 64, 138 

BadaunI, see Mulla ‘Abdul Qadlr 
BadaunI 
Badln 221 
Badi-uz-Zaman 12 
Badr-i-‘Alam 619 
Badr-i-Chach 707 
Badrud-din Sirhindl 14 
Badshah-Nama 325, 553, 802 
Bagha Singh 341, 386 
Baghdad 506, 707 
Baglan(a) 209, 245, 269, 282, 415 
Baglan-ndma 11 
BagulaS of Mayurgiri 610 
Bahadur see Bahadur Shah 
Bahadur (s. of Raja ‘Ali Khan) 164, 
165 

Bahadur Badakhshi 141 
Bahadurgarh 288 
Bahadur GllanI 445, 446 
Bahadur Khan 276 
Bahadur Khan 107, 113, 117, 119, 199, 
221, 223, 245, 269, 276 
Bahadur Kheshgl 141 
Bahadur Nizam Shah 432, 433, 435 
Bahadur Shah 45, 46, 47, 49, 50, 51, 

72, 73, 74, 169, 237, 336, 375, 383, 
391, 392, 393, 396, 397, 464 
—and Humayun 395 
—and the Portuguese 392, 394 
—end of 397 

—treaty with the Portuguese 394 
Bahadur Shah II 670 
BahamanI empire 30, 412, 503 
Bahamanis of the Deccan, The 481 
Bahara 183 
Bahar-i-Danish 707 
Bahar-i-Sakhun 11 
Bahdristdn 811, 816 
Bahdristdn-i-Ghdtbt 11 


Baha-ud-dln 147 
Bahbal Khan 107 
Bahini(a)bai 581, 582, 651, 676 
Bahirji Naik 260 

Bai(y)ana 35, 36, 47, 64, 91, 92, 95, 99, 
108, 120 

Bahlol Khan 270 
Bahraich 75 
Bahrein 299 
Bahr-i-Mawwdj 616 
Baicharaju Venkatanatha 592 
al-BaidawI 617 
Bailey 409 

Bairam (Beg) Khan 48, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 
63, 64, 65, 96, 100, 101, 104, 105, 106, 

107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 114, 115, 

123, 130, 143, 146, 153, 154, 157, 158, 

161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 167, 172, 175, 

181, 182, 208, 439, 528, 667 
—an estimate of 109, 111, 112 
—assassination of 111 
—downfall of 108-11 
—his contribution to Mughul empire 
111 

—plot for dismissal of 110 
Bairam Khan 65 
Bairat 725 
Baisunqur MIrza 25 
Bajaur 30, 31, 40, 148, 149, 150 
Baji 279 

Baji Ghorpade 261 
Baker, Aarom 515 
Bakhshi 9 

Bakhta war Khan 13, 627 
Balaghat 182, 198, 200 
Balamanoramd 614 
Balaramdas 557, 646 
Balasore 516, 517, 731 
Bala Vaidya Cheluva 600 
Balkh 26, 32, 33, 60, 61, 157, 205, 206, 
207, 225, 730 
Balkrishna 711 
Ball, V. 20, 22, 739 
Balnath Jogi 726 
Balochpur 187 
Baltistan 403 
Baluchis 56 

Baluchistan 151, 153, 324 
Balwand 664 
Bamunia Gosains 635 
—school 643 
Banamali Das 17 

Banaras 38, 46, 52, 53, 71, 75, 118, 119, 
120, 124, 140, 220, 222, 234, 235, 265, 
279, 585, 692, 704, 705, 709, 716, 718 
Banarasi Das 16 
Banerjee, I. B. 325, 326 
Banarasi Vilasa 16 
Banda 282 

Banda Bahadur 322, 323 

Bandrey, V. S. 18 

Banerji, R. D. 140, 173 

Banerji, Dr. S. K. 65, 67, 409, 553 

Banerji, S. N. 21, 174, 709, 711 

Bangalore 248, 253, 254, 255, 256, 288 

Bangash(es) 26, 150, 199, 232 





960 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Bangla Desh 201 
Bankapur 288 
Bankey Behari 630 
Bankipur 503 
Bankura 152 
Bannihatti 425 
Banswara 132, 345 

Bantam 510, 511, 515, 516, 518, 520, 
727 

—Raja of 510 
Bappa Rawal 121 
Baqar 624 
Baqir Khan 625 
Bara-gitas 563 
Baramgalla 147 
Baramula 147 
Barbary 225, 716 
Barbosa 717 
Barbosa, Duarte 509 
Bardez 450 
Bargi-giri 182 
Barh 73 

Barid-i-mumdlik 84 
Bari Sahiba, Queen 459 
Barkhudar Vajid 576 
Barmazld Gaur 78, 90 
Baroda 49, 127, 133, 145, 146, 298 
Barros, Joao de 509 
Bartholomew, Dias 502 
Barua, K. L. 675 
Basantgarh 297 

Basatin-us-Salatin 413, 481, 482 
Basavappanayaka 612 
Basava-Raja-Vijaya 598 
Basawan 812, 815, 816, 817 
Basra 225, 707, 719, 727 
BasSein 509, 519 
Bassur 261 
Basu, K. K. 24, 484 
Basu, Man indr a Mohan 676 
Basu, Raja 180, 199, 341 
batdi, system of 210 
Batavia 511 
Battatisvara 598 

Battles of Guru Gobind Singh 326 
Bavadekar, Ramachandra, N. 294, 295 
Bayana 327, 713, 718, 719, 741 
Bayazid Bi(y)at 4, 37, 38, 129, 148, 621 
—memoirs of 4, 621 
Bay ley 383, 408 

Baz Bahadur 112, 113, 116, 121, 125, 
384, 633, 637 
Bazm-i-Timuriya 678 
Beames 372 
Beard, John 517 
Bednor 121, 460 
Behara Ganita 600 
Belgaum 282, 288 
Belghata 222 
Bellamconda 469 
Benapur 152 

Bengal 10, 11, 12, 16, 30, 37, 38, 49, 51, 
52, 53, 54, 58, 64, 66, 72, 73, 74, 76, 
77, 84, 89, 92, 94, 95, 97, 98, 107, 116, 
117, 118, 124, 129, 130, 131, 133, 139, 


140, 141, 142, 144, 145, 152, 156, 166, 

170, 183, 184, 185, 188, 201, 202, 214, 

221, 222, 227, 228, 230, 243, 289, 299, 

304, 327, 516, 645, 653, 656, 714, 715, 

716, 717, 718, 719, 720, 721, 722, 723, 

724, 725, 727, 728, 729, 731, 735, 737, 

757 

—history of 10, 11, 12 
Bengal in the 16th Century 710, 711 
Bengal—Past and Present 521 
Beni Prasad 23, 24, 182, 186, 191, 193, 
194, 195, 196, 199, 308, 309, 325, 710 
Berar 30, 113, 161, 162, 163, 164, 166, 
181, 200, 209, 245, 295, 296, 298, 299, 

412, 413, 414, 416, 452, 714, 715, 720, 

724 

—annexation by Ahmadnagar 427 
—cessation from Ahmadnagar 433 
Bernier, Frangois 22, 202, 214, 217, 
277, 484, 685, 697, 704, 709, 710, 712, 
716, 719, 723, 733, 737, 738 
Best, Captain Thomas Aldworth 511 
Beetumperumal 490 
Beveridge, (Mrs.) A.S. 2, 23, 41, 42, 44, 
172, 174, 709, 710, 737 
Beveridge, H. 23, 24, 103, 195, 196, 
410, 482, 483, 711 
Bhadrakh 131 
Bhadrappa Nay aka 460 
Bhagalpur 52, 73, 130, 131, 152 
Bhaganagar, see Hyderabad 
Bhagavad Gita (Malayalam) 602 
Bhagavad Gita (Sanskrit) 325, 563, 

600, 603, 626 

Bhagavanta, Bundela chief 634 
Bhagavata (Assamese) 675 
Bhagavata (of Jagannath Dasa) 646 
Bhdgavata-Champu (of Chindambar) 
610 

Bhagavata-champu (of Dindima) 610 
Bhagavata Puvdna (Marathi) 650 
Bhagavata Purdna 561, 563, 566, 569, 
608, 627, 635, 640, 675, 806 
Bhagawan Das (Chronicler) 628 
Bhagawan Das, Raja 113, 119, 122, 
123, 147, 148, 167, 174, 175, 334, 337, 
338, 341, 381, 382, 407, 411, 678 
Bhagirath Bhil 203 
Bhagu 231 
Bhagwant Singh 292 
Bhai Gurudas 574, 659, 661, 677 
Bhai Kahan Singh 660 
Bhai Mali Das 316 
Bhai Mani Singh 574 
Bhairowal 179 
Bhai Santokh Singh 677 
Bhakkar 56, 57, 58, 80, 151 
Bhak-Sirudhu 649 
Bhaktamald 16, 566, 649 
Bhakti cult 16, 562, 565, 569, 570, 578, 
578, 579, 634, 650, 655 
Bhaktiratndkara 558, 646, 675, 676 
Bhakti-ratndvali 563 
Bhalan 569, 630 
Bhambar 213 
Bhamakalapam 590 












INDEX 


961 


Bhdmini-parinaya 612 
Bhaminivlasa (Marathi) 583 
Bhamini Vilasa (Sanskrit) 16, 613 
Bhanduli 215 
Bhanuchandra Charitra 15 
Bhanuchandra Upadhyaya 137 
Bharata 597 
Bharat-chahdra 559 
Bharatesa Vaibhava 597 
Bharati Nanja 599 
Bharat Itihasa Sarhsodhaka Mandala, 
Poona 17, 820 

Bharat Kala Bhavan, Banaras 805, 806, 
811, 817 

Bharat ke Saht-Mahatma 630 
Bharatpur 291, 375 
Bharkunda 74 
Bharmal, Raja 332 
Bhaskara 600 
Bhath kingdom, see Panna 
Bhatinda 111, 313 
Bhatkal 503 

Bhattacharya, Babatosh 675 

Bhattadeva 563 

Bhatiakalanka 600 

Bhatt Murti (Ramaraja Bhushana) 

592 

Bhttoji Dikshita 614 
Bhatvadi, battle of 248, 442, 474 
BhavabhutI 641 
Bhavachintaratna 597 
Bhavan 627 

Bhavand-purushottama 613 
Bhavartha Ramdyana 579 
Bhawalpur State 66 
Bhera (fort) 30, 31, 79, 134, 143 
Bhilsa 47, 81, 329 
Bhhnasvami 582 
Bhimbar 153, 197, 312 
Bhim Narain 198, 387 
Bhimsen 10, 304 
Bhim Singh 344, 351 
Bhitargaon 749 
Bhiwandl 242, 459 
Bhojpur 77, 203 
Bhongaon 55 
Bho(n)sles of Verul 247 
Bhopal 44, 80 

Bhopat Rai (alias Bigham Vairagi) 

627 

Bhosalavamsavali 610 
Bhramara-sahdesa 611 
Bhaudeva £ukla 613 
Bhujabali-charite 597 
Bhuminatha (Nalla Dikshita) 610, 612 
Bhupala 600 

Bhupalgarh, capture of 273 

Bhupat 328, 397 

Bhupati Pandita 564 

Bhushana 16, 568 

Bhuvanagiri 460, 490 

Bhuyan, S. K. 17 

BIban Khan Jalwani 37, 38, 46 

Bibi Bal 94 

Bibi Musity 448 

BIbl Rabi‘a 404 


Bibliotheca Indica Series 5, 6 
Bichitr 814, 819 
Bichitra Natak 317, 325, 568 
Bicholim 282 
Bidai Chand 127 

Bldar 30, 161, 166, 211, 282, 299, 412, 
413, 414, 417, 418, 419, 439, 441, 452, 
455, 459, 466, 629 
Bldar Bakht 296, 629 
Bidar, Its History and Monuments 
481, 484 

Bidhi Chand 313 
Bldil 621 

Bihar 35, 38, 39, 46, 49, 50, 51, 52, 54, 
65, 72, 74, 75, 76, 94, 97, 107, 117, 
131, 140, 141, 144, 150, 152, 166, 173, 

187, 221, 226, 289, 292, 293, 299, 606, 

714, 717, 719, 720, 721, 722, 724, 725, 

727 

Biharl Mai, Raja 113, 125 
Bihar Khan Lohani (Sultan Muham¬ 
mad) 32, 35, 70, 71, 73, 74, 79, 676 
Biharllal 568 
Bihishtabad 169 
Bijagarh 112, 161 

Bijapur 11, 30, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 
166, 168, 182, 207, 208, 210, 211, 242, 

243, 244, 253, 254, 256, 257, 258, 261, 

262, 265, 266, 269, 270, 273, 280, 281, 

282, 283, 284, 286, 288, 299, 362, 412, 

413, 414, 417, 418, 419, 420, 421, 439, 

440, 441, 445, 459, 462, 476, 477, 479, 

486, 503, 506, 507, 629, 720, 727, 820, 

821 

—annexation to Mughul empire 285 
—history of 11 
Bijayagupta 558 
Bijjala-Rdya-charite 597 
Bijjala Timmabhupala 594 
Bijul Khan 676 

Bikaner 57, 110, 124, 125, 226, 237, 334, 
684, 717, 819 

Bikramjit, Raja see Himu 
Bilaspur 311 
Bilgram 50, 77, 90, 102 
—battle of 3, 77, 78 
Biligi Arasara Vamsdvali 599 
Biigrami, G. A. 632 
Bimlipatam 731 
Binnapa 598 
Binyon 115 
Bipradas Pipilai 558 
BIr 164, 200 

Birbal Raja 137, 149, 167, 411, 567 
—residence of, at F. Sikri 768 
BTr Bhan, Raja 82 
BIr Narayan 116, 202 
BIr Simha (Singh) (Deva) Bundela 8, 
82, 167, 175, 198, 199, 200, 376-77 
BishndaS 812, 813, 814, 815 
Bishun Singh Kachhwa 375 
Bizad-ul-Mulk 453 

Blochmann, H. 23, 195, 709, 710, 711, 
738, 739 


M.E.— 61 




962 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Bodleian Library, Oxford 811, 816, 
817 

Bohra(s) 234 
Bohr a Lachman 203 
Bokhara 730 
Bolan pass 222, 223 
Bombay 3, 7, 13, 18, 508, 512, 513, 514, 
519, 520, 725, 736 
—development of 514 
—transfer to East India Co. 513 
Bombay Gazetteer 676 
Bombey Lakka 597 
Bopadeva 569 

Bordeaux, Austin de 788, 797 
Borneo 717, 728, 729 
Boston 815 

Boughton, Gabriel 516, 521 
Bowrey, Thomas 22 
Boxing 691 
Brahmananda Giri 639 
Brahmapuri 296 

Brahma-V aiv arta-Puran\a 635, 675 
Brahmottarakhanda 600 
Bridhagirison, V. 484 
Briggs, J 23, 102, 103, 480, 481, 482, 
483, 484, 485, 518 
Brihat Bhagavatdmrta 676 
Brhatkatha 570 
Brindavandas 555, 556, 564 
British Museum, London 808, 811, 812, 
817 

British Museum Catalogue of Coins of 
Persian Shahs 43 
Broach 49, 128, 145, 324, 519, 715 
Brown, C. J. 19 

Brown, Percy 18, 19, 172, 710, 743, 746, 
750, 759, 765, 802 
Bryce 131 

Buchanan, Francis 676 
Buddha, The 646 
Buhlul Khan 283 
Buhlul Lodi 29 

Bukhara 28, 117, 140, 151, 157, 158, 170, 
204, 205, 206, 207, 225 
Buland Akhtar 290, 356, 357 
Bulhe Shah 576, 577 
Buliyan Pass 147 
Bundelas, The 376 
—early history 376 
Bundelkhand 82, 91, 226, 236, 264, 289, 
292, 294, 376, 378, 380 
Bundi 123, 124, 132, 328, 330, 819 
Buranji(s) 17, 563 
Burdwan 130, 152 
Burgess, James 18 
Burhan-i-Maasir 11, 174, 482 
Burhan ‘Imad Shah 465-66 
Burhan-i-Qdti 624 

Burhan Nizam Shah I 51, 162, 329, 
383, 391, 394, 416, 417, 418, 419, 420, 
463, 464, 466, 467, 470, 491, 492 
—re-establishment of Shiah religion 
417 

—sunni rising against 417 

Burhan Nizam Shah II 430, 431, 454, 

Burhanpur 87, 112, 164, 168, 182, 187, 


200, 208, 241, 244, 260, 265, 281, 361, 
416, 427, 442, 511, 512, 692, 729 
Burhan-ud-dln 162, 429, 430 
Burhan-ul-Mulk 6, 396 
Burma 715, 729 
Burn 553 
Burnell, A. C. 20 
Bustan 69, 805, 817 
Buxar 75, 203 
Buzurg Ummed Khan 230 

Cabral, Alvarez 504 
Cabral, Antonio 159 
Cachar 643 
Caesar, Frederick 494 
Cairo 707 

Cairo (the Jew navigator) 502 
Calcutta 293, 517, 521 
Calendars of Court Minutes of the 
East India Company 737 
Calicut 503, 504, 507, 715, 728, 729, 731 
Caliphs, biographical notes of 14, 15 
Cambay 48, 49, 126, 128, 133, 146, 158, 
715, 723, 730 

Cambridge History of India 42, 65, 
103, 195, 218, 246, 479, 678, 802 
Cambridge Shorter History of India 
172 

Camoens 509 
Campos, J. J. A. 102 
Cannanore 503, 504, 505 
Canning, Paul 190 
Cao, Diego 502 

Cape Comorin 490, 505, 509, 510 
Cape of Good Hope 502, 507, 510, 511, 
518 

Cape of Tempests 502 
Careri Gemelli 300, 554 
Carnatic 210 
—war 515 

Castro, Dom Joao de 509 
Castro, Joa de 507 
Castro, Joseph de 189 
Catalogue of Coins collected by Sayyid 
A. S. M. Taifur 102 
Catalogue of Sanskrit Manuscripts 
from Gujarat 676 

Catalogue of Coins in the Lucknow 
Museum 19 

Catalogue of Coins in the Punjab 
Museum, Lahore 19 
Catalogue of the Coins in the Indian 
Museum 18, 103 
Cathay 134 
Catherine II 169 
Catherine of Braganza 513 
Central Record Office, Hyderabad 23 
Central Structure of the Mughul 
Empire 553 

Centres of learning 706 

also see under Mughul period— 
education 

Ceylon 299, 503, 505, 507, 518, 656, 
728, 729, 731 
Chaghatai Khan 25, 45 
Chahamana Hammir 330 





INDEX 


963 


Chahar Chaman 628, 712 
Chahar tasleem 212 
Chaitanya 305, 555, 556, 558, 559, 561, 
613, 635, 639, 640, 643, 644, 645, 646, 
650, 652, 653, 655, 659, 675 
Chaitanya Bhagavat 16, 555, 644, 675, 
711 

Chaitanya-chahdrodaya 613 
Chaitanya-charitamrita 16, 555, 556, 
676 

Chaitanya Chariter Upadana 676 

Chaitanya-Mangala 16, 555, 556 

Chakan 242, 243, 255, 458 

Chak-darah 149, 150 

Chakradhwaj 229 

Chakrakavi 607 

Chakravarty, Chintaharan 675 

Chaks 403, 404, 405, 411 

Chail 725 

Chalukyas 606 

Chalpi Beg 705 

Chaulukyas of Gujarat, The 711 
Chamaraja 600 
Chamarasa 586 
Chambal 200, 215 
Chaimiarl 96, 106 
Chamkaur 321, 326 
Champakavijaya 562 
Champaner 47, 48, 49, 50, 65, 127, 128, 
762 

Champat Rai Bundela 199, 226, 292, 
378-79 

Chandavar 713 
Chanddyan 566 
Chandel (Princess) 703 
Chandel dynasty 116 
Chandesvara 633 
Chandldas 557, 649 
Chandigarh Museum 806 
Chandi-mahgala Kdvya 558, 559, 640, 
646, 705 

Chand Khan 328 

Chanda kingdom 293 

Chanderl 37, 47, 81, 111, 127, 307, 329 

Chandi Charitra 317 

ChancLi Kdvya 16 

Chandra Bhan (Brahman) 345, 387, 
627, 628, 632, 673, 707 
Chandrabhdna Charita 592 
Chandraprabha-Charita 597 
Chandraguni 452 
Chandrama 597 
Chandraprabha-Charita 597 
Chandrasekhar 15 
Chandrasekhar avilasa 612 
Chandra Sen 124, 131 
Chandravali Varnand 583 
Chahdrikd 615 
Chandrikaparinaya 594 
Chandrotsavam 708 
Chand (Bibi) Sultan 162, 163, 164, 165, 
424, 432, 433, 434, 435, 452, 453, 455, 
482, 703 

—murder of 434-35 


Chandur 161, 163 
Chandu Shah, Diwan 308 
Chandwar 36, 44 
Charkha spinning 715 
Charles II 513, 516 
Charnock, Job 293, 520, 521 
Charvaka 135 

Chatterji, Dr. S. K. 630, 631 
Chatuhsloki 647, 650 
Chaturbhuja-dasa 627, 647 
Chaturdamodara 614 
Chaturdandiprakasikd 614 
Chaturmatasdra-sangraha 614 
Chatu Vithalanatha 598 
Chaudhuri J. B. 174 
Chaudhuri, Pramatha 676 
Chaudhuri, S. 521 
Chaul 159, 451, 730 
—attack on by Burhan Nizam Shah 
II 430, 431 

Chaura-panchasika 806 

Chaurdsi Vdrtd 648 

Chaund 70, 71, 102 

Chauragarh 116, 118, 198, 199 

Chaurdsi Vaishnav ki Vdrtd 16, 676 

Chausa 54, 63, 75, 76, 90 

Chauth 245, 265, 275, 276, 295, 297, 380 

Chavand 132, 341 

Chayana 598 

Chemakura Venkata Kavi 595 
Chenab 32, 79, 179 
Chenna-Basava-Purdna 598 

Chenappa Nayaka 452 
Chennaraja 600 
Chenniga 598 
Cherusseri Nambudiri 602 
Chester Beatty Library, Dublin 812 
814, 817, 818, 820 
Chhahar Gulshan 738 
Chhandassdra 600 
Chhandoratnamald 614 
Chhapparghatta 95 
Chhatarman 719, 724, 738 
Chhatra Prakash 16, 568 
Chhatra Sal Bundela 226, 291, 379-80, 
568, 654 

ChhitasvamI 647 
Chidambara 608, 610 
Chidambara Svamin 641 
Chikka Deva-Rdja-Vijaya 599 
Chikkadeva Raya 598, 599, 709 
Chikkadevavaya Vilasamu 597 
Chikkupadhyaya 599 
Child, Sir John 514, 519, 520 
Child, Sir Josiah 514, 520 
China 299, 503, 728, 729, 730 
Chingiz Khan 25, 29, 39, 117, 120, 122, 
126, 324 

Chingiz Khan (Gujarat noble) 401 
Chingiz Khan (Minister of Murtaza 
Nizam Shah) 428 
Chinsura 512, 517 
Chintamani 217 
Chin Timma 490 
Chin Timur Sultan 34, 36, 37 





964 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Chishti saints, biographical accounts of 
14, 15 

Chishtiya-i-Bihishtiya 15 
Chistiya school 672, 674 
Chitnis 360, 368 
Chitnis Bakhar 17 

Chitor 47, 50, 82, 87, 107, 113, 121, 123, 

124, 131, 133, 169, 170, 180, 239, 240, 

247, 310, 327, 329, 330, 331, 332, 333, 

339, 341, 345, 351, 383, 394, 394, 396, 

562, 702 

Chitra Gupta Bakhar 17 
Chitramimdrrisa 613 
Chitramimdmsa-Khandana 613 
Chitra Sataka Sdngatya 599 
Chittagong 73, 77, 201, 229, 230, 299, 
508, 517, 561, 562 
Chokkanatha 612, 613 
Chokkanatha Nayaka 596 
Chola country 486, 490, 495 
Chopra, P. N. 709, 710, 711, 712 
Chota Nagpur 116 
Chowdhuri, J. N. 482, 483 
Christian(s), 135, 140, 159, 189, 193, 194, 
195 

Christianity 137, 139, 140, 159, 189, 
213, 219, 489 

Chronicles (Mughul period), see under 
Mughul period, literary sources 
Chronicles of the Pathan Kings of 
Delhi 18, 102, 103 
Chudamanidas 556 
Chughtai, Abdullah 805 
Chuhungmung Svargadeo 642 
Chunar 38, 46, 51, 52, 53, 65, 71, 72, 
73, 74, 75, 76, 95, 96, 99, 104, 107, 
113, 118, 124 

—captured by Humayun 51, 52 
—treaty of 51 

Churaman 292, 375 
ChurchilVs Voyages 304 
Church of Rome 668 
Cleveland Museum of Art 809 
Cochin 503, 504, 505, 507, 508, 714, 727, 
728, 731 

—chiefs of 606 
Cogan 520 

Coins of the Mogul Emperos of 
Hindustan in the British Museum, 
London, The 18 
Colgong 74, 75, 130 
Collin Davies, C. 44 
Colombo 506 

Commantarius of Fr. Monserrate 174, 
554, 711 

Commercial Policy of the Mughuls , The 
737 

Commercial Relations between England 
and India 711 
Commissariat, M. S. 409 
Congo 502 

Conjeevaram 288, 296 
Constable, A. 22, 710 
Constantinople 225, 729, 741 


! Contribution of India to Arabic 
Literature 631 

Cooch Bihar 10, 129, 184, 202, 227, 229, 
557, 642 

Cooke, Humphrey 513 
Coomaraswamy, A. K. 19 
Copper Coins of Akbar 19 
Coromandel coast 509, 729 
Correa, Gaspar 509 
Corsi, Fr. R. 189 
Coryat, T. 20, 193 
Cossimbazar 517, 717, 719 
Count Von Noer 111, 112 
Court bulletins 1 
Cousens, H. 483 
Couto, Diogo do 509 
Cranganore 503, 504 
Croix, Fr. 581 
Cromwell 519 
Crooke, W. 22, 89, 712 
Crowther, John 21 
Cuddalore 520 
Cuddapa 473, 476 
Cultural Heritage of India 675 
Cultural Heritage of Pakistan, The 
631 

Cultural Trends in Medieval India 
631, 632 

Culture Centre, Ahmadabad 806 
Cunha, Nuno da 506 
Cunningham, Alexander 17, 310. 325, 
661, 662, 667 
Cutch 146, 153, 183 
Cuttack 152 

Dabhol 257, 730 
Dabir ( Sumant ) 268 
Dabir-i-Khas 84 
Dabir, Sonopant 254, 268 
Dabistan-i-Mazahib 13, 641, 649, 653, 
654, 661, 675, 676 
Dabistan, The 325, 677 
Dabistan-ul-Majhab 676 
Dacca 87, 201, 222, 227, 229, 230, 715, 
719 

Dacca University Studies 103 
Dadaji Kondadev 249, 250, 253, 254, 

255 

Dadar 223 
Dadrah 50, 65, 72 
—battle of (1531) 72 

—batle of (1532) 46, 50, 72 

Dadu Dayal 567, 651 
Dagh 128 
Dahmlri 104, 107 
dak chauki 87, 88, 92, 698 
Dakshinachara 640 
Dalpat Rai 281 
Dalpat Simha (Prince) 16 
Dalpat Vilasa 16 
Dam 85, 129 
Daman 507 

Damera Ankabhupala 594 
Dames M. L. 19 
Damlrl BilgramI 621 






INDEX 


965 


Damodara 649 
Damodar Deb 635, 643 
Damodar Ghulati 575 
Dana-patra of Sambhaji 278 
Daniyal, Prince 164, 434, 812 
Dantan 130 

Danvers, F. C. 408, 409 
Dara Shukoh 10, 13, 14, 15, 187, 205, 
210, 211, 212, 213, 214, 216, 219, 220, 
221, 222, 225, 226, 233, 345, 346, 373, 
378, 459, 476. 541, 606, 610, 626, 627, 
654, 672, 673, 818, 819 
—death of 223 
Darbahra 177 
Darbdr-i-Akbari 678 
Darmesteter 43 

Darogd-i-Dak-Chauki 87, 94, 98 
Dar-ul-Islam 233 
Dar-ul-jihad 233 
Darvesh 456 

Darya ‘Irnad Shah 418, 420, 422, 464-65 

Darya Khan 35, 398, 399 

Daryapur 130 

Dasabodha 582, 651, 676 

Dasakufa, see Haridas movement 

Dasam Granth 322 

Dasavatara Charitre (Kannada) 598 

Dasavatara Charitra (Telugu) 594 

Dasgupta, J. N. 710, 711, 712 

Das, H. H. 711 

Dasopanta 580 

Dass, Shyam Sunder 711 

Dastam Qaqshal 142 

Dastdn-i-Amir Hamza ( Hamaznama ) 

808 

Dastur Dinar 446, 447 
Dastur Mahyarjl Rana 137 
Dastur-ul-Amal 1, 11, 176 
Daswant 810 
Dattaji (Chronicler) 17 
Dattaji Trimbak ( Waqenavis ) 268 
Daud 129, 130, 131 
Daud Khan (a commander under 
Sultan Ibrahim) 33 
Daud Khan (gr. of Bihar) 222, 226 
Daud Khan (Mughul commander) 266 
Daulat 814 

Daulatabad 163, 200, 208, 247, 249, 285, 
287, 415, 417, 428, 437, 441, 442, 444, 
464, 479 

Daulat Chak 403, 405 
Daulat Khan (Bijapur noble) 456 
Daulat Khan (naval commander) 276 
Daulat Khan Lodi (Viceroy of 
Punjab) 30, 32, 33 
Daulat Makri 403 
Daulat QazI 561 
Daulat Quli 471 
Devies, C. Colin 44 
Dawar Baksh 197, 198, 218 
al-Dawhat al-Mayyddah ft Hadiqat 
al-Surah 617 
Dayal Das 353 
Dayaram 319 

Day, Francis 515, 516, 520 


Debal 324 
DebI 136 

Deccan, dynastic history of 11 
Deccan (i) party 283, 429, 431, 461 
Deccan Sultanates 
—chronology of 479-480 
—confederacy against Vijayanagar 
424, 480-81, 492-94 

—Ramaraja’s relations with 48, 491 
Dehu 653 

De Laet 187, 554, 719, 724, 737, 738, 
739 

De Laet, De Imperio Magni Moglis , 
sive India vera Commentarius ex 
variius Auctoribus Congestis 21 
Delhi 14, 33, 35, 45, 46, 47, 53, 56, 62, 
63, 76, 77, 78, 80, 81, 87, 88, 94, 95, 
96, 97, 99, 100, 104, 105, 106, 109, 
110, 114, 120, 124, 125, 130, 143, 158, 
183, 187, 205, 214, 216, 220, 221, 223, 
224, 232, 237, 238, 240, 247, 258, 259, 
261, 281, 290, 299, 301, 322, 683, 685, 
705, 714, 715, 718, 719, 720, 724, 725, 
733, 734, 742, 743, 744, 745, 749, 784, 
785, 792, 793 

Delhi Fort, a guide to the Buildings 
and Gardens 18 

Della Valle, Pietro 709, 711, 712 
Deming, W. S. 676 
Deogarh 293 
Deolia 345 
Deorai 223 
Deo, S. S. 17 
Desai, Z. A. 63 
Description of Hindustan and 
Guzardte 21 

Descriptive list of Farmans, Manshurs 
and Nishans addressed by the Im¬ 
perial Mughuls to the Princes of 
Rajasthan 13 

Descriptive List of the Vakil Reports 
addressed to the Rulers of Jaipur, 
A, 13 

Deshmukh of Kari 254 
Dev Das 114 
Deva-durlabha Dasa 564 
Devagiri, see Daulatabad 
Devapur 297 
Devarasa 597 
Devarconda 469 

Devasana Pado Bhandar, Baroda 804 
Deva Vimala 15 

Development of Trade and Industry 
under the Mughals 737 
Devi Misra 627 

Devi Singh Bundela, Raja 292, 377, 

378, 379, 380, 639 
Dewar 180 

Dhabar(d)e, Khande Rao 359 
Dhamoni 198, 199, 292, 296 
Dhana(ji), Jadhav 294, 295, 298 
—appointment as Sendpati 369 
Dhanna 664 

Dhanyamanikya, (r. of Tirupura) 642 
Dhar 80 
Dharamdas 319 













966 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


dhara of Murshid Quli Khan 210 
Dharaseo 453, 454 
Dharmamahgala 559, 646 
Dharmat 215, 220 
—battle of 220, 238, 387 
Dharmavijaya 613 
Dharmavijayachampu 610 
Dharma, the Jat Saint 636 
Dharanidevula 594 
Dharanl-Pandita 597 
Dharur 284 

Dhenumdhatmyamu 596 
Dhivara 564 
Dholka 133 

Dholpur 35, 120, 200, 215, 741 
Dhurjati 590 

Diary of William Hedges (1681-87), 
The 22 

Dictionary of Islam 553 

Diego Cao 502 

Digby, Simon 805 

Dig-Vandana 675 

Dilhwar 57 

Dilawar Khan 211 

Dilawar Khan (Genl.) 429, 430, 454 

Dilavar Khan Lodi 54 

Dilkasha 484 

Dilip (Singh) 386 

Dilir Khan 243, 245, 261, 262, 270, 273 
Dilras Banu 300 
Dimock, Edward C. (Jr.) 676 
Dina 321 

Dinakara Gosavi 582 
DInakrishna Dasa 564 
Dindima (Rajanatha III) 608, 610 
Dm-i-Ildhi 138, 139, 194, 678 
DInpanah 46 
Dipabai 272 

DIpalpur 32, 62, 95, 111, 123, 215 
Directorate of Archives, Bikaner 13 
Dirhams 235 

District Gazetteer of Amritsar 677 
Diu 48, 49, 392, 399, 505, 506, 507, 730 
—epic of 399 
Divekar, S. M. 17 
Diwdn(s) 1, 13, 40, 115, 185 
DIwan-i-Afridi 797 
Diwan-i- Arz 83, 84 
Diwdn-i-Hdfiz 811, 812, 818 
Diwdn-i-Humayun 67 
Diwan-i-Insha 83, 84 
Diwdn-i-Kdhi 631 
Diwan-i-Makhfl ! 626 
Dhodn-i-Risalat 83 
Diwan-i-Wizarat 83 
Diwan of Anwdri 811 
Doddayya 597 
Dolis 74 
Dominicans 507 
Downton, Captain 512 
Dowson, John 23 
Dowton, Nicholes 21, 189 
Drake, Sir Francis 510, 511 
Dudu 71 

Dguhlat, Kashmir Mjrza Haidar 12 


Dughlat, MIrza Muhammad Haider 3 
Duke of Alva 171 
Duminsila 203 
Dungarpur 132 

Durga Das 239, 240, 241, 282, 283, 290 
347, 348, 349, 351, 352, 355, 356, 357, 
358, 364, 387 

—joins Mughul service 357 
—rebellion against Aurangzlb 291 

Durgavatl-prakdsa 633 
Durgavatl Rani 116, 633, 704 
Durjan Sal Har(d)a 290, 355, 356 
Dutch East Indies 299, 510, 723 
Dutch, The 507, 508, 513, 516, 518, 717, 
718, 723, 726, 727, 729 
—and the English 510, 511, 514, 519 
—early enterprises 510-511 
Dutch United East India Co. 510, 518 
Dvija Basanta 635 
Dvija Madhab 16, 559 

Early History of Kamrupa 675 
Early Travels in India 20, 553, 554, 
738, 739 

East India Co. see English East India 
Co. 

East Pakistan 201 
Economic History of India 740 
Edapati Errana 593 
Education in Ancient India 712 
Edwards, J. F. 676 
Edwards, William 190 
Edwards, W. S. M. 277 
Egypt 505, 545, 729, 731 
Ekanatha (Santa) 578, 579, 580, 581, 
583, 630, 650 
Ekandthl Bhagavata 579 
Ekanatha Charitra 583 
Ekoji, (r. of Tanjore) 269, 270, 271, 
272, 610 

Elakuchi Venkata Krishnayya 594 
Elias, N. 23, 66 

Eliot, Sir Charles, N. E. 675, 802 
Eliot, Sir Henry 550 
Elizabeth, Queen 160, 169 
Ellichpur 161, 164, 174, 416, 464, 465 
Elliot 23, 483 
Ellore 469 

Elphinstone, M. S. 216, 277, 288, 304 
Embassy of Sir Thomas Roe to India 
(1615-19) 21, 554 

Empire Builder of the 16th Century, 
An 41 

Empire of the Great Mogal 21, 554, 
737 

Encyclopaedia of Islam 44, 553, 554, 
631 

England 19, 160, 171, 190 
—and Spain 518 

English, The 508, 510, 511, 515, 718, 
723, 726, 729 

—and French rivalry 513 
—settlement at Bombay 512 
English and the Dutch 
i see Dutch and the English 






INDEX 


967 


English East India Co. 80, 160, 267, 
473, 510, 511, 730 
—first voyage 510 
—Portuguese rivalry 511 
—private trade 516 
English settlements, history of 513 
Epigraphica Indo-Moslemica 18 
Erachh 167 

Eredia, de Manuel Godino 21 
Erskine 409 

Essays in Ecclesiastical Biography 518 
Etawa 35, 77, 166 
Ethe, Dr. Hermann 620 
Ethiopia 716 

Europe 299, 727, 728, 729, 730, 731, 
733 

European settlements 502-518 
Evolution of the Klialsa 325, 326 
Exports, see under Mughul period, 
economic condition 
Eyre, Sir Charles 517 

Factories in India 483 
al-Faiz al-Tari 619 

Faizi Sirhindi 65, 135, 616, 617, 621, 
622, 623, 627, 669, 707 
Faqir(s) 133, 135 
Farah 95, 104 

Farghana 25, 28, 29, 41, 730 
Farhad Khan 431, 441 
Farhang-i-Jahdngiri 626 
Farhang-i-Rashidi 626 
Faria-y-Souza 482 
Farid (Saint) 664 
Farid, See Sher Shah 
FarighI 620 

Farmdn(s) 1, 10, 13, 70, 72, 186, 234, 
511, 517, 521 
—on criminal law 544 
Farquhar J. N. 648, 676 
Farrukh-siyar 792 

Farrukh, the Qalmaq 812, 813, 814 
Fatawa-i-Alamgiri 300, 544, 618 
Fateh Singh (r. of Kashmir) 613 
Fateh Singh (s. of Guru Govind Singh) 
321 

Fath al-Mannan fl ta >: id al-Nu e mdn 
616 

Fr. Fernao Guerreiro S. J. 20 
Fath Khan 79, 117, 207, 208, 444, 445 
Fath Khan Jat 80 
Fathiyya-i-abriyya 10 
Fathpur SIkrI 116, 125, 126, 127, 128, 
131, 134, 135, 137, 141, 144, 149, 160, 

171, 175, 185, 187, 340, 668, 716, 733, 

741, 759, 760, 761, 762, 763, 764, 765, 

766, 767, 768, 769, 770, 816 

—monuments at 760-71 
Fatimid Caliphs 670 
Fath-ullah £ Imad-ul-Mulk 412, 463 
Fatuhat-i-Alamgiri 10 
Fawa y id al-Akhbgr 621 
Fergusson, James 18, 483, 710, 754, 
761, 769, 786, 790, 800, 801 
Feringhis 42, 508 
Fernao Guerreiro, S. J., Fr. 20 


Fidai Khan Kuka 801 

Finch, William 20, 483, 718, 721, 734 

Firdausi 704, 707 

Firishta (Muhammad Qasim) 31, 43, 
65, 66, 67, 71, 82, 86, 102, 103, 105, 
163, 172, 173, 372, 390, 414, 415, 424, 
428, 429, 445, 447, 455, 468, 480, 481, 
492, 493, 518, 624, 698 
Firozpur 313, 321 
First Englishmen in India 174 
Firuz (boy king) 62 
Firuz (poet) 472 
FIruza 46 
Firuzabad 44 
FIruzpur 91 

Firuz Shah Tughluq 212, 224, 713, 744 
Fitch, Ralph 20, 125, 160, 512, 643, 
721, 722, 728, 734, 738, 739, 760 
Fogg Museum of Art, Cambridge, 
Mass., USA 811 
Forbes 409 

Foreign Policy of the Great Mughals 
174 

Forgotten Empire, A 482 
Fort St. David 520 
Fort St. George 515 
Fort William 517 

Foster, William 20, 21, 710, 738, 739 

Foxcroft 516 

France 169 

Franciscans 507 

Frederick, Caesar 425 

Freeman 139 

Freer Gallery of Art, Washington 
D. C. 814, 815 
French, The 516, 517, 729 
From Akbar to Aurangzib 739, 740 
Fryer, Dr. John 22, 514, 516, 685 
Further Sources of Vijayanagara 
History 484 
Fusus al-Hikam 618 
Fuzuni Astarabadi 414 
Fatuhat-i- Adil-Shahl 414, 441, 482, 

483 

Futuhdt-i-Alamgiri 10, 628 
Futuhdt-i-Firoz Shahi 553 
Fuzuni 441 

Gadadhar Singh 229 
Gaga Bhatt 

see Visvesvar Bhatta 
Gagraun 120, 329 
Gait 642, 675 
Gajapati Prataprudra 469 
Gajendramoksha (of Muktesvara— 
Marathi) 583 

Gajendramoksha (of Raghunatha 
Pandit— Marathi ) 583 

Gajendramoksha (Sanskrit ) 607 
Gakkhar(s) 30, 32, 61, 79, 83, 93, 114 
Ganapavarpu Venkata Kavi 595 
Ganda Singh 325, 326 
Gandava 58, 153 
Gandikota 473 
Ganga, battle of 

see Bilgram, battle of 



968 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Gangadhara (Kannada poet) 600 
Gangadhara (Minister poet of Tanjore) 
610 

Gangadhar (scholar in Akbar’s Court) 
627 

Gangadhara (Vaishnava saint) 644 
Gangadhara Kavlndra 613 
Gahga Lahari 16 
Ganganarayana ChakravartI 635 
Gang avatar ana 607 
Ganpura 469 
Ganshal 150 
Garha 116 
Garha-Katanga 116 
Garhgaon 227, 228 
Garhi 75, 77 
Garhwal 203 
Garmsir 31, 59, 154 
Gaudiya Vaishnava Abhidhdna 676 
Gaud a 733 
Gauhar Gossain 71 
Gauhati 17, 227, 228, 229, 299 
Gaur 52, 53, 54, 64, 65, 66, 73, 74, 75, 
77, 79, 130 
Gaurahg-vijaya 556 
Gautamiya Tantra 675 
Gawdlior-ndma 628 
Gawll 164 
Gaya 141, 279 
Gayer, Sir John 514, 520 
Gazetteer of India 172 
Geographical Account of the Countries 
round the Bay of Bengal, (1667-79), 
A 22 

George II (of Ireland) 523 
Germain, French Envoy 277 
Geronimo Verrneo 797 
Geyl, P. 21, 710 
Ghanaram 559 
Ghani Khan 316 
Ghani Kashmiri 621 
Ghani, M. A. 631 
Ghatikachala-mdhdtmyamu 591 
Ghawwasi 629 
Ghazall Mashhad! 622 
Ghazdawan (fort) 28, 43 
—battle of 29, 43 
‘Ghazi’ 37, 40, 106 
Ghazi Chak 403, 405 
Ghazi Khan 32, 33, 64, 79, 94, 92, 146 
Ghazlpur 35, 71, 119, 129, 140 
Ghazi-ud-din Firuz Jang 285 
Ghaznafar 50 

Ghazni 26, 29, 33, 35, 60, 62, 142, 204, 
730 

Ghilzais 207 
Ghiyas-ud-dln ‘All 131 
Ghiyas-ud-dln Muhammad Khvand 
Amir 4 

Ghiyas-ud-din Tughluq 324 
Ghoraghat 130, 142 
Ghosh, Atal Behari 675 
Ghosh, Basudev 557 
Ghulam Ali Azad Bilgrami 631 
Ghulam Hussain Salim 11 


Ghurband 61, 67, 143, 145 
Gian Ratndvali 575 
Gibbon, E. 138 

Gingee 245, 272, 289, 294, 295, 296, 367, 
458, 500, 520 
—Nayaks of 607 
Giridhara 582 
Gita Gopala 598, 599 
Gitagovinda 564, 569, 605, 611, 806 
Gitarnava 580 

Gitarthabodha-chandrika 580 
Gitasankara 611 

Glimpses of Medieval Indian Culture 
632 

Goa 137, 158, 159, 269, 282, 299, 447, 
451, 491, 503, 505, 506, 507, 508, 512, 
518, 723, 725, 728, 731 
—captured by Portuguese 505 
—recaptured from Bijapur 506 
Goalpara 227 

Godino, Eredia de Manuel 21 
Goes, Br. Benedict de 159 
Gogha 730 
Gogra 38, 118, 119, 

—battle of 38 

Gogunda 131, 132, 335, 337, 338 
Gokarn 261 
Gokla 236, 291, 373 
Gokra Desh 725 

Gokulanatha (Sanskrit dramatist) 613 
Gokulanathji (author of Chaurasivarta ) 
647, 648 

Golconda 10, 11, 30, 161, 162, 163, 166, 
208, 210, 212, 242, 245, 264, 265, 269, 

270, 271, 280, 282, 286, 288, 294, 362, 

412, 413, 414, 417, 418, 419, 439, 440, 

467, 472, 475, 476, 478, 479, 512, 514, 

620, 624, 629, 719, 720, 724, 725, 820, 

821 

—annexatoin to Mughul empire 287 
—history of 11 

Golden Treasury of Persian Poetry, A 
631 

Gol Gumbaz 458 
Golko(u)nda 

see Golconda 
Gombroon 508 

Gondwana 116, 118, 124, 199, 200, 264, 
?qq ?94 

Gopala’ Bhatta 634, 640, 644, 648 
Gopala-Chandra Dvija 563 
Gopaldas (disciple of Vitthalnath) 652 
Gopaldas (poet) 557 
Gopal Deb 635, 644 
Gopijanavallabha 646 
Gorakhnath 659 
Gorakhpur 120 
Gosvami, Atul Krishna 675 
Goswami, B. N. 13 
Goswami Tulsidas 
see Tulsi Das 
Govardhan 814 

Govindachandra Gahadavala 633 
Govindacharya 674 
Govindadas Kaviraj 557 





INDEX 


969 


Govinda Dikshita 609 
Govindamanikya 642 
Govindpur 517 

Govind Singh, Sikh Guru 316, 317, 
318, 319, 320, 321, 322, 323, 326, 568, 
574, 661, 664 

—attacked by Pathans 237, 322-23 
—attitude towards Islam 316 
—congregation 317, 318, 319 
—creates a new nation 317 
—his contribution 324 
—his last injunctions 323 
—his teachings 317, 318, 319, 320 
Golunda 718 
Govindasvami 647 
Govindwal 308 

Gramanyacha Sddyanta Itihdsa 675 

Grant-Duff 277 

Granthardja 580 

Granth Sahib, see Adi Granth 

Gray, Captain 513 

Gray, Albert 20 

Greek 159 

Greenhill 520 

Grewal, J. S. 13 

Grey, Edward 21 

Grierson, Sir George Abraham 577, 
632, 677, 709 
Grimon, Leo 159 

Growse, F. S. 18, 390, 649, 676, 704, 
711, 712 

Gubbi Mallanna 597 
Guhilot(s) 333 
Gujar, M. V. 17 

Gujarat 6, 10, 11, 17, 30, 32, 45. 46, 48, 
49, 50, 51, 52, 56, 64, 72, 73, 74, 83, 
107, 108, 110, 111, 116, 117, 120, 121, 

122, 126, 127, 128, 133, 137, 140, 145, 

146, 161, 162, 170, 172, 180, 194, 214, 

221, 222, 234, 238, 245, 264. 266, 290, 

291, 299, 312, 327, 329, 333, 512, 619, 

629, 652, 714, 715, 716, 718, 720, 721, 

722, 723, 728, 729, 730, 735, 736, 757, 

765, 768, 803 

—centres of learning 705 
—contribution to Arabic literature 
619 

—during Mughul times 10 
—history of 11, 619 
Gujarat 383 

Gujarat and its Literature 630 
Gujarati manuscript painting 803 
also see under Mughul period, 
painting 

Gujarati Sahityani Ruparekha 630 
Gujarati Sahityanun Rekhadarshana 
630 

Gulbadan 56 

Gulbadan Begam 3, 56, 65, 66, 67, 134, 
409, 621, 702, 708, 710 
Gulbarga 283, 418, 421, 448, 461, 692 
Gulf of Cambay 505, 512 
Gulistan-i-Ibrahim 624, 817 
Gulistan Palace Library, Tehran 808 
Gul Muhammad 223 
Gulrukh Banu 222 


Gulshan-i-lbrdhimi 7 
Gulshan-i-Ishq 461 
Gulzar-i-Abvar 14 
Gumti 65 
Gunachandra 600 
Gunachaur, battle of 111 
Gunadhya 570 
Gupta, Murari 555 
Gur Bilas 325 
Gurjara-Pratiharas 349 
Gurshasp 198 
Guru(s) 137 
Gurucharitra 580 
Gurudatta-Charite 597 
Guru Nanak, see Nanak Guru 
Guru Nanak’s Religion 677 
Gutti 488 

Guzman, Luis de 173 
Gwalior 3, 15, 35, 36, 47, 78, 80, 91, 92, 
96, 99, 105, 107, 115, 120, 194, 208, 
215, 216, 220, 223, 307, 311, 330, 386, 
706, 725, 741, 751, 753, 759 

Habba Khotun 577, 578 

Habib (r. of Kashmir) 405 

Habib ‘All Khan 107 

Habib al-Siyar 621 

Habib-ullah 11 

Habib-us-Siyar 3, 43 

Hada’iq al-Salatin 624 

Hadi Hasan, (Dr.) 631 

Hadiq Fatehpuri 626 

Hada’iq-i-Qutb Shahi 620 

Hadibadeya Dharma 599 

Hadikat-us-Salatin 484 

Hadith 619 

Hadiya Sultana 424 

Hadramaut 225 

Hafiz 576, 707, 811, 812 

Haft Anjuman 11 

Haft Iqlim 642 

Haft Tappa 469 

Haidar Khan 147 

Haidar Malik 12, 410 

Haidar Muhammad Akhta Begi 64 

Haidar Zihni 624 

Haig, Sir Wolseley 23, 101, 411, 413, 
482, 678 Z 

Haihayendra-charita 609 
Haji 'Abdullah 159 
Haji Altamash 156 
Haji Begam 125 
Haji Dabir 619 
Haji Ibrahim Sarhindi 627 
Haji Khalifa 631 
Haji Khan 106, 107, 332 
Haji Kishvar Khan 452, 453 
Haji Mahmud 805 
Haji Muhammad 60, 66 
Haji Muhammad 'Arif Qandahari 4, 
60 

Hajipur 72, 111, 118, 131, 142, 166 
Hajkan 57 
Haji-ud-dabir 409 
Hajo 202 

Hakim (s. of Babur) 524 








970 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Hakim Abu-’l Fath 149 
Hakim ‘Alawl Khan Jilani 617 
Hakim ‘Ah 147 
Hakim Human 159 
Hakim Khan Sur 132 
Hakim Nizam al-Din GilanI 620 
Hakim Sur Pathan 335 
Hakluyt Society 20, 21, 22, 482 
Halaga 597 
Hdlat-i-Alamglri 10 
Halat-i-Asad Beg 8 
Haldighat 131 

—battle of 131, 132, 335, 336, 385, 
536 

Hamazanama 806, 808, 809 
Hambir Rao Mohite ( Sarnaubat ) 268, 

272 

Hamida Banu 57 
Hamida Begam 58, 109 
Hamid bin Fazullah 14 
Hamid Khan 33 

Hamid Khan (a genl. of Ahmadnagar) 
456 

Hamid-ud-din Khan 10 
Hamilton, Capt. Alexander 22, 712, 
738 

Hamilton, Buchanan 645, 676 
Hanafi Law 543, 618 
Handbook to Agra and the Taj i 18 
Hanumantakhydna 583 
Hhnumant Rao More ( Diwan ) 279 
Hanumante, Raghunath Pant 270, 272 
Hanumante, Raghunath Pant Pandit 
268, 275 
Haqiri 10 

Hara-Gauri-vivaha 612 
Hdrdvali 564 

TTsrrl wpr 1QQ 

Har Gob(v)ind, Sikh Guru 308, 310, 
311, 312, 313, 314, 325, 661 
—assessment of 314-15 
—captivity of 311 
—creates a separate State 310 
—death of 314 
—defeats Mughul army 313 
—relations with Jahangir 311 
—transforms Sikhs into a martial 
race 310-11 

—warlike activities of 312-314 
Haribans 812 
Hariana 62, 64 

Hari-bhakti Vilasa 635, 674, 675 

Haridasa Dasa 676 

Haridasa movement 652 

Haridasa SvamI 647, 649 

Haridas, Jhala 342 

Hari Deb 635 

Harihar 260 

Hariharabuva 582 

Hariharapur 516 

Harihar Das 22 

Harikavi (Bhanubhatta) 609 

Harilal Vyasa 648 

Harilllamrita 569 

Haripdth 650 

Harischandra Nalopdkhyanamu 592 


Harisiihha 633 

Harivarada 583 

Harivijaya 584 

Harivijaya Suri 137 

Har Kishan, Sikh Guru 315 

Hasmohan Das 675 

Hari-Vamsa 17 

Har Rai Rawal 124 

Har Rai, Sikh Guru 315 

Hasan Abal 147 

Hasan ‘All Khan 236, 239, 350 

Harivamsa 563, 589 
Hasan ‘Askari 624 
Hasan Beg 179 
Hasan Beg Romlu 7 
Hasan Khan 36 
Hasan Khan Mewati 44 
Hasan Shawqi 629 
Hasan Sur 68 
Hashim 814 
1 Hassan Makri 403 

Hastagiri-champu (V aradabhyudaya) 

611 

Hastyayurveda 600 

Hatim Khan 33 

Hati Vidyalankara 708 

Havell, E. B. 18, 710, 745 

Hamdshi Thalathat al-Zahidlyyah 618 

Hawkins, Captain William 20, 190, 

511, 512, 553, 738 
Hayasara Samuchchaya 600 
Hayasirsa-Pahcharatra 635 
Haydt-i- Abdul Haqq 631 
Hayat Baksh Begam 473, 474, 475 
Hayati 625 
Hazara 61 
Hazarat-ul-Quds 14 
Hedaya 554 
Hedges, William 517 
Hemachandra 
see Himu 

Hemachandracharya Jhianamandir, 
Patan 804 
Hemadri 633 
Hemu, see Himu 
Henriquez, Fr. Francis 137 
Henry IV, 169 
Henry VIII, 668 

Henry, Prince of Portugal 502, 518 
Herat 3, 26, 27, 31, 45, 115, 155, 171 
Hidayat Husain, M. 23 
HIED 195, 196 
Hijaz 707 

al-Hikmat al-Bdllgha 617 
Himmat Khan 295 

Himu 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 
104, 105, 106 

—a forgotten Hindu hero 97-101 
—an estimate of 97 et. seq. 

—death of 96, 101 
—fights battle of Panipat (1556) 96 
—life sketch of 97 
—occupies Delhi and Agra (1556), 96, 
105 











INDEX 


971 


Hindal Mirza 45, 46, 50, 51, 53, 54, 55, 
56, 57, 58, 60, 61, 75, 78, 396 
Hindi 16, 69, 84, 171 
Hindi Shabda Sagar 711 
Hindiya 161 
Hindoos, The 677 
Hindustan hi Qadimi Islami 
Darsgahan 712 

Hindu(s) 87, 90, 93, 100, 105, 115, 117, 
124, 136, 137, 138, 139, 193, 194, 196, 
206, 212, 217, 218, 538, 540, 541, 542 
Hiftdaun 718 
Hindu Beg 30, 49, 51 
Hinduism 136, 139, 140, 193, 212, 213, 
219 

Hinduism in Assam 675 
Hindu Kush 26, 29, 124 
Hindu Pad Padshahi 263, 368 
Hindu resistance to Muslim domination 
327-390 

Hindu Samskdras 711 
Hindusthani 45 
Hird Saubhagyam 15 
Hiravijaya Suri 137 
Hissar 28, 29, 38, 46, 63, 69, 107, 125, 
730 

Hissar FIruza, 68 

Histoire des choses plus memorables 
advenues, etc. 21 
Historical letters 1 
Historical Landmarks of the Deccan 
482 

Historical Studies in Mughal 
Numismatics 19, 172 
History and Culture of the Indian 
People, Vol. VI 103 
History of Assam 675 
History of Aurangzib 245, 246, 280, 
304 387 482 

History of Bengal 65, 102, 173, 409, 
711 

History of Bengali Literature 630 
History of Bikaner 384 
History of Dharmasastra 675 
History of Fine Art in India and 
Ceylon, A 18 

History of Gujarat (Arabic) 409 
History of India, The 7, 304 
History of Indian and Eastern 
Architecture 18, 710 
History of Jahangir 195, 308, 309, 325 
History of Jinji and Its Rulers, A 484 
History of Kanarese Literature, A 676 
History of Medieval Bengal (in Bengali) 
710 

History of Orissa 173 
History of Persian Language and Lite¬ 
rature at the Mughul Court, A 
631 

History of Shahjahan of Delhi 218, 
387 

History of the Portuguese in Bengal 
102 

History of South India, A 482, 483 
History of the Sikhs, A 325, 676 
History of Udaipur 383 


Hita Harivamsa 647, 648, 676 
Hockey 691 

Hodivala, S. H. 19, 65, 409, 410 

Holkar 370 

Holland 510 

Homa 137 

Honavar 503 

Hooghly 201, 202, 506, 508, 517, 726, 
731 

Hoshang 197, 198 

Hoshiarpur 67, 111 

Hosten, H., S. J. 20, 21, 174, 710 

House of Shivaji 280 

Houtman 510 

Hoyland, J. S. 20, 174, 709, 710, 711 
Hugel, Baron 660 

Humayun 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 13, 15, 27, 28, 
32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 44, 45- 
67, 68, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 
81, 82, 89, 90, 92, 95, 96, 99, 100, 
104, 108, 117, 120, 126, 142, 145, 146, 

154, 155, 158, 169, 329, 330, 383, 395, 

396, 397, 402, 404, 409, 524, 528, 539, 

545, 546, 552, 620, 621, 666, 678, 686, 

689, 690, 705, 711, 724, 741, 742, 743, 

750, 807, 808, 809 

—accession of 45 
—an estimate of 64-65 
—becomes master of Malwa 47, 48 
—bid for Delhi throne (1554) 62 

—biography of 3 
—campaign against Badakshan 60 
—campaign against Balkh and the 
Uzbegs (1548) 61 

—campaigns in Malwa and Gujarat 
47, 48, 49, 50 

—captures Chunar (1538) 74 

—captures Qandahar (1545) 59 
—confronts Bahadur Shah 47-49 
—conquest of Bengal (1538) 51-52 
—conquest of Champaner (1535) 

48-49 

—death of 64 

—decides to go to Persia 58, 59 
—defeated by Sher Khan (1539) 54 
—defeats Mirza Sulaiman 
at Tirgiran 60 
—expedition to Sind 58 
—forced to leave Bengal (1539) 

52 et. seq. 

—founding of Dinpanah 46 
—in exile 56-59 

—lays siege to Chunar (1531) 72 
—lays Siege to Qandahar (1545) 59 

—mausoleum of, 748-50, 751, 753, 

780 

—occupies Garhi 75 
—quells the rebellion in Bihar 
(1534) 46 

—re-establishes himself at Delhi 
(1555) 62-64, 95 
—retreats to Bhakkar 57 
—return from exile 60-61 
—routed by Sher Shah near 
Karmanasa (1539) 76 







972 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Humayun, seeks shelter with Shah 
Tahmasp 78 

—sources of history of 34 
—struggle for defending his 
dominion (1530-40) 45-56 
—starts on Indian expedition from 
exile (1554) 95 

—submission of Sher Shah (1531) 

46 

—treaty with Shah Husain Arghun 
(1543) 58 

—war against Mirza Kamaran (1550) 

61 

—wins battle of Dadrah (1532) 46 

—wins battle of Machiwara (1555) 
Humayun Badshah 65, 409, 553 
Humayun in Persia 173 
Humayun-ndma (of Gulbadan 

Begam) 3, 44, 409, 621, 702, 708, 
710 

Humayun-ndma (of Khvand Amir) 

3, 742 

Hunhar 819 
Husain Ambar 580 
Husain Khan (gr. of Lahore) 306 
Husain Khan (r. of Kashmir) 405 
Husain, (Dr.) M. 410, 411 
Husain Makri 404 
Husain, M. Hidayat 23 
Husain Mirza Baiqara, Sultan (r. of 
Herat) 26, 27, 31 

Husain Nizam Shah I 162, 420-26, 451, 
464, 494 

Husain Nizam Shah II (Sultan of 
Ahmadnagar 428, 429, 454 
Husain Nizam Shah III 207, 208, 444 
Husain Quli Khan 122, 127, 333 
Husain Shah (r. of Kshmir) 146, 147 
Husain Shah Sharql 805 
Husain Waiz 707 
Huxley, Aldous 799 
Hyderabad 210, 271, 286, 299. 472, 473, 
477, 478, 479 

‘Ibddat-Khdn a 134, 135, 136, 137 

Ibbetson 390 

Ibn al-‘Arabi 618 

Ibn Hasan 553 

Ibn Husain 230 

Ibn-i-Khatun 624 

Ibn-i-Nishati 629 

Ibn Ma‘sum 619 

Ibrahim 29 

Ibrahim II, see Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah II 
Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah I 412, 414, 417, 

418, 419, 420, 421, 449-51, 487, 488 
Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah II 162, 165, 428, 
429, 430, 431, 432, 433, 437, 438, 441, 
442, 452, 454, 455, 468, 472, 474, 505, 
624, 629, 820, 821 
—an estimate of 455-56 
Ibrahim Barid Shah 468 
Ibrahim Husain Mirza 120, 127, 133 
Ibrahim Khan 73, 117, 118 


Ibrahim Khan (naval commander) 

276 

Ibrahim Khan (viceroy of Bengal) 

293 

Ibrahim Khan Sur 64, 68, 92, 94, 95, 
97, 98, 99 

Ibrahim Lodi 3, 29, 30, 32, 33, 34, 36, 
38, 44, 46, 733 

Ibrahim Nizam Shah 341, 432, 455 
Ibrahim Qutb Shah 412, 421, 422, 423, 
424, 425, 427, 470-72, 480, 482, 494 
—an estimate of 471-72 
Ibrahim Shah 404, 405 
Ibrahim Sur 107 
Ichhawati Haran 17 
Idar 126, 128, 132 
Idi Raina 404 

Ikhlas Khan (ally of Chand Sultan) 

163, 431, 432, 433, 454 
Ikhlas Khan (Mughul commander) 

266 

Ikhtiyar Khan 48, 49 
Ikhtiyar-ul-Mulk 128 
Ikkeri 457, 460 
Ikram, S. M. 631, 632 
Ilah-diyah 14 
Ilahi era 137 
Ilingapuranam 585 
Ilminski, N. 2 

‘Imad Shah, see Imad-ul-Mulk 
‘Imad-Shahi dynasty of Berar 463-66 
Imad-ul-mulk (a noble of Gujarat) 

49, 398, 619 
Imad-ul-Mulk, see 

‘Ala-ud-din ‘Imad-ul-Mulk 
Imad-us-Sadat 390 
Imamfs) 15, 28, 135, 141, 158 
—biographical notes of 14, 15 
Imam Rabbani, 

see Shaikh Ahmad of Sarhind 
Imam Quli 205, 206 
Imperial and Asiatic Quarterly Review, 
The 44 

Imperial Farmans 13 

Imperial Gazetteer of India 1, 103. 

172 

Inayat Khan, alias Muhammad Tahir 
9, 626 

Tnayat-Ullah 7, 707 
Tnayat-ullah Khan 11 
India at the Death of Akbar 737 
India of Aurangzib 710 
India Office Library, London 19, 816 
817 

Indian Antiquary 66, 174 
Indian Architecture 18, 710, 802 
Indian Architecture; Its Psychology, 
Structure and History from the 
first Muhammadan Invasion to the 
Present Day 18 

Indian Institute of Advanced Study , 
Simla 24 

Indian Museum, Calcutta 19, 810, 814, 
815, 821 

Indian Muslims 666, 669, 670, 671, 674 







INDEX 


973 


Indian painting, medieval 568 

(also see under Mughul period, 
painting) 

Indian Painting under the Mughals 
172 

Indian Review 44 

Indian Travels of Thevenot and Careri 
(1695), The 22, 485, 554, 710 
India’s Contribution to the Study of 
Hadith Literature 631 
Indo-China 729 
Indo-Iranica 631, 632 
Indo-Persian literature 620, 627 
—contribution of the Hindus to 627 
Indore 725 
Indraconda 469 
Indraprastha 46 

Indra Singh Rathor 238, 239, 347, 349 
Indumati-yarinayamu 593 
Inshd 1 

Inshd-i-Abu-l-Fazl 6, 623 
Insha-i-Madho Ram 707 
Insha-i-Yusufi 707 

Intellectual History of Islam in India, 
An 631, 632 

Intikhab-i-Jahangir Shah 9, 187 
Iqbdl-nama 8, 23, 196, 386, 483 
Iqbal Nama-i-Jahangir! 625, 707, 709, 
712 

Iran 28, 58, 59, 153, 154, 620, 624, 656, 
692 

Iraq 656, 730, 803 
Irshad-ut-Talibln 15 
Irvine, W. 22, 304, 711 
‘Isa Khan 131, 142 
—tomb of 751 
‘Isa Khan Niyazi 91 
‘Isa Khan Sur 92 
Isfahan 154, 283 
Ishwar Das 10, 390 
Iskandar Khan Uzbeg 96, 105, 106, 
117, 118, 119 
Iskandar Munshi 3 
Islam 1, 106, 132, 134, 135, 136, 137, 
138, 139, 140, 141, 166, 192, 194, 213, 
216, 223, 226, 233, 235, 236, 237, 315, 
512, 522, 523, 655, 658, 665-674, 699 
Islamabad (Chittagong) 230 
Islamic Culture 66, 102, 174, 484, 632 
Islam Khan 202 
Islampuri 296 

Islam Shah (of Sind) 61, 62 
Islam Shah Sur alias Jalal Khan 38, 
51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 61, 62, 66, 71, 72, 
73, 74, 75, 78, 79, 81, 90-93, 94, 97, 
98, 107, 115, 403 
—an estimate of 92, 93 
—attempts on his life 91, 92 
—coronation of 90 
—death of 92 

—his attitude towards old nobility 
91, 92 

—introduction of graded system in 
the army 93 

Isma‘ila (Bohra) community 234 
Isma‘Il Khan 79 


Isma‘Il Khan RumI 797 
Isle of Banda 728 
Isle of Timor 728 
Isma‘51 454 

Isma‘il ‘Adil Khan (Shah) 416, 417, 
447, 448, 464, 466, 467, 482 
Isma‘Il Nizam Shah II 429 
Ismail Shah (r. of Kashmir) 405, 410 
Isvara-Puri 640 

Isvar Das Nagar 290, 356, 628 
Ishwari Prasad (Dr.) 66, 67, 69, 102, 

185, 196, 409 

I‘timad Khan 115, 125, 126, 145, 401 
Itimadpur 718 

rtimad-u’d-Daula (Ghyath Beg) 186 
625 

—mausoleum of 778, 779, 780 
Ivie, Thomas 520 
Ivory Coast 502 
Iyer-i-Ddnish 812 

Ja‘far Khan 529 
Jaffar Beg 13, 180 
Jagadadharana 16, 610 
Jagadananda 557 
Jagadeva Rdyana Kavya 599 
Jagadvijayachandas 610 
Jagajyotimalla 612, 614 
Jagan 812 

Jagannath Kachwa (Kachhwahah) 

(a gnl. of Akbar) 132, 152, 217, 386 
Jagannathabuva 582 
Jagannatha-Charitamrita 676 
Jagannath Dasa 564, 646, 647 
J agannatha-Mangala 646 
Jagannatha Pandit 16, 611, 613 
Jagannatha Panditraja, see Pandit 
Jagannatha 
Jagannath Purl 279 
Jagannath, Raja 639 
Jagannivasa 639 

Jagat Singh (s. of Kama) 343, 344-45, 
387 

Jagat Singh (s. of Man Singh) 152, 
183, 199 

Jagdeva Rao Naikwari 471 
Jagir system 276 
Jagmal 335 
Jahanabad 152 

Jahan Ara 226, 477, 626, 672, 673, 702, 
705, 707, 793 

Jahanara Begam 14, 210 
Jahangir 1, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 16, 
19, 113, 160, 169, 175-96, 200, 201, 
203, 212, 218, 224, 247, 307, 308, 309, 

310, 311, 312, 315, 340, 341, 342, 343, 

382, 387, 410, 438, 440, 522, 525, 527, 

530, 535, 541, 544, 546, 552, 610, 614, 

617, 619, 621, 622, 625, 626, 627, 671, 

672, 673, 678, 681, 682, 683, 686, 687, 

688, 689, 690, 697, 703, 701, 715, 717, 

718, 723, 724, 725, 727, 729, 730, 733, 

736, 758, 759, 760, 765, 766, 770, 772, 

773, 774, 775, 776, 777, 778, 780, 784, 

786, 800, 808, 813, 814, 816, 817, 818, 

819 







974 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


—an estimate of 195 
—as a reformist 194 
—attitude towards Jesuits 189 
—attitude towards other religions 
192, 193, 194, 196 

—attitude towards Sikhs 307, 309 
—autobiography of, see Tuzuk-i- 
Jahdnglri 

—campaign against Amar Singh 
340-43 

—court of 777, 780 
—encouragement to painting, see 
under Mughul period, painting 
—fines Guru Arjun 309 
—foreign policy of 191 
—his personal religion 194, 195, 196 
—his religious attitude 192, 193, 194 
—patronage of Sanskrit 15, 16 
—relations with Persia 190, 191 
—relations with the Portuguese 189 
Jahangir and the Jesuits 21 
Jahangir Chandrika 16 
Jahangir Khan 447, 448, 465 
Jahangir MIrza 25 
Jahangir Quli (Beg) 53, 75, 77 
Jahangirs India 21 
J ahan-i-Zajar 627 
Jahnava Devi 645 
Jaimini Bharata 600 
Jai Mai 114, 121, 122, 174, 310, 339, 700 
Jains 15, 135, 137, 140, 194, 803 
—miniature painting 803, 804, 805 
Jain, P. C. 804 
Jaipur 13, 19, 235 
Jaisalmer 58, 124, 125, 334, 684, 716 
Jaish Khan 191 
Jaita 82 
Jaitaran 81 
Jaitrasimha 639 
Jajhar Khan 107 
Jakarta 510 

Jalal Khan, s. of Sher Shah, 
see Islam Shah 
Jalal Khan bin Jalu 91 
Jalalabad 143, 147 
Jalal-ud-dln Khalji 324 
Jalal-ud-dln RumI 628 
Jaleswar 131, 152 
Jalor 81 

Jam, battle of 38 

Jamal al-DIn Muhammad Tahir 619 
Jam‘al-jawdmi c 616 
Jamal Khan 69 

Jamal Khan (leader of the Deccani 
party) 429, 430 
Jamal Khan SarangkhanI 68 
Jamal-ud-dln Husain Inju 626 
Jambuvatiparinaya 590 
James I, 190, 511 
Jami‘-al-Fawd‘Id 617, 621 
Jdm-i-Jam 68 
Jami'ut-Tawarikh 811 
Jamkhandi 446 

Jamshld Qiitb-Shah 418, 419, 469-70 
—an estimate of 470 
Janakiparinaya 607, 612 


Janardana Svami 578 
Janasvabhava Gosavi 582 
Janjira 269 
Jan! Beg 151 
Jani Janardana 580 
Jannatabad 52, 53 
Jarib system of assessment 210 
Jaridata-i-Farman-i-Salatin-i-Delhi 
13 

Jarret, H. S. 23, 173, 711, 738 
Jarric, F. Pierre du 21, 174 
Jasovanta Singh Rathor 215, 221, 238, 
264, 301, 346 

Jaswant Rai Munshi 627 
Jats 291 

—origin and early history of 371 
—revolt against Mughuls 373 
Jatwan 372 
Jauhar 116, 122, 333 
Jauhar Aftabchl 4, 57, 60, 66, 67, 76, 
102, 621, 678 
Jauhar Aftabrahi 678 
Jalaur 724 

Jaunpur 30, 35, 46, 50, 51, 52, 53, 65, 
69, 75, 76, 77, 99, 107, 113, 115, 117, 
118, 119, 120, 141, 172, 705, 716, 803, 
804, 805 

Java 507, 508, 510, 518, 717, 728, 729 
729 

Javli 242, 256, 278, 279 
Jawhar 245 
J awahiru-l-Asrdr 629 
Jayadeva 564, 569, 605, 606, 611 
Jayadhwaj 227, 228, 229 
Jayananda Kavi 556 
Jayarama Pande 609 
JayaramasvamI 582 
Jayne 518 

JayaSamudra (lake) 354 
Jay Singh, Raja 214, 229, 238, 240, 241, 
243, 244, 348, 351, 353, 354, 356, 357, 
460, 568, 701, 704 

—treaty with Aurangzlb 353, 355 
Jayasoma Upadhyaya 15 
Jedhayanchi Sakhavali (Jedhe 
Chronology) 17, 278 
Jedhe Karina 17 
Jerry 178, 195 
Jesuit (s) 189, 190, 507, 509 
—Jesuit mission 816 
Jesuits and the Great Mogul 173, 324 
Jew, the 135 
Jhabai 313 
Jhalor 290 
Jhajhar 81 
Jhansi 190 

Jharkhand 51, 53, 73, 75, 116, 203 

Jharoka 213 

Jhaveri, K. M. 13 

Jihald 36, 40, 106 

Jlji Anaga 109 

Jija Bai 247, 248, 249, 251, 252, 253, 

256, 260, 265, 267 
Jinat-ul-Fardus 12 









INDEX 


975 


Jinjee, see Gingee 
Jiryar 61 
Jita Khan 434 
JIva GosvamI 630, 644, 647 
Jizya 85, 115, 123, 192, 213, 235, 236, 
238, 239, 241, 273, 275, 299, 305, 333, 
347, 348, 353, 354, 381, 408, 410, 529, 
534, 538, 539, 542 
Jnanabhandara 804 
Jnanadas 557 
Jndnappana 604 
Jhanasagara 580 

Jhanesvara, Santa 578, 581, 650, 653 
Jnanesvari 579 

Jodhpur 10, 13, 57, 81, 82, 87, 124, 125, 
131, 238, 239, 291, 349, 358, 684 
Jog Bashisht 812 
Joglgupha 227 
Jogis of Jakhbar 13 
John Marshall in India (1667-72) 22 

John Rhylands Library, Manchester 
806 

Joshi, P. M. 483 
Joshi, Umashankar 630 
Jotana 126 

Jujhar Singh (Bundela) 377-78 
Jujhar Singh (s. of Guru Govind 
Singh) 321 

—rebellion against Mughuls 198-199 
Jullundur 32, 62, 95, 105, 107, 111, 313 
Jun 58 

Junagarh 127, 133, 146, 226 
Junnaid Kararani 131 
Junnar 165, 243, 293 
Jwalamukhi 306 
Jyotishtattva 637 
Jyayasi 711 

Kabir 138, 305, 655, 659, 660, 664 
Kabul 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 35, 36, 
37, 39, 41, 44, 45, 46, 53, 56, 58, 59, 
60, 61, 62, 64, 79, 92, 95, 101, 105, 
109, 111, 114, 119, 140, 141, 142, 143, 
144, 145, 148, 150, 151, 153, 155, 
156, 157, 170, 175, 179, 188, 199, 204, 
205, 206, 298, 299, 308, 313, 316, 322, 
404, 730, 731, 808 
—batte of 61 
Kahuliyat 85 
Kafiristan 150 
Kahalgaon 52, 66, 74, 130 
Kahanu Dasa 564 
Kahlur 311 
Kahmard 26, 206 
Kaigwins 520 
Kailwa 122 
Kajali 184, 202, 203 
KajI Chak 402, 403 
Kdka-Sandesam 602 
Kakmani Murti Kavi 593 
Kakrali 116 
Kdkutstha Vi] ay a 594 
Kala Bhawan, Banaras 19 
Kdlahastimdhdtmyamu 590 
Kalanaur 99, 104, 106, 145, 147 
Kala Pahar 63 


Kalapurnodayamu 591 
Kalhana 610 
Kalid-i-Makhazin 15 
Kalika-mangal 559 
Kalikata, See Calcutta 
Kalim 621 
Kalima 234 
Kalimdt-i-Aurangzib 11 
Kalimat-i-Tayyibdt 11, 315, 325 
Kalimdt-us-Sddiqin 14 
Kalimullah 412 

Kalinjar 47, 82, 83, 90, 103, 124, 201, 
292, 725 

Kalkalghatl 152 
Kalpasutra 804 

Kalpasutra-Kdlakachdrya-Katha 804 
KalpI 35, 46, 53, 54, 76, 77, 95, 99, 111, 
119, 122, 166, 719 

Kalyan 242, 243, 245, 257, 259, 265, 296, 
459 

Kalyan, Raja 183 
KalyanasvamI 582 
Kalyani 211, 459, 467 
Kalyan Mai 124 
Kamalavati 116 
Kdmdkhyd Tantra 638 
Kamalakara Bhatta 634, 636, 637 
Kamala Lectures 676 
Kamal Khan (officer under Yusuf ‘Adil 
Khan of Bijapur) 447, 448 
Kamal Khan (protege of Akbar) 114 
Kamalini-Kalahamsa 612 
Kamarupar Buranji 17 
Kamarusu Venkatapati Somayaji 595 
Kamasandesa 611 
Kambhammet 469 
Kamgar Khan 625 
Kamil Khan 231, 452, 453 
Kamran (Mirza) 13, 31, 45, 46, 53, 54, 
55, 58, 60, 61, 62, 67, 77, 78, 79, 109, 
110, 402, 524 

Kamrup 184, 202, 227, 229 
(also see Assam) 

Kamsavadha 612 
Kanakadasa 653 
Kanakagiri 248 
Kanar 46 

Kanauj 35, 36, 37, 50, 53, 55, 58, 63, 
75, 77 , 78, 102, 118, 119, 123, 324 
Kdnchi-Kaveri 17 
Kandukuri Rudra Kavi 472, 592 
Kane, P. V. 675 
Kangra 104, 183, 197, 306, 316 
Kanhoji Jedhe 254, 278 
Kankanti Paparaju 593 
Kannada, see Karnatak 
Kannada Lilavati 600 
Kanpur 15 

Kanthirava Narasardja Vijaya 599 
Kantimatl-Parinaya 612 
Kanz al-‘Ummal 616 
Kara 113, 116, 119 
Karamchand Varhshatkirtanaka- 
Kavyam 15 
Karam Devi 700 
Kara-Manikpur 50 




976 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Karanahastaki 580 
Karan Rao 226 
Karapa pass 232 
Karhad 704 

Karkala-Gommatesa Charite 597 
Karmanasa 75, 76 
Karmarkar, A. P. 676 
Karmatattva 583 

Karmavati (Queen) 327, 329, 330, 331, 
383 

Kama (Karan), (s. of Amar Singh) 

341, 342, 343, 344-345, 382, 387 
Karnal 144 

Kamatak 269, 272, 275, 299, 652 
also see Carnatic 
Karnataka music 653 
Karnavatamsa 610 
Karnisimha (r. of Bikaner) 610 
Karnul 288 
Kartarpur 313, 314 
Karttika Dasa 564 
Karunashtake 582 
Karvir Chhatrapati Gharanyachyd 
Itihdsdchi Sadhane 17 
Karwar 261 
Kashf al-Zunun 631 
Kashghar 6, 31, 38 
Kashmir 56, 62, 83, 91, 146, 147, 148, 
149, 151, 153, 157, 169, 183, 202, 215, 
218, 226, 237, 299, 312, 315, 402-408, 
411, 606, 656, 673, 685, 706, 714, 
716, 717, 718, 720, 724, 726, 727. 735 
—history of 12, 610 
Kashmir under the Sultans 410 
Kasi, see Banaras 
Ka^ikandam 585 
Kasinatha Bhatta Bhada 
(Sivanandanatha) 640 
Kasini 567 

Kasiram Das (Dev) 560 
Kasi Visesvar, temple of 265 
Katehr 140, 142 
Kathakali 604 
Kati Gang 142 
Kausarl 171 
Kautilya 601 
Kaviballabh 558 
Kavi Chandappa 594 
Kavi-Kalash 282, 288, 289, 361, 364, 
365 

Kavikahkana Chandi 675 
Kavikarnapura 613 
Kavikarna Rasdyana 597 
Kavikarna-rasayanamu 591 
Kavikaustubha 614 
Kavindracharya Sarasvati 16, 217, 

541. 610 

Kavlndra Paramananda 609 
Kavlndra Paramesvara 560 
Kavisekhara 557, 558 
Kavyaddkini 613 
Kavyalahkara Sahgraha 
(Narasabhupatiya ) 592 
Kavya Yuga-sambad 

(Satya-kali-vivad-sambad) 562 
Kaye, G. 712 


Kazor 725 
Kazzaki 182 
Keene, H. G. 90 
Keladinripa Vijayam 491, 494 
Kelwara 132 
Kena Bai 703 
Kenge Hanuma 457 
Kesava Bhatt 637 
Kesava Chaitanya 651 
Kesava-dasa (Hindi poet) 567 
Keshav Das (author of Jahangir 
Chahdrikd) 16 
Kesavdas (painter) 812, 816 
Kesav Hrideram 569 
Kesava Pandita 609, 634 
Keshab Rai, temple of 265 
Ketakdas Kshemananda 558, 646 
Khadija 429, 454, 482 
Khafi Khan 325, 326, 483, 484, 485 
Khairabad 118 
Khaji Khan 277 
Khajuha 221, 223, 238 
—battle of 301 
Khalifa 158 
Khallfatu’l-lah 135 
Khalil Beg 313, 325 
Khalil-ullah 221, 232, 286 
Khdlisa 115, 128, 153, 173, 176, 177 
Khalsa 319, 320, 323, 324, 326 
—creation of 319 
Khamsa-i-Amir Khusrau 805 
Khan ‘Alam, 

see Iskandar Khan 
Khan A £ zam 126, 127, 128, 141, 142, 
146, 161, 162, 164, 168, 240, 386 
Khan Dauran 206 

Khandesh 30, 112, 113, 118, 133, 159, 
161, 164, 165, 166, 169, 170, 181, 200, 

209, 236, 241, 245, 264, 266, 269, 281, 

282, 296, 298, 299, 413, 415, 714, 715, 

720 

—history of 610 
Khan-i-A‘zam Mirza ‘Aziz 669 
Khan-i-Khanan (genl. of Golconda) 

498, 499, 500 

Khan Jahan 131, 201, 282, 292, 439 
Khan Jahan Lodi 182, 200, 439 
Khan Kalan 122, 123, 126, 143 
Khan Khanan, see Bairam Khan 
Khan Muhammad 459 
Khanua 36, 37, 38, 41, 42, 95, 334 
—battle of 36-37, 41, 42 
Khanwah 99 
Khanzada Begam 25, 28 
Khan Zaman 100, 107. 113, 117, 118, 
119, 120, 172, 182 
Khaqani 707 
Kharda 183 
Khare, G. H. 676 
Kharif 103 
Khattaks 230, 231 
Khavas Khan (a genl. of Bijapur) 
261, 461 

Khavass Khan (a genl. of Sher Shah) 
52, 56, 74, 75, 78, 79, 82, 91, 283 
KhavaSspur Tanda 69, 70 







INDEX 


977 


Khayalat-i-Shaida 627 
Khazan Singh 326 
Khelna, see Vishalgarh 
Khem Karan (painter) 812 
Kherta 164 
Khirki 181 
Khirqatu’l ‘llm 624 
Khiva 26 

Khizr Khan 461, 496 , 

Khizr Khan (gr. of Bengal) 77, 79, 96, 
105, 106 

Khizr Khan Sur 97, 107 
Khizhr Khvaja Khan 106 
Khokhar 183, 324 
Khotan 314 
Khrishta Purana 580 
Khriu ' 725 
Khub Tarang 629 

Khuda Baksh Oriental Library, Patna 
4, 8, 12, 23, 24, 797, 811 
Khuldsat-ul-Tawarikh 13, 628, 710, 

722, 726, 738, 739 
Khuldabad 298 
Khums 85 

Khunza Humayun Sultana 426 
Khurasan 25, 27, 120, 153, 154, 155, 
157, 299, 707, 730 
Khurdha 152 
Khurd Kabul 145 
Khurja 718 

Khurram, Prince 180, 182, 186, 187, 
188, 191, 341, 342, 343. 344, 353, 382, 
386, 439, 511, 524, 814 
—rebellion against Jahangir 187, 

344 

Khushab 56, 79 
Khush-hal Khan 231, 232 
Khushwant Singh 325 
Khusrav 8, 168, 175, 178, 179, 180, 187, 
190, 194, 197, 307, 308, 340, 341, 524 
Khusrav Shah 26 
Khusrav Kukultash 34 
Khuzar 28 

Khvaja Ahmad Husain Khan 14 
Khvaja Ashraf Naqshbandl 157 
Khvaja Dlwana Sayyid Atai 14 
Khvaja ‘Isa 152 
Khvaja Jahan 119, 445 
Khvaja Jahan Deccani 420 
Khvaja Jalal-ud-dln Bujuq 108 
Khvaja Kamgar Ghairat Khan 9 
Khvaja Kilan 33, 34, 35 
Khvaja Mahmud Gavan 414 
Khvaja Mu‘azzam 63, 115, 240 
Khvaja Muhamad M‘asum 233 
Khvaja Mu‘In-ud-din Chishti 626 
Khvaja Ni‘mat-Ullah 12 
Khvaja Umar Naqshbandi 188 
Khvand Amir (Ghyat al-DIn 

Muhammad Khvand Amir) 3, 43, 
67, 621, 710, 742 
Khwaja BakI Billah 670 
Khwaja Baha’ud-din Naqshband 670 
Khwaja Baqlbillah 617 
Khwaja Habibullah Naushahrl 578 
Khwaja Mohammad Ma‘sum 672 


( Khwaja Mohammad Naqshband 672 
Khwaja Mohammad Zubair 672 
Khwaja Nizam-ud-din Auliya 
(Chishti) 668 

Khwaja ‘Ubaidullah al-Ahrar 670 
Khvaza-Nizam-ud-dln Ahmad 6, 7, 65 
Khyat 383 

Khyber Pass 26, 31, 32, 148, 150, 231, 

Kilwa 504 
Kiratpur 311, 314 
Kir at Simha (r. of Kalinjar) 82 
Kirat Singh (s. of Mirza Raja Jay 
Singh) 262 
Kish 191 
Kishm 60 

Kishtwar 148, 183, 403 
Kishujoshi 627 

Kishvar Khan (genl. of All ‘Adil 
Shah I) 427 

Kitab Asma’ al-Rljal Mishkat 
al-Masablh 616 
Kiul 73,‘741' 

Klanswitz 330 

Kofa 707 

Kohat 26, 184 

Koh-i-Nur (diamond) 35 

Kohir 469 

Kolaba 257 

Kolar 499 

Kolar mines 724, 725 

Kolhapur 243 

Koli country 269, 291 

Kondapalli 469 

Kandavidu 469, 471, 473, 497 

Kondhana, see Sinhgarh 

Konkan 257, 259, 735 

Kos 87 

Kota 719 

Kot-Kabula 80 

Kot Kachhwaha 144 

Kotputli 725 

Kotwals 79 

Kovelaconda 469 

Kriparas Kos 15 

Krishnadas Kaviraj GosvamI 16, 555, 
556, 647 

Krishnadayarnava 583, 584 
Krishna Deva (Raya) Raja (emperor 
of Vijayanagar) 448, 469, 486, 588, 
589, 590, 591, 594, 598, 615 
Krishnadhvarin (Sanskrit poet) 

608 

Krishnadhvari (Telugu poet) 595 
Krishna Ganaka 15 
Krishnagita 605, 611 
Krishnaji (boy King of Javli) 279 
Krishnaji Anant Sabhasad 17, 254, 

267, 275, 278 
Krishna-mangala 558 
Krishnananda Agamavaglsa 639, 640 
Krishnappa Nayaka (r. of Gingee)641 
Krshnappattu 602 
Krishnardya Vijayamu 594 
Krishndsraya 647 
Krishnattam 605 


M.E.— 62 









978 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Krishna Sarma 599 
Krishna Savant 296 
Krittivasa 560, 561 
Krohs 99 
Kshemendra 600 
Kshetra Ganita 600 
Kuch Hajo 227 
Kudal 257 
Kulab 60 

Kularnava tantra 638 
Kulbarga, see Gulburga 
Kul-i-Malik 28 
Kulliyats 13, 14 
Kulshrestha, S. S. 737, 739 
Kumaon 725 
Kumaon hills 91 
Kumaradeva 641 
Kumara Dhurjati 594 
Kumara Guruparar 586 
Kumarananta 594 
Kumar Tatacharya 612 
Kumara Valmiki 598 
Kumbhalgarh 131, 132, 338 
Kumbhalmer 331, 334 
Kumbha Mela 655 
Kumbhan-dasa 647 
Kumbha, Rana 334, 336 
Kumudvatl Par may a 594 
Kupa 82 
Kurnool 473 
Kutban 566, 567 
Kutiana 708 
Kuvalayananda 613 
Kuvalaydsva Charitra 597 

La Bourdonnais 516 
Ladakh, see Little Tibet 
Ladll Begam 186 
Lad Malka 71 
Lahara 313 
Lahari Bandar 730 

Lahore 30, 32, 33, 46, 50, 54, 56, 62, 
63, 78, 79, 80, 87, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 
96, 98, 104, 106, 107, 119, 143, 144, 
151, 152, 153, 159, 179, 188, 189, 197, 

216, 220, 221, 223, 224, 299, 309, 316, 

319, 324, 341, 684, 685, 705, 706, 714, 

715, 716, 718, 719, 720, 722, 723, 733, 

734, 735, 759, 760, 770, 783, 784, 801 

—monuments of 784 
—museum 806 
Laila Majnun 622 
Lake Pushkar, battle of 349 
Lakhau 228 

Lakhnau 37, 46, 118, 157, 172 
Lakhnau University Library 14 
Lakhnawatl 80 
Lakshanaratnuvali 613 
Lakshmldhara 633, 636 
Lakshml Narayan 184 
Lakshmi Narayan Shafiq 628 
Lakshmisa 597, 598, 599 
Lad 812 
Laid as 654 


Lai Kavi (alias Gorelal Purohit) 

16, 568 

Lai Khan 217 

Laila Didi (Lai Ded) 577 

Lama(s) 134 

Lam‘at al-Tanqih ‘ala Mishkat 
al-Masabih 616 
Lamghan 43 
Lammet 730 
Lancaster, Captain 510 
Land Revenue Administration under 
the Mughals 737 

Lane-Poole, Stanley 18, 44, 64, 172 
Langar 656 

Langhorne, Sir William 516 
Languages and Literatures of 
Mo , dem India 630 
Latifa-i-Fayyddi 622 
Latif, Dr. Sayyid Abdulla 712 
Lataif-ul-Akbhar 12 
Laur Chanda 806 
Lavanyasamay 572 
Leedes, William 160 
Leningrad 815 
Letter books 

see under Mughul period, literary 
sources 

Levant Company 160, 511, 518 
Life and Teachings of Tukdram, The 
676 

Life and Times of Humayun 102, 409 
LUatilakam 601, 602 
Lilavatl 707 

Linganamakhi Kamesvara Kavi 596 
Linguistic Survey of India 677 
Lisbon 731 

Literary sources of Mughul history 
2-17 

Little Tibet 202, 226, 403 
Lochan Das 17, 556, 557 
Locke, J. C. 174 
Lodi(s) 12, 29, 30, 35, 39, 70 
—history of 12 

Lohgarh fort (near Amritsar) 310 

Lohani chiefs 72 

Lokanatha Vidyadhara 564 

Lohar Chak 147, 406 

Lolimbaraja 580 

Lonar 725, 726 

London 125 

Lon Karan, Rai 132 

Lowe, W. H. 23, 710 

Luard, C. E. 21, 710 

Lubbut-Tawdrikh 13, 216, 628 

Lucas, Sir Gervase 513 

Ludhiana 63, 95, 111 

Ludi Khan 129, 130 

Lukhji Jadhava 247 

Maasir-i-Alamgiri 10 
Maasir-i-Jahangiri 9, 10 
Maasir-i-Rahiml 12, 439, 482 
M aasir-ul-Umrd 12, 173 
Ma’athir Jahangiri 625 
Mabda wa Ma e dd 15 




INDEX 


979 


Macauliffe 173, 308, 324, 325, 660, 677, 
710, 711 

M’Gregor 325, 326 

Machlwara 63, 95, 104, 105, 106, 111, 
321 

—battle of 63 
Maclagan, Sir Edward 324 
Macnicol 676 

Ma e dan-i-akbhar-i-Ahmadi 172 
Madana Mdhinl Kathe 600 
Madanna, (alias Surya Prakash Rao), 
Minister 270, 286, 477, 478 
Madar, Shah of Mahanpur 15 
Madayagari Mallana 590 
Madhavacharya (of Bengal) 558 
Madhavadeva 563, 635, 642, 643, 644 
Madhava Deva (Arhaddasa) 600 
Madhava Kandali 560 
Madho Das Bairagi, see Banda 
Bahadur 

Madho Ram 628 
Madhu 812 

Madhukar Shah (Bundela) 376 

Madhu-malatl 567 

Madhuravani 607, 703 

Madhu Singh 147 

Madhusudana 564 

Madhusudana Misra 627 

Madhusudana Sarasvati 615 

Madhvacharya (of Udipi) 606, 608, 652 

Madhva sect 652 

Madhya Pradesh 116, 721, 724 

Madina 616 

Madras 515, 516, 517, 520, 521, 737 
—development of 516, 520, 521 
Madrasa(s) 69 
Madrasah Faiz Safa 708 
Madura 490, 595, 596, 692, 705 
—Nayaks of 270, 272, 595, 597 
Madurakkalambakam 586 
Magan Thakur 561, 652 
Magellan route 510, 511 
Magh Raja 222 
Mag rulers 561 
Mahabaleshwar 257 
Mahabat Khan 180, 187, 188, 198, 200, 
208, 232, 266, 341, 386, 443 
Mahdbhdrata ( Sanskrit ) 560, 580, 

583, 594, 597, 598, 599, 608, 627, 649 
Mahabharatam ( Malayali ) 602, 603 

Mahad 243 

Mahad aj ipanta Kulkami 581 
Mahadaji Sindhia 276 
Mahadeva 612 
Mahadeva Yadava 633 
Mahadevpura 460 
Mahakam Singh 355 
Maha-Kavi-Rai, 
see Jagannath 
MahalingadaSa 580 
Mahalingam, T. V. 710, 711 
Maham Anaga 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 
114, 528, 705 
Mahanahda 627 
Mahapadma Nanda 637 


Mahdpurana 806, 807 
Mahapurushias 643 

Maharaja Sawai Man Singh II Museum, 
Jaipur 810, 815, 811, 818 
Maharashtra 244, 245, 265, 267, 271, 
272, 281, 294, 296, 578, 579, 650, 651 
—after Shivaji 359-71 
Maharashtra-Purdna 362 
Maharatha Chero 54, 76 
Mah Chuchak Begam 143 
Mahdawi movement 666 
sect 420 430 

Mahdl Khvaja 34, 36, 39, 65, 524, 528 
Mahes (painter) 812 
Mahesa (Sanskrit scholar) 627 
Mahesh Thakur 15 
Mahldhara 639 
Mahilamriduvani 708 
Mahishamangalam Nambudiri 604 
Mahitariyal 654 
Mahmud, see Mahmud III 
Mahmud (Urdu poet) 472 
Mahmud II (Sultan of Malwa) 391 
Mahmud III (Sultan of Gujarat) 80, 
398, 399, 400, 401, 410 
—administration of 400 
Mahmudabad 49, 50 
Mahmud Gavan 428, 445, 709 
Mahmud Khan (s. of Sikandar Lodi) 
44 

Mahmud Khan Lohani 35 
Mahmud Shah (Bahmanl Sultan) 

412, 446, 447, 448, 464 
Mahmud Shah (Sultan of Bengal) 73, 
74, 95 

—enters into treaty with Sher Shah 
73 

Mahoba 116, 199 
Maholi 332 
Mahram Beg 402 
Mahram, Shah Quli 96, 106 
Mahull 242, 243, 459 
Mahur 464 

Mahwi HamadanI 622 
Mahzar 135, 136 
Maimu Khan 316 
Mainpuri 66 
Maitra Rathors 349 
Maj-Mafal Bahrain 14, 626 
Majma e Bahar-al-Anwar 619 
Majnun Khan Qaqshal 118, 119, 124 
Majumdar, A. K. 410, 711 
Majumdar, Bimanbehari 676 
Majumdar, R. C. 710, 711 
Makalma Baba Lai Wa Dctrd Shukoh 
15 

Makhanlal 627 
Makhdum ‘Alam 245 
Makhdum al-Mulk ‘Abdullah 
Sultanpuri 616, 669 
Makhduma-u-Jahan 703 
Makhdum-ul-Mulk 134, 616, 667 
Makhiz-i-Tawarikh-i-Sikhan 326 
Makhzam 69, 85, 102 
Makhzan al-Asrar 622 
Makhzan-i-Afghani 12, 66, 102 






980 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Makran 153, 191 

Makris 403, 404 

Maktubat 1 

Maktubdt-i-Allarm 6 

Maktubat-i-Hazrat ‘Abdul-Haqq 7 

Maktubat-i-Imam Rabbanl 15 

Maktul Husain 562 

Malabar coast 261, 502, 503, 505, 507, 
508, 720, 731 

Malacca 503, 505, 506, 507, 508, 509, 
518, 519, 715, 723, 730 
Malakhand Pass 149, 150 
Malayalam 

—Manipravalam school 601, 602, 

603, 604 

—Pattu school 601 
Malay Peninsula 505, 510, 518 
Malcolm, John 661 
Malda 222 

Maldev, Raja (Rathor) 57, 58, 81, 82, 
110, 124, 131, 172, 332 
Maldives 505 
Malfuzat 2, 14 
Malfuzat-i-Shah Kalimullah 
Akbardbddi 15 
Mallgarh 165 

Malik Ahmad Nizam-ul-Mulk 412, 

415 41 6 445 44fi 

Malik ‘Ambar 166, 181, 182, 187, 207, 
209, 247, 248, 251, 413, 414, 435-44, 
455, 468, 474, 482, 483 
—an estimate of 435-44 
—his land revenue system 444 
Malika Zaman 472 
Malik Hasan Bahri 415 
Malik Ibrahim 592 
Malik JIvan 223 
Malik Khusnud 629 
Malik Ma‘sud 185 
Malik Muhammad Jayasi 567, 709 
Malik Qummi 624 
Malik San! 144 
Malkhed 286, 295 
Mallarasa 598 
Malli Ananta 594 
Mallikarjuna 599 
Mallu ‘Adil Khan 449, 480 
Mallu Khan (gr.) 50 

Maloji 247, 278 

Malwa 30, 37, 39, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 53, 
58, 64, 80, 84, 92, 107, 112, 113, 114, 
115, 116, 117, 118, 120, 121, 122, 123, 

125,. 127, 161, 162, 164, 172, 187, 200, 

201, 209, 236, 264, 279, 281, 292, 293, 

294, 299, 328, 329, 330, 714, 715, 718, 

719, 720, 723, 803, 819 
Mamun ‘Abbasid Caliph 138 
Manache Sloka 582 
Manameyodaya 614 
Manaqib-ul-Akhydr 14 
Mandqib-ul-Hazardt 15 
Mandr al-Anwar 618 
Manasd-mangala 558, 646 
Manaveda, Zamorin king 611 
Man Bai 175 


Mandal 341 

Mandalgarh 131, 133, 339 
Mandasor 47, 50, 329 
Mandelslo, Albert 709, 710, 711 
Mandrawar 27 
Mandrel 47 

Mandu 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 64, 80, 
113, 117, 118, 120, 122, 161, 182, 200, 
208, 803, 804, 805 
Mangal Chandir Gita 16 
Mangalvide 284, 462 
Mangarasa 597, 600 
Manik Datta 559 
Manikpur 118, 119 
Manikram 559 
Manjhan 567 

Mankot 64, 93, 95, 96, 103, 107, 134 
Mannarudeva 595 
Manohar 813, 814, 815 
Manrique, Fr. Sebastian 689, 797 
Mans 72 

Mansab 129, 178, 185, 203, 241 
Mansabdari 217 
Mansab dars 194, 213, 244 
Man* Singh, Raja 113, 123, 126, 131, 
132, 133, 144, 145, 147, 149, 150, 151, 

152, 166, 168, 182, 183, 194, 332, 335, 

336, 337, 348, 340, 381, 385, 406, 438, 

439 

Man Singh, Tomara chief 753 
—palace of 741, 753-54, 759 
Mansur 814, 815, 816 
Mansur-al-Hallaj 135 
Mantra-mahodadhi 639 
Manucci, N. V. 214, 261, 291, 297, 304, 

364, 390, 552, 553, 554, 656, 676, 683, 

693, 695, 709, 710, 711, 712, 729, 738 

Manu Charitra 589, 590 
Manu, Institutes of 544, 662 
Manusamhita 637 

Maratha(s) 211, 212, 213, 239, 268, 293,. 
294, 295, 316, 322, 536 
—civil war between Santa and 
Dhanaji 295-96 
Mardtib al-Arba ( ah 618 
Mardana 664 
Margaret, Macricol 712 
Mariam Makani 5 
Marichiparinayam 703 
M‘arif-i-Laduniya 15 
Mdrkandeya Puvana 589, 600 
Markaz-i-Adwar 622 
Marshall, D. N. 24 
Marshall, Sir John 18, 703, 712 
Ma £ ruf Farmuli 35, 37, 38 
Marv 38 
Marvi Gond 203 

Marwar 57, 81, 82, 110, 238, 239, 240„. 
241, 283, 290, 332, 346-48, 356, 358 ; . 
716 

Masak 76 
Maands 311, 323 
Mashhad-i-Anwdr 622 
Masir-i-Alamgiri 484, 485, 711, 712 
Ma‘sir-i-Rahimi 482, 483, 712 




INDEX 


981 


Maasir-ul-Umard 386, 390, 483, 711 
Masnavls 40 

Master, Streynsham 516, 521 
Mastung 58, 59 
Mas‘ud Husain Mirza 120, 127 
Masulipatam 473, 512, 514, 685, 718, 
719, 724, 728, 731, 736 
M‘asum Khan FarankhudI 141 
M‘asum Khan Kabuli 141, 142, 143, 
144, 145 

Ma thabata bi’l-Sunnah fl Ay yam 
al-Sanah 616 

Ma’athiri Rahiml 623, 631 
Ma‘dthirul Umar a 678 
Mathnavi-i-Alamgxri 627 
Mathnavi-i-Mubin 620 
Mathnavis 13, 14 

Mathura 13, 216, 235, 236, 264, 265, 
279, 692, 704 

Mathura, a District Memoir 18 
Mathurapur 228 
Matli Chiefs of Chittiveli 499 
Mau 107 

Maulana Azad 672 
Maulana Daud 566, 803 
Maulana Jalali 621 
Maulana Mir Kalan Harvi 175 
Maulavi Abalswala Muhammad 
Zakriya 709, 712 
Maulavi Husain 157 
Mau Nurpur 199 
Mavals 250, 251 
M aw a’iza-i-Jahangir 625 
Mawdrid al-Kalam Wa silk Durar 
al-Hikam 617 
Mazumdar, B. P. 711 
Mecca 6, 62, 67, 108, 110, 126, 134, 136 
139, 140, 142, 156, 158, 159, 170, 172. 
212, 225, 260, 519, 615, 657, 707, 719 
Medhi Singh 203 
Medieval India Quarterly 19 
Medieval Mystics of North India, The 
676 

Medina 126, 136, 158, 707 
Medini Rai 37, 329 
Melioransky, P. M. 3 
Mehta, N. C. 19 

Memoirs of Babur (Tr.) 43, 324, 383, 

737, 741 

Memoirs of Bdyazid Biat 3 
Memoirs of the Asiatic Society of 
Bengal 20, 174 

Memoirs of the Races of the North 
Western Provinces of India 103, 
390 

Memoirs on the History, Folk-lore and 
Distribution of the Races of 
N.W.F.P. 554 
Merpur 341 

Merta 81, 114, 121, 126, 128, 291 
Merusvami 582 
Mesopotamia 719 

Metpattur Narayana Bhattatiri 604 
Mewar 10, 30, 82, 114, 121, 122, 131, 
132, 133, 166, 168, 180, 181, 182, 197, 
239, 240, 241, 327-54, 356, 819 


Mewar and the Mughul Emperors 383 
Mewar and the Mughuls 348-54 
Mewat 35, 36, 37, 91, 97, 236, 290, 332 
Mian Hansi 461 
Mian Hasan 70 

Mian Hasan Sur (f. of Sher Shah) 68, 
69, 70 

Mian Mir 673 

Mian Nusrali 461 

Middleton, Sir Henry 21, 508, 511 

Midnapur 130 

Mihr ‘Ali 133 

Mihr-un-nisa 185, 196 

Mihtar Khan 124 

Mildenhall, John 20, 160, 512 

Military History of India 44, 102 

Millat 192, 217 

Milwat 33 

Mint Towns of the Mughul Emperors 
of India, The 19 
Minuchihr Beg 155 
Mira Bai 566, 569, 570, 630, 702 
Mir ‘Abdul-Latif Qazvini 110, 114 
Mir Abu Baqa, Saint 39 
Mir Abu Talib Turbati 2 
Mir Abu Turab Vali 11 
Mirak Mirza Ghiyas 750 
Mir ‘Ali Khalifa 34, 36, 39, 65 
Miranbai, see Mira Bai 
Miran Hashimi 629 
Miran Husain, see Husain Nizam 
Shah II 

Miran Muhammad Shah of Khandesh 
398, 427 

Miran Sadr Jahan 178 
Miran Shah 120 
Mir’at al-Sifat 622 

Mirdt-i-Ahmadi 11, 544, 553, 554, 712 
Mirdt-i-Armadi 10 
Mirat-i-J ahan-Numa 13 
Mirdt-i-Maddri 15 
MIrdt-i-Sikandari 11, 65, 408 
Mirdt-ul-Alam 13, 627 
Mirdt-ul-Asrar 15 
Mxr Bahri 176 
Mir Faqr ‘Ali 53 

Mir Ghayath al-Din Mansur 616 
Mirj an Marsiya 461 
Mir Jumla alias Muhammad Sayyid 
10, 12, 210, 211, 222, 227, 228, 229. 
458, 459, 475, 476, 477, 498, 499, 500, 
515, 517, 520 
Mir Khalifa 524 
Mir Lutf-ullah Shirazi 227 
Mir Mohammad, see Mian Mir 
Mir Muhammad Bakshi 53 
Mir Muhammad Husain Sharqi 625 
Mir Muhammad Ibrahim 286, 478 
Mir Muhammad Ma‘sum 10, 153 
Mir Muhammad Zahid 618 
Mir Mu‘izz-ul-Mulk 118 
Mir Quraish 157, 158 
Mir Rada Danish Mashhadi 625 
Mir Rafi-din 414 
Mir Sadr al-Din 616 
Mir Sadr Jahan 168 



982 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Mir Sayyid ‘All 807, 808, 812 

Mir Sayyid Jalal 707 

Mir Sharif 134 

Mir WaisI 621 

Mirza ‘Abdul Qadir Bldil 626, 627 
Mirza ‘Abdur-Rahim 111, 151, 153, 179 
Mirza ‘Ala-ud-daulah Qazvini 8 
Mirza ‘Ali Barid 468 
Mirza ‘All Beg 155 
Mirza Askarl 38, 45, 46, 47, 49, 50, 51, 
54, 55, 58, 59, 60, 61, 396 
Mirza Aziz Koka (Kuka), Khan A’zam 
123, 180, 341, 678 
Mirza Barkhwardar Turkman 3 
Mirza Fuladi 157 
Mirza Ghiyas Beg 184, 185 
Mirza Haidar 28, 54, 55, 56, 61, 62, 77, 
118, 146, 402, 403, 404, 410 
—his orthodoxy 404 
Mirza Hakim 117, 119, 120, 141, 143, 
144, 145, 148, 151 
Mirza Ibrahim 156 
Mirza Jan Mir 616 
Mirza Khan 146, 338 
Mirza Muhammad ‘All Sa’ib 
(Musta‘id Khan) 625 
Mirza Muhammad Amin 474 
Mirza Muhammad Kazim 10 
Mirza Muhammad Sadiq Isfahan! 13 
Mirza, Muhammad Zaman 409 
Mirza Mukim 405 
Mirza Nur ud-dln 53, 144 
MIrzapur 102 
Mirza Qara Bahadur 145 
Mirza RafI 11 

Mirza Raja Jaya Singh 243, 244, 261, 
262, 263, 264, 265, 279, 292, 379 
Mirzas 121, 122, 126, 127, 128 
Mirza) Shah Rukh 6, 145, 147, 156, 157, 
162, 411 

Mirza Sharaf-ud-dln Husain 109, 114 
Mirza Sikandar 402 
Mirzas of Broach 401 
Mirza Tahir 147 

Mirza Yusuf Khan 119, 147, 148, 153 

Mishkin 812 

Mithankot 79 

Mithila 704, 705, 706, 709 

Mitradatta 611 

Mirtamisra 610, 634 

Mitra, Rajendralal 676 

Mitravindd Gdvinda 599 

Mittal, Prabhudayal 676 

Miyana Afghans 116 

Miyan Manjhu 162, 163, 431, 432, 433 

Miyan Mir 626 

Moa (Maya) Maria sect 644 

Mocha 225, 729 

Modern Vernacular Literature of India, 
The 632 
Modi, J. J 13 

Moghul Architecture of Fatehpur Sikri, 
The 18 

Moghul Colour Decoration of Agra 18 
Moghul Poetry: its Cultural and 
Historical Value 631 


Mogul Copper Coins 19 
Mohammad Yasin 246, 304 
Mohammadan Dynasties , The 172 
Mohammed and Islam 173 
Mohanangi 703 

Mohite, Hambir Rao 268, 272, 359 
Mohite, Shambhuji 242, 255 
Mohta Nainsi 16 

Mo(u)hsin Fani 13, 308, 309, 311, 313, 
314, 325, 638, 649, 653, 661, 677 
Moluccas 506, 508, 510, 511, 518, 728 
Mombasa 503 

Momin Muhyluddin, (Dr.) 631 

Mommsen 116 
Monghyr 130, 141, 220, 222 
Mongol(s) 26, 27, 29, 34, 40, 43, 324 
Mongolicae Legationis Commentarius 
20, 174 

Moors of Africa 502 
Moplah(s) 503 

Monserrate, Fr. Anthony, S. J. 20, 137, 
140, 144, 169, 170, 174, 552, 679, 709, 
710, 712, 733, 734, 760 
Mookerji, Dr. Radha Kamal 712, 730, 
736, 740 
Morar 819 

More, Hanumant Rao 256, 279 
More, Krishnail 256 
Moreland, W. H. 21, 172, 710, 717, 722, 
730, 737, 738, 739, 740 
More, Pratap Rao 256 
More Ydnchi bakhar 17 
More, Yasvant Rao 256 
Mosque of Wazir Khan, Lahore 18 
Mossel Bay 502 
Moti Chand 19 
Mount Abu 82 
Mount Lebanon 134 
Mozambique 503, 504, 507 
Mrigdvati 566 
Mrityuhjaya 580 

Mu‘azzam (Prince) 264, 265, 316, 322, 
350 

Mu‘azzin 64 

Mubarak Khan 32, 111, 113 
Mubarak Shah 118, 161 
Mubariz Khan, see Muhammad ‘Adil 
Shah Sur 
Mubayyin 40 
Mubid(s) 134 
Muddaraju Ramana 594 
Mudgal 420, 445, 446, 449, 467 
MudgalakhydTia 583 
Mughul Cui'rency System, The 19 
Mughul period 

—administration 103, 226, 227, 544, 
553, 554, 738. Also see under 
respective rulers. 

—administration of justice 527 
—administrative organization 522-30 
—Architecture 

—Akbari 748, 752-60, 769 84, 

793-99 

—beginnings 741-52 
—Bengali 782-83 

—decay and disintegration 799-802 




INDEX 


983 


—development and culmination of 
772-99 

—foundation of 752-71 
—Gujarat Muslim architecture 
752 

—ilndo-Muslim 741 
—Khaljl 741 
—Lodi 744, 751, 762 
—Malwa Muslim architecture 752 
—Mughul 741-802 
—Sayyld 744 
—Timurid 749 
—army, the 534-36 
—centres of learning 704 
—classification of villages 713 
—council of ministers 524, 528-30 
—despotism and limited monarchy 
523 

—economic condition 713-737 
—abundance and prosperity 733 
34 

—agricultural and other products 
—fibres (cotton, wool and silk) 
715-18 

—forest produce 720-22 
—gum lac 723 
—indigo 718-19 
—minerals 724-25 
—misc. products 723 
—paper 723 
—poppy 719-20 
—saffron 726 
—salt 725-26 
—saltpetre 726 
—spices 727 
—sugarcane 719 
—tobacco 728-29 
—vegetables and fruit 720 
—Emperor, the 3, 524-27, 545 
—encouragement to agriculture 533 
—exactions 531, 534 
—famines 734-37 
—high officers 528-30 
—Hindu Panchayats 523, 545, 549-50 
—history, literary sources of 
—Arabic 2 
—Assamese 16 
—Bengali 16 
—Gujarati 16 
—Hindi 16 
—Marathi 17 
—Oriya 16 
—Persian 2 
—Sanskrit 17 
—Turki 2 
—Other sources 

—accounts of foreign visitors 20 
—archaeological 17 
—chronicles 2 
—Diwans 13 
—Farmans 13 
—Kulliyats 13 
—Letter books 13 
—Malfuzats 14 
—Mathanvis 13 


—Memoirs 2, 382 
—News letters 10 
—numismatic 18, 19 
—imperialism and Muslim 
resistance to, in the north 391-411 
—in the South 412-85 
—imports and exports 729-31 
—industrial specialisation 731-33 
—irrigation 713-14 
—labour supply 731-32 
—Law and legal institutions 537-52 
—administration of justice 552 
—Chief Qazi, the 547-49 
—common law for all 540-41 
—criminal law and punishment 
542-44 

—defects in the organisation 

550- 51 

—judicial organization 545 
—legal changes under Jahangir 
and Shah Jahan 541 
—mode of conducting investigations 

551- 52 

—Muslim Law, Character and 
sources 537-38 
—Muslim personal law 540 
—and non-Muslims 538-40 
—Muslims and non-Muslims 
538-39 

—Panchayats 549-50 
—Personal law of the Hindus 540 
—Royal Court, the 545-47 
—procedure at 525 
—Secular Courts, the 549 
—Libraries 708 09 
—Literary achievement 14 
—Literature 555-630 
—Arabic 615-20 
—Assamese 562-63 
—Bengali 555-62 
—Gujarati 569-72 
—Hindi 564-69 
—Jain writers 571-72 
—Kannada 597-600 
—Kasmlrl 577-78 
—Malayalam 600-06, 630 
—Marathi 578-84 
—Muslim writers 561-62 
—on Bhakti movement 16 
—Oriya 564 
—Persian 620-28 
—poetry 621 
—Proto-Urdu 628-30 
—Punjabi 572-77 
—religious 1, 2 
—Sahajlya 558 
—Sanskrit 606-613 
—Tamil 584-88 
—Telugu 588-97 

—technical and scientific 613-615 
—translations 560-61 
—Vaishnava literature 555-60 
—Painting 12, 19 
—Deccanese painting 820-21 
—early Mughul paintings 807-12 
—illustrated manuscripts 803 806 



984 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


—impact of European art on 816 
—Jahangiri albums 813 
—Laur Chan^-Chaura Panchasika 
group 806 

—miniature painting 803-06 
—Mughul school of 12, 19, 569, 
769, 772 

—new tradition under Jahagir 
812-17 

—period of decadence 817-19 
—period of transition 806-07 
—portrait painting 813 
—pre- Mughul period 803-06 
—Rajasthani painting 807- 819 
—Regional centres 819-21 
—patronage to Sanskrit learning 174 
—peerage 12 

—persecution of the Hindus 305-07 
—political theory 522-30 
—Religion 

—Hindu religion 633-655 

—Bhakti movement 16, 17, 562, 
656, 568, 570 

—in western India 650-52 
—contending religious forces in 
Eastern India 642-47 
—general review 633-34 
—liberal trends in Hinduism 
635-54 

—religious movement in 
Southern India 652-53 
—religious rights of the Sudras 
634-38 

—£aivas, the 641-42 
—Tantrik (6akti) cult 638-41, 
642, 645, 647, 652 
—Vaishnavism in Northern India 
647-49 

—Islam 665-74 
—Sikh religion, the 655-65 

—Nanak, a reformer and not a 
revolutionary 660-65 
—Nanak’s journeys 656-57 
—Nanak’s religion 657-59 
—difference from other reform 
movements 659-62 
—Sikhism, expansion of 662-65 
—religious policy 523 
—restrictions on the Hindus 305-06 
—social condition 14 
—customs and ceremonies 692 95 
—diet 681-82 
—dress 679-80 
—education 703-708, 709 
—fairs and festivals 686-90 
—houses and furniture 684-86 
—intoxicants 683-84 
—kitchen and utensils 682-83 
—ornaments 681 
—position of women 698-703 
—postal system 698 
—social etiquettes and manners 
695-96 

—sports, games and pastimes 
690-92 

—toilets 680-81 


—travelling and conveyance 
696-98 

—women’s education 707-07 
—sources of revenue 531-34 
—taxation 531-34 

Mughuls and the Jogis of Jakhbar, 

The 13 

Muhammad ‘Adil Shah (r. of Bijapur) 
211, 242, 253, 254, 258, 270, 275, 414, 
456-59, 480, 498 
—an estimate of 458-59 
—treaty with Shah Jahan 456 
Muhammad ‘Adil Shah Sur 

(alias Mubariz Khan) 92, 93, 94- 
97, 98, 104, 105, 107 
—death of 97 
Muhammad ‘All Jang 34 
Muhammad ‘All Karbala’i 620 
Muhammad Amin 8, 476 
Muhammad Amin Badakhshi 15 
Muhammad Amin Khan (gr. of 
Afghanistan) 231 
Muhammad Amin Qazvini, 
alias Aminai Qazvini 9 
Muhammad Amir Khan 350 
Muhammad A‘zam 241, 350, 357 
Muhammad Baqa Saharanpuri 15 
Muhammad bin Qasim 538 
Muhammad bin Tughluq 324 
Muhammad Ghaus, tomb of 751-52 
Muhammad Ghausi Shattarl 14 
Muhammad Badi 8, 625 
Muhammad Hadi Qamwar Khan 12 
Muhammad Haidar Dughlat Mirza 3 
Muhammad Hakim 141, 142, 143, 144 
Muhammad Hashim Khafi Khan 10, 
627 

Muhammad HuSain Mirza 127, 128 
Muhammad Husain Rasmi 625 
Muhammad Husain Tabrezi 624 
Muhammad Ishaq 631 
Muhammad Jayasi 694 
Muhammad Kazim Mirza 10, 627 
Muhammad Khan (of Chaund) 70, 71, 
99 

Muhammad Khan (poet) 562 
Muhammad Khan (prime minister of 
Ahmadnagar 433, 434 
Muhammad Khan (gr. of 
Bangala) 92, 98, 99 
Muhammad Khudaband 473 
Muhammad Nadir Samarqandi 818 
819 

Muhammad Qasim 14, 147 
Muhammad Quli Khan Barlas 120 
Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah 415, 432, 
433, 454, 472-74, 624, 629 
—an estimate of 474 
Muhammad Qutb Shah 474-75 
Muhammad Sadiq Isfahani Mirza 13, 
626, 632 

Muhammad Sadiq Kashmiri HamadanI 

14 

Muhammad Sadiq Khan 9 
Muhammad Saifuddin 233 







INDEX 


985 


Muhammad Salih 115, 325, 791, 792 
Muhammad Salih Kambu 3, 9, 115 
Muhammad SaqI Musta‘id Khan 10 
Muhammad Shah I (r. of Kashmir) 

402, 410 

Muhammad Shah I (of Khandesh) 

391, 394, 464 

Muhammad Shah III (Bahamani ruler) 
466, 468 

Muhammad Sultan (Prince) 210, 221, 
222, 476, 477 
—imprisonment of 222 
Muhammad Sultan MIrza 34, 36, 45, 

46, 50, 120 

Muhammad Tahir Ashna, 
see Inayat Khan 
Muhammad Waris 9, 626 
Muhammad Yusuf Ataki 13 
Muhammad Zaman MIrza 45, 46, 47, 
50, 51, 395, 398 
Muhammadabad 119 
Muhammad-nama 11 
Muhazzib al-DIn Damamlnl 620 
Muhibb ‘All Khan 141 
~ Muhibb ‘All SindhI 218 
Muhibbullah Bihar! 618 
Muhibullah IllahabadI 618 
Muhio-ud-dln ‘Abu-ud-Qadir 8 
Muhkam Singh 291 
Muhyl al-DIn ‘Abdul Qadar Aydurs 
619 

Mu‘id Khan, (Dr.) M.A. 631 
Mu‘in-ud-dln Chishti 14, 113, 133 
Muizz-ul-Mulk ( bakshi ) 341 
Mujaddid 15 

Mujaddid Ahmad Sirhindl 233 
Mujaddid Alf-i-SanI, alias Shaikh 
Ahmad of Sirhind 15, 212 
Mujtahid(s) 135, 136 
Mukammal Khan 416 
Mukhlis Khan 313 
Muktacharita 612 
Muktesvara 583, 584 
Mukunda Dev 118 
Mukundaram Chakravarti (Kavi- 

Kankana ) 16, 559, 640, 641, 646, 
682, 700, 705, 708 
Muktsar 321, 326 

Mulla ‘Abdul-BaqI Nahavandl 12, 622 
Mulla ‘Abdul Hakim SlalkutI 617 
Mulla ‘Abdul Qadir Badauni 4, 6, 67, 
97, 98, 99, 103, 108, 112, 113, 132, 
134, 135, 136, 138, 139, 144, 170, 172, 
173, 334, 337, 382, 385, 411, 525, 
553, 554, 622, 623, 627, 678, 690, 704, 
705, 707, 710, 711, 712, 734, 808 
Mulla Ahmad Thattawi 623 
Mulla Haider 276 
Mullah Shah 14 
Mulla ‘Ishql 147, 406 
Mulla Jami 707 
Mulla Jlwan 618 
Mulla Khiyall 472 
Mulla Mahmud Jaunpurl 617 
Mulla Muhammad A‘zaml 12 
Mulla Muhammad Lari 442 


Mulla Muhammad Qasim Hindu Shah 
7 

Mulla Munir 707 
Mulla Murshid 30 
Mulla Muhammad Yazdl 141, 192 
Mulla Shah of Badakshan 672, 673 
Mulla Shah Badakshi 706, 707 
Mulla Shaklbl 622 
Mulla Shihab 620 
Mulla Shukra-Ullah ( alias Afzal 
Khan) 342 
Mulla WajhI 629 
Mulla Zuhurl 624 

Multan 30, 43, 46, 56, 78, 80, 87, 107 r 
151, 152, 221, 299, 324, 372, 704, 705, 
714, 715, 718, 719, 720, 725, 726, 735 
Muluk Shah 6 

Mumtaz Mahal 186, 702, 788, 793 
Mundiyas, see Satnamis 
Mundy, Peter 705 
Muner 52, 74, 75, 76 
Mungir 53, 54, 73, 75 
Mun‘im Beg 58 

Mun'im Khan 4, 108, 111, 113, 114, 118, 
120, 129, 130, 131, 142, 143, 172, 528 
Muni Punyavijayaji Collection, 
Ahmadabad 804 
Munir Lahurl 625 
Munis al-Arwah 14, 626, 702 
Munivamsdbhyudaya 599 
Munshi Hiraman Lai 628 
Munshi, K. M. 630 
Munshi Sujan Rai 628 
Munsif 79, 84, 86 
Munsif-i-Munsifan 79, 84 
Muntakhab-ul-Lubab 10, 325, 628, 710' 
Muntakhab-ut-Tawarikh 6, 8, 13, 67, 
103, 173, 553, 621, 623 
Muqarrab Khan 165, 174, 189, 288 
Muqim Beg, the Arghun 26, 43 
Muqim MIrza 31, 146 
Murad, Prince 5, 125, 137, 145, 164, 

214, 215, 220, 221, 432, 433, 434, 811 
—beheading of 223 
Murad, Sultan 162, 163, 205, 206, 216, 
226 

Murahari Rao 471 
Murar Baji 262 
Murarivijaya 612 

Murshid Qull Khan 209, 210, 373, 517 
Murtaza Khan 183, 192, 309 
Murtaza Nizam Shah I 161, 162, 426, 
427, 428, 465 

Murtaza Shah II Nizam-ul-Mulk 166, 
181, 200, 436, 440, 441, 444, 455, 480 
Musahib Beg 108, 109 
Musallam al-Thubut 618 
Museum of Eastern Cultures, Moscow 
812 

Museum of Industrial Art, Vienna 
808 

Mush-wa-Gorbeh, 818 
Muslim Civilization in India 631, 632 
Muslim domination, Hindu resistance to 
327-90 

Muslim Institutions 553 







986 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Muslim law 522, 537, 673, 674 
also see under Mughul period, 
law and legal institutions 
Murshidabad 222 
Muslim invasion on India 324 
Muslim resistance to Mughul imperial¬ 
ism 391-485, 412-485 
Muslim saints, their lives and teachings 
14, 15 

Mustafa Khan (Abdur-Razzaq Lari) 
(gnl. of Golconda) 256, 287, 479 
Mustafa Khan (Minister of ‘Ali ‘Adil 
Shah I of Bijapur) 452, 453, 456, 
458, 476, 499, 500 
Mustafa RumI 34, 36, 37, 41, 42 
Mu‘tamad Khan 8, 182, 185, 196, 625 
Muta-Saddi 176 
Mutoji Vazir-ul-mulk 580 
Muzaffar II, Sultan of Gujarat 392 
Muzaffar III 145, 401 
Muzaffar ‘All Turbatl 115 
Muzaffar Husain 127, 133 
Muzaffar Khan Turbati 4, 119, 123, 
131, 140 

Muzaffar Husain MIrza 154 
Muzaffar Shah III 125, 126, 410 
Muzaffar Sultan 32, 391 
Muzmudar ( Arndtya, revenue 
minister) 268 
Mysore 299 

Mystic Teachings of the Hariddsas of 
Karnataka 676 

Nabhadas (Nabhaji-dasa) 16, 566, 649 

Nabi Khan 316 

Nadia 704, 705, 706, 709 

Nadlad 49 

Nadira Banu 223 

Nadir Samarqandi 620 

Nadu un mikat 654 

Nadvi, Abdul Hasan 712 

Nadwi, Abu Zafar 678 

Nafahdt al-Uns 617, 812, 814 

Nafdis-ul-Ma e dsir 8, 808 

Nagalapur 450 

Nagarasa 600 

Nagarchain 116 

Nagarkot 127 

Nagaur 47, 81, 110, 113, 122, 124, 125, 
126, 238 

Nagesa (Marathi poet) 583 

Nagoji Dikshita 614 

Nagore 490 

Nahan 320 

Ndib 71 

Naidatham 585 

Naikwaris, revolt of 471 

Nainsi Khydt 16 

Naishadham Champa 604 

Naishadha-parijdta 608 

Naishadha Pdrijdtiyamu 595 

Najm Beg 28, 43 

Nakar 569 

Nalabhyudaya 607 

Nalacharitam Attakkatha 605, 606 

N alacharita-N ataka 612 


Nal Daman 622 
Naladamayantiras 572 
Naladamayanti-svayamvara 583 
Nalayana 572 

Naldurg 283, 445, 453, 461, 467 
Nalacharitra 595 

Namadeva (Sant) 578, 581, 655, 664 
Nama-ghosha ( Hazari-ghoshd ) 563, 643, 

675 

Nam Mala 16 

Nanak, Guru 138, 305, 306, 324, 572, 
573, 574, 575, 655-65, 677, 694, 695 
(also see under Mughul period, 
Sikh Religion) 

Nanda-dasa 647 
Nander(d) 237, 321, 322, 436 
Nandial 473 

Nandi Timmana 589, 590 
Nandod 146 
Nandurbar 161 
Nangnahar 61 
Nanha 813, 815 
Nanneri 587 
Naqib Khan 625 

Naqsh-i-BadTi Qudrat-i-Athar 622 
Naradiya Purana 635 
Narahari (Kannada poet) 598 
Narahari Chakravarti 557, 558, 675 
Narahari Sarkar 557, 635, 644 
Nara Narayana, Raja of Cooch Behar 
184, 563, 642, 643, 675 
Narang, G. C. 195, 660 
Nara Ping ali 600 
Narasa Nayaka 445, 446 
Narasimha 600 

Narasimhajina Polna Jnanabhandara 
Baroda 804 

Narsi(rhha) Mehta 17, 569, 570, 571, 
630 

Narayana 611 
Narayana Bhatta 653 
Narayan Das of Idar 337 
Narayanabhattatiri 607 
Narayanadeva 558 
Nardyaniyam 604, 608, 653 
Narayan Kaul 628 
Narayan Rao, N. 484 
Narhl 116 
Narnala 164, 465 
Narnaul 68, 69, 236 
Narottamdas 557 
Narottama Thakura 635, 645 
Narottamvilasa 558, 646 
Narsing Dev 329 
Narunthokai, see Vatriverkai 
Narwar 117 

Nasab-Ndma-i-Shahryari 624 
Nasafi 618 
! Nasaq 123 
Nasarpur 151 

Nasik 187, 188, 260, 281, 282 
Nasir-ul-mulk 101 
Nasir Khan 78, 152 
Nasir Khan Lohani 35, 71 
Nasir MIrza 28, 29 
i Nasir-ud-dln-Khaljl 805 









INDEX 


987 


Natak Samaya Sar 16 
Natesan 676 

Nath Jogis of Jakhbar 13 
Nath, R. M. 675 
National Archives of India 22 
National Library, Calcutta 24 
National Museum, Delhi 804, 805, 811, 
813, 815 
Nature 44 
Naul 625 
Nauruz 234 
Navadvlpa 653, 704 
Navanagar 183, 226 
Navapura 715 
Navarasalamkara 600 
Navsarl 13, 49, 715 
Nawab Bal 300 
Nawabganj 65 
Nawab Murtaza Khan, 
see Shaikh Farid 
Nawal Siddlq Hasan Khan 619 
Nayak(s) of Gingee 495, 498, 499 
Nayak(s) of Ikkeri 460 
Ndyaks of Ikkeri, The 484, 485 
Nayak(s) of Madura 270, 272, 458, 

460, 495, 498, 499 
Nayak(s) of Tanjore 270, 458, 460, 

484, 494, 498, 499, 500, 501 
Nayak(s) of Vellore 641 
Nayasundar 572 
Nazir Ahmad 567 
Nazlrl 621, 625 
Nazirl Nishapuri 623 
Nazuk Shah 402, 403, 410 
Nazr Muhammad Khan 204, 205, 206 
N. C. Mehta Collection 805, 806 
Needi Neri Vilakkam 586 
Negapatam 731 
Nellore 476 
Nemichandra 598 
Nemijinesa Sangati 597 
Nensi, Muhanote 383 
Neo-Vaishnava Movement 555, 556 
New Account of East Indies and Persia, 

(1672-81), A 22 

New Account of the East Indies 

(1688-1723), A 22, 712 
New History of the Marathas 278, 

279, 280, 390 

New Imperial Series from 1902-1903 to 

date 18 

Newbery, John 160 
Niarnat Khan All 10 
Nigamasara 583 
Nilakantha 612, 634 
Nilakantha DIkshita 607, 610 
Nilakantha-vijay-champu 610 
Niloba 581 
Ni’matndma 805 
Ni'matullah 625 
Nimbalkar(s) 247 
Nimbalkar, Bajaji 252 
Nimkhar 118 

Ninety-one Qalmi Bakhar 17 
Nirankusopakhyanamu 592 
Nirmal 725 


Nirmoh 326 
Nirnayasindhu 637 
Nisbat Ndma-i-Shahrydri 624 
Nishani 625 
Nishapur 707 
Nishkalanka-prabodha 580 
Nityanahda 644 
Nityanahda Das, alias Adbhuta 
Acharya 558, 560, 646, 652 
Niyabat Khan 142 
Niyazi, Haibat Khan 80, 91, 403, 404 
Nizam 69, 76, 94 
Nizami Ganjawl 562, 622, 707 
Nizami, K. A. 631 

Nizam-Shahi kingdom of Ahmadnagar 
161, 415-45 

—accepts Mughul suzerainty 433 
Nizam-ud-dln Ahmad Bakshi 7, 65, 

144, 172, 173, 372, 384, 408, 494, 553,, 
623, 689 

Nizam-ul-Mulk Bahri 415 
Noer, Count Von 111, 112, 166, 173 
Noman Ahmad Siddiqi 737 
Norris Embassy to Aurangzib, The 
22, 711 

Notes on Afghanistan 43 
Novelties in Moghal Coins 19 
Nrisimha Sarasvatl (Marathi poet) 

578, 580 

Nrisimha Sarasvatl (of Banaras) 610 
Nujum-al-ulm 820 
Nuno, da Kunha 392 
Nur al Anwar 618 
al-Nur al-Safir ‘an Akhbar al-Qaran 
al-‘Ashir 619 

Nur Jahan (alias Nur Mahall) 8, 9, 
184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 191, 195, 197, 
200, 343, 702, 703, 778, 814 
—political career 185, 186, 187 
Nur Muhammad 567 
Nur-ndmah, see Rishi-namah 
Nurpur 104 
Nur-ud-dln Mirza 53 
Nushkha-i-Dilkushd 10 
Nusrat Chakk 146 
Nusratl 629 

Nusrat Khan, alias Chhuti Khan 560 
Nusrat Shah 38, 394 
Nydydmrita 615 

Oduva Giriya 597 

Ojha, Mahamahopadhyay 336, 383, 

387 

Olearious, Adam 709 
Orchha 132, 167, 198 
Origins of Islamic Jurisprudence 553 
Orissa 17, 30, 97, 118, 130, 140, 141, 
152, 151, 152, 166, 183, 645, 646, 647, 
714, 715, 720, 721 

Ormuz 505, 506, 507, 508, 519, 727 
Orta, Garcia Da 509 
Os Lusiadas 509 
Ovington, J. 22, 709, 711 
Oxenden, Sir George 267, 513, 519 
Oocford History of hidia 218, 304 
Oxus 39, 60 










•988 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Pacheco, Durate 504 
Padikkasuppulavar 588 
Padishah Bibi, see Shahr Banu 
Paditruppattanthati 587 
Padma Kavi 597 
Padmanabha Misra 633 
Padmana Pandita 600 
Padma-Purdna 675 
Padmarasa 600 
Padma Sunder 15 
Padmavati 561, 562 
Padmini Kalydna 599 
Pddshdhndma (of Abdul Hamid 
Lauharl 690, 785, 786 
Pddshdh-nama (of Muhammad Amin 
Qazvini) 9 

Pddshdh-vdma (of Muhammad Waris) 
9 

Padshah-ndma (of QudsI) 625 
Padumdvati 562, 567, 709, 711 
Padyavali 676 
Paes, D. 733 

Pagadi, Setu Madhavrao 278 
Pahar Singh Bundela, Raja 199, 292 
378 

Painda Khan 312, 313 

Painting, see under Mughul period 

Paithan 163, 704 

Pakhanda Dharma Khandana 649 

Pak Pattan 125 

Palamau 203 

Pdlayagars 495 

Pali 282 

Palsaert, Francisco 733 
Panchabana 597 
Panchakalyana-champu 608,610 
Panchali-parinayamu 593 
Pdnchatantra 592 
Panchikarana 580 
Panddri 224 
Pandavapratapa 584 
Pandey, R. B. 711 
Pandey, S. M. 676 
Pandharpur 273 
Pandharpur movement 651, 652 
Pandita Jagannatha 610 
Panduranga-mahatmya 584 
Pandurangamahdtmyamu 590, 591 
Pangal 469 

Panhala 243, 259, 266, 273, 297, 359, 460 
Pangarkar, L. R. 676 
Panlpat 31, 33, 35, 36, 37, 38, 41, 44, 
71, 96, 100, 106 

—battle of (1526) 33-35, 41, 42, 409 
—battle of (1556) 31, 33, 34, 35, 43, 
96, 100, 106, 748 
Panjim 509 
Panna 116, 724 
Panna (nurse) 331 
Pannaganti Teleganarya 472 
Pant 737, 738 

Parabrahma Sampradaya 654 
Parachakra-nirupana 582 
Paragal Khan 560 
Paramanand 254, 275 
Paramananda-dasa 647 


Paramananda-kavyam 609 
Paramo, Yogi Vildsamu 593 
Paramottarkandam 585 
Paranjoti 587 

Parshuram Trimbak 294, 295 
Paraspur 727 

Parenda 208, 211, 455, 459 
Pargand-dmms 79, 84 
Parijdtaharana 607, 612 
Pdrijatupaharana Prabandha 589, 590 
Parikshit 184, 202 
Psris 40 

Parli (Sajjagarh) 269 
Parsees at the Court of Akbar and 
Dastur Meharji Rand, The 13 
Parviz, Prince 180, 181, 188, 201, 340, 
341, 386, 438, 439, 443. 

—campaign against Mewar 340, 341 
Patan 49, 111, 126, 127, 154, 235, 290 
Patar 57 
Pathankot 107 
Pathri 463, 464 

Patna 52, 74, 129, 130, 173, 222, 292, 
517, 716, 717, 724, 725, 726 
Patta 95, 122, 310, 702 
Pattan 715 
Pavanavijaya 580 
Payandah Hasan 2 
Payne, C. H. 21, 174, 660 
Peda Tirumala 495 
Peelu 575 

Pegu 717, 720, 723, 725, 728, 729, 731 
Pelsaert, F. 21, 684, 685, 710 
Penuk(g)onda 452, 473, 496, 497 
People of India 390 
Perath. 723 

Persia(n) 1, 3, 6, 8, 14, 18, 29, 23, 28, 
40, 43, 45, 59, 69, 78, 84, 86, 100, 
117, 125, 126, 134, 136, 137, 151, 153, 

154, 155, 157, 169, 170, 171, 175, 180, 

191, 192, 203, 204, 205, 296, 207, 210, 

217, 222, 225, 268, 282, 283, 476, 514, 

562, 620-28, 683, 685, 716, 719, 723, 
729, 731, 734, 803, 807 
Persian Court 283 

Persian Gulf 503, 505, 506, 508, 512, 
519, 715, 730, 731 

Persian Imperial Library, Tehran 811 
Persian Literature — A Biographical 
Survey 710 

Persian Painting 804, 805 
Persian poets 8 

Peshawar, 26, 31, 62, 143, 145, 149, 150, 
231, 232, 324 
Peshwa 268 

Peshwa, S-hyamrao Nilkanth 284 
Peter Purdna 581 
Phagwara 314 
Phaltan 247 
Philip H 171, 507 
Phillipines 171 
Phillot, D. C. 23, 711 
Pieter Van Den Broeke at Surat 
(1620-29 ) 21 

Pilgrim tax on Hindus 305, 381, 534, 541 
—abolition of 115, 333, 539 





INDEX 


989 


Pillaipperumal Iyengar (Diyya Kavi) 
587 

Pimenta, Fr. N 641 

Pingali Ellana 594 

Piiigali Surana 591, 592 

Pingle, Moro Trimal, Amatya 268, 359 

Pinheiro Fr. Emmanuel 159, 189 

Pipa 664 

Pipli 731 

Pir Budhu Shah 316 
Pir Muhammad 101 
Pir Muhammad Khan 60, 61, 107, 108, 
110, 111, 112, 117 
Pir Muhammad Sherwani 106 
Pitambar Das 558 
Pitambar Siddhanta-Vaglsa 634 
Pithanirnaya 640 
Pitt, Thomas 516 

Place of the Hidden Moon-Erotic 
Mysticism in the Vaishnava 
Sahajiya Cult of Bengal 676 
Polo 691 
Ponda 269 
Pondicherry 272 
Ponnekanti Telanganna 582 
Poona 242, 243, 249, 255, 259, 261, 282 
Poonathanam Nambudiri 604 
Porto Novo 520 
Portugal 126, 134, 158, 505, 683 
Portuguese, The 

Portuguese, the 73, 126, 127, 158, 159, 
160, 161, 165, 188, 189, 201, 202, 229, 
269, 279, 281, 282, 363, 364, 392, 394, 
422, 489, 490, 502-510, 511, 513, 518, 
683, 719, 722, 723 , 726, 727, 728, 729, 
731 

—administration of 509 
—control of export trade from India 
to Europe 507 

—conversion of Hindus 489, 490 
—decline of power in the Indian 
Ocean 508 

—destruction and plunder of Hindu 
temples and shrines 489, 490 
—development of commerce on eastern 
coast 506 

—diminution of trade with India 507, 
510 

—dominance in the Indian Ocean 
502-510, 615 
—inquisitions 507-508 
—relations with Vijayanagar 505 
—rivalry with Arabs 503, 505 
—Second expedtion to India 504 
—spread of education in India 508 
—their bigotry 490, 507, 508, 509 
Portuguese Indian Church 509 
Portuguese in India, The , 408 
Portuguese Missionaries 489, 490, 491 
Postal system 698 

also see dak chauki 
Post Chaitanya Sahajiya Cult of Bengal 
676 

Potrikkalivenba 587 
Powddas and Tanjavur cha Silalekh 
17 


Prabandhardja Venkatesvara Vijaya 
Vilasamu 594 
Prabhavali 257 
Prabhavallpradyumnamu 592 
Prabhulinga-lile, (Kannada) 586 
Prabhulinga-lile, (Tamil) 587 
Prajyabhatta 402, 408, 410, 411, 610 
Prakriydsarvasva 614 
Pralhad Niraji 366, 367 
Prananarayana 610 
Prannath 654 
Prana-toshani-tantra 639 
Prataparudra 637 
Pratapgarh 242, 257, 258 
Pratap, Raja 203 
Pratap Rai 17 
Pratap Shah 474 

Pratap Singh, Maha Rand 131, 132, 327, 
330, 334, 335-340, 381, 382, 383 
Praudhamanorama 614 
Premanand 171, 571 
Prema-pahchamrita 564 
Prematarahgini 56 
Premavildsa 558, 646, 676 
Prester, John 502 
Price, Major 172 

Prince of Wales Museum, Bombay 804, 
806, 815 
Priya-dasa 566 
Prithvlraj 331, 372 
Psalms of the Maratha Saints 676 
Public Library, Lahore 23 
Pulicat 476, 512, 514, 520, 731 
Pullirukku Velur Kalambak^m 588 
Punam Nambudiri 604 
Pundarlkavithhala 614 
Punjab 13, 30, 32, 33, 46, 53, 55, 56, 58, 
61, 63, 64, 66, 79, 80, 84, 93, 94, 95, 
96, 110, 119, 120, 122, 123, 125, 127 f 

131, 132, 144, 148, 149, 153, 156, 166, 

172, 179, 197, 200, 215, 216, 218, 220, 

221, 237, 313, 316, 322, 324, 329, 713, 

716, 718, 721, 722, 724, 726 

Punjab Glossary 390 
Purana Malla 80, 81, 82 
Purana-QuiTa 88 
Purandar 242, 244, 255, 261, 458 
—treaty of (1665) 244, 265 

Purandara-dasa 652, 653 
Purani c Asam Buranji 17 
Puratan Janam-Sakhi 574 
Purchas and His Pilgrims (Hakluyt 
Posthumas) 20, 21, 482, 483, 675, 
710 

Puri 129, 152 
Pumananda 639 
Purnea Report 676 
Purushottama 136 
Purushottamdas 17 
Purushottam Dikshita 596 
Purushottam Thakur 644 
Pushpagiri Timmakavi 593 
Pushtxmarga 647 
Puttabai, wife of Shivaji 274 


M.E.—03 





990 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Qadiriya school 672, 673, 674 
Qadir Shah 80 

Qadi Shahab al-DIn Daulatabadi 616 
Qalaml 39 
Qalml Bakhar 17 
Qambar ‘Ali 63 

Qandahar 12, 27, 31, 45, 46, 53, 57, 58, 
59, 60, 61, 62, 66, 151, 153 154, 155, 
157, 172, 184, 187, 188, 190, 191, 203, 
204, 205, 206, 207, 218, 222, 378, 404, 
714, 731 

—expeditions against 205 
—Mughal expeditions to 12 
al-Qanun 617 

Qanungo, Dr. K. R. 65, 69, 70, 73, 76, 
102, 372, 383, 390, 711 
Qdnun-i-Humdyunl 4, 67, 621, 710 
Qard Bahadur Khan 118, 405 
Qarshi 28 
Qasaid 707 

Qasim Barid Shah 412, 445, 446, 

Qasim Barid Shah II 468 
Qasm Kahl 621 

Qasim Khan 148, 150, 201, 202, 410, 411 
(a gnl. under Akbar) 

Qasim Khan 295, 408 

(Mughul gnl. under Aurangzib) 
Qasim Khan Juwaini 625 
Qasim Khan Mauji 621 
Qazi 79, 84, 86, 141, 523, 545, 547 
Qazi Fazilat 80, 92 
Qazi-i-mumdlik 84 
Qazi Khan 132, 337 
Qazi Nurud-din Khaqani 625 
Qazi Nurullah Shustarl 617 
Qazi Pir Muhammad 316 
Qazi Sadr-ud-din 147, 406 
Qazvln 154, 155 
Qibchaq 61 
Qil‘a Zafar 38, 60, 61 
Qiya Khan Gung 107 
Qudsi 625 

Queen Elizabeth 511 
Quetta 58 

QuiPa-i-Kuhna mosque 746, 747 
Quilon 507, 728, 731 
Quli Qutb-ul-Mulk, Sultan 556, 468-69, 
471 

—an estimate of 469 
Quliz Khan 151 
Qunduz 26, 28, 29, 60, 206 
Qur’an 112, 135, 136, 139, 148, 196, 210, 
226, 234, 522, 523, 537, 538, 616, 618, 
619, 620, 654, 661, 664, 704, 707 
Qurhan-i-id 150 
Qutban 805 

Qutb Khan 51, 54, 77, 79, 90 

Qutb Khan (s. of Sher Shah) 51, 54, 

77 7Q QO 

Qutb Khin Naib 91 
Qutb-Shahi dynasty of Golconda 468- 
479 

Qutb-ud-dln (elder br. of Jamshid Qutb 
Khan) 469 

Qutb-ud-dln (gr. of Bengal) 

185 


Qutb-ud-din Khan 337 
Qutb-ud-dln Khan, Nawab 765 
Qutb-ud-din Muhammad Khan 123, 
145 

Qutb-ud-din Muhammad Khan, 

Atga 63, 175 
Qutb-ul-Mulk 412 
Qutlu Khan Lohani 141, 152 
Qutluq Nigar Khanum 25 
Qutub Mustarl 629 


Rabi 103 

Rabi'a-ud-Daurani 801 
Rabi‘ u-l-awwal 177 
Ra‘dandaz Khan 236 
Radhamadhava Kavi (Chintalpudi 
Ellanarya) 590, 591 
Radhamadhavamu 591 
Radhamadhava-Vildsa Chanvpu 609 
Radha-sudha-nidhi 676 
Radha-Vallabhi sect 648 
Radhavildsa 583 
Rae Bareli 119 
Rafi Mirza 11 
Rdgamala 614, 806, 807 
Rdgamahjari 614 
Raghava Chaitanya 651 
Rdghava-Pdndaviyamu 590, 591 
Raghava-Yadava-Pdfidavtya 608 
Raghava Yddava Pandavlyamu 594 
Raghavendratirtha 615 
Raghunandana 634, 636, 637, 638, 675, 
705 

Raghunatha 706 
Raghunatha Bhatt 64 
Raghunath Bhatti 347, 348 
Raghunathabhyudaya (Sanskrit) 609 
Raghunathdbhyudaya (Telugu) 595, 
703 


Raghunatha Dasa 644 
Raghunathamanohar 614 
Raghunatha Nayaka 595, 607, 609, 614 
Raghunatha Pandit 561, 583 
Raghunath Pandit Hanmante 269, 270, 
271, 275 


Raghunath Pandit (Panditrao) 268 
Raghunath Pant 272 
Raghunath, Raja 529 
Raghunath Siromani 705 
Raghunatha Tarkavaglsa 639 
Rahasyamahjari 564 




Raichur 288, 418, 420, 445, 446, 448, 
449, 467 ’ 

Raidas 654 

Raigarh 242, 244, 245, 254, 260, 261, 

263, 264, 267, 271, 274, 276, 279, 280, 
281, 289, 358, 359, 369 


Rai Kalha 316, 321 
Raipur 152 


Rai Ramananda 646, 649 
rais’ 39 

Raisen 47, 80, 81, 328, 329, 330 
Rai Singh 124, 226, 386 
Rai Vrindaban 628 









INDEX 


991 


Raja ‘Ali Khan 6, 133, 161, 162, 163, 
164, 430, 432 

Rajachudamani Dikshita 607, 608, 612, 
613, 614 
Rajadhara 642 
Rajadharma-Kaustubha 675 
Rajahmundry 469 
Raja Husain 707 
Rajamdla 562, 642 
Raja Nripa-Charite 599 
Raja of Bantam 510 
Raja of Kottarakkara 605 
Raja of Kottayam 605 
Rajaprasasti 615 
Rajapur 257, 283, 730 
Rajaram (Jat leader) 374 
—sacks Sikandra 291, 374 
Rajaram (s. of Shivaji) 272, 274, 281, 
294, 295, 359, 361, 365-71, 390, 520, 
609, 637 

—attack on Santa and Dhanaji 637 
—coronation at Raigarh 281, 359 
—death of 296, 370 
—flight to Gingee 366 
—imprisonment of 281 
—innovations in military 
administration 370 

Raja Ram Chandra (Ram Shah) 376, 
377 

Rajardma-charita 609 
Rajaram’s Life 368 
Rajas Bai 296 
Rajasekhara 641 
Rdjasekhara Charitra 590 
Rajdsekhara-Vildsa 598 
Rajasthan 10, 30, 39, 45, 47, 81, 121, 
123, 124, 125, 131, 132, 236, 241, 289, 
322, 327, 332, 333, 334, 335, 716, 717, 
721, 723, 724, 803, 819 
—history of 10 

—last Muslim invasion of 348 
Rajasthan Archives 1 
Rajaorl 146, 148, 312 
Rajatarangini 410, 411, 610 
Rajavahanavijayamu 593 
Rajavalipataka 610 

Raja-Vyavahdr Kosa 268, 269, 276, 584 

Rajconda 469 

Rajgarh 295, 297 

Rajgir 723 

Rajjab 654 

Rajkunwdr 812 

Rajmahal 131, 141, 142, 222 

Rajpipla 333 

Rajput confederacy 30, 36, 37 
Rajrup 199 

Raj Singh, Mahdrana 239, 240, 343, 

345, 347, 348, 351, 352 
Raju Deccani 435, 436, 437 
Raj i Vilas 16 

Rakshasi-Tangadi battle of, see 
Talikota, battle of 
Ram 812 
Rama 497 
Rama Amatya 614 
Ramabhadra Dikshita 612, 613, 703 


Ramabhadraihba 609 
Rdmdbhyudaya 591 
Ramachandra 600 
Ramchandra Baghela, Raja 124 
Ramchandra Dev 152 
Ramachandraguru Sishya 600 
Ram Chandra Nilkanth, Muzumdar 
268 

Ramachandra Pant ( Amdtya ) 275, 366 

Ram Chandra Trimbak (Dabir) 268 
R dmachandrodaya 607 
Ramachandra Pattanayaka 564 
Rdmacharitam 602 
Rdma-charita-manasa 565, 649, 675 
Ram Chehra (Jat leader) 291, 374 
Rama cult 649 
Ramanuja 653 

Ramdas, Swami (Samarth) 269, 273, 
274, 275, 276, 278, 559, 578, 581, 582, 
583, 654, 703 

Ram Das (Sikh Guru) 137, 664 
Ram Das, Raja 169 
Ramadasi sect 652 
Ramadevaraya 497 
Ramakrishna Chakravarti 635 
Ramakrishna Kavi, see 
Tenali Ramakrishna 
Ramamantri 593 

Ramananda 569, 613, 655, 659, 664 
Ramanath Vidya-Vachaspati 634 
Ramanattam 605 

Ramaraja (k. of Vijayanagar) 418, 419, 
420, 421, 422, 423, 424, 425, 450, 480, 
486-95, 594, 614 
—an estimate of 494-95 
—relations with the Portuguese 491 
—southern expedition 489 
—usurps Vijayanagar Crown 487 
Ramarajabhushana 589 
Rdmarajiyamu (Narapativijayamu) 

594 

Ramaraju Rangapparaju 593 
Ramaraya, see Ramaraja 
Rama Saraswati 563 
Ramatoshna Vidyalamkara 639 
Ramavallabhadasa 580 
Ramavallabha-das (s. of Prime 
Minister of Devagiri) 650 
Ramavaraddyini 582 
Ramavijaya 584 

Ramdyana (Sanskrit) 560, 561, 564, 

566, 569, 594, 598, 600, 607, 608, 612, 
627, 704, 810, 816 
Ramayana ( Telugu) 595 

Ramayanam 602 
Ramayanam, Champu 604 
Ramayana of Tulsidas , The 711 
Rdmayana-sdr-sangraha 607 
Ramendra 600 
Ramesvara 641 
Ramesvarabhatta 581 
Ramesvar Bhattacharya 559 
Ramghat pass 282, 283 
Ramglr 211, 477 
Ramgopal Das 558 
Ram Janardana 580 





992 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Ramlal 630 
Ramnagar 245 

Ram Singh 229, 263, 264, 276 
Ranachhoda 615 
Rand Rdso 16 
Ranchhod Bhatt 15 
Ranchhor Das Jodha 239 
Ranas of Mewar 15 
Randaulah Khan 457 
Rahgajamrna 595, 596 
Rangamati 229 
Ranganatha Mogarekar 580 
Rahganathasvami 582 
Ranking, G.S.A. 23, 103, 172 
Ranmal 797 
Ran of Cutch 725 

Ranthambhor 15, 47, 80, 90, 107, 122, 
123, 124, 327, 330, 334 
Rooji Niraji (Nyayadhisa) 268 
Rao Surthan 700 
Rapri 35, 36 

Rare Copper Coins of Akbar 19 

Rasagangadhara 613 

Rasakadamva 558 

Rasa-kallola 564 

Rasakalpavalli 558 

Rasakrida 583 

Rasamahfarl 558 

Rasa Ratndkara 600 

Rasasahasrapadi 570 

Rasatarangini 613 

Rasatattva-sara 646 

Rasavilasa 613 

Ras Gangadhar 16 

Rashahat 617 

Rashid 624 

Rashtrakutas 347 

Rasika-dasa 646 

Rasika-mangala 646, 676 

Rasikananda 647 

R as-m ala 409 

Rastraudha kdvya 610 

Rasulpur 285 

Rasulvijaya 562 

Ratanpur 116, 203 

Rathors 290 

—attacks on Mughul territories 
290 

—recapture of territories 291 
Ratnagiri 282, 288 
Ratnakaradhisvara Sataka 597 
Ratnakara Varni 597 
Ratna Sastra 600 
Ratna Singh 327-28, 383 
Ratt Jataka 600 
Rauzat-ut-Tdhirin 8 
Ravanamandodarisamvdd 572 
Ravanavadha 583 
Ravidas 636 
Rawdat al-Shah 620 
Rawlinson, H. G. 22 
Raya-mangala 560 
Rdyavachakamu 596 
Raza Library, Rampur 14, 811, 814, 
818 


Razm-nama 707, 810, 816 
Rebellion in Bombay 520 
Record Office, Patiala 23 
Reddy, Dr. C. R. 592 
Red Fort 787 
Regi Chak 403 

Religious Policy of the Mughul 
Emperors 553 

Religious Policy of the Mughals 324 
Religious Sects of the Hindus 676 
Remonstrantie of Fransisco Pelsaert, 
The 21, 710, 739 

Reports of the Archaeological Survey 
of India 17 
Reu, B. N. 390 
Revadanda 422 
Rewa 15, 90, 124 
Rewakanta 333 
Rewari 94, 97, 105 
Rice, Edward, P. 652, 676 
Ridazada Shafaq 631 
Risdla fi Muluk Khulasat al-Sadat 
Naqshbandlh 617 
Risdlah-i-Iiaqnuma 14 
Rise of the Portuguese Power in 
India, The 409 
Rishabhadas 572 
Rishi-ndmah 577 
Risley, Sir Herbert 372, 390 
Riyad al-Adwiya 621 
Riydz-ul-Auliya 15 
Riyaz-us-Saldtin 11, 65, 102 
Rizvl, Dr. S. A. A. 15 
Rodgers, C. J. 19, 23 
Roe, Sir Thomas 140, 181, 190, 192, 382, 
511, 512, 554, 678, 682, 685, 707, 710, 
718 

Rogers, A. 195, 196, 711 
Roh 50, 68 
Rohankhed 162 
Rohid(r)a 242, 254 
Rohira 295 
Rohrl 56, 57, 66 
Rohtak 55 

Rohtas 52, 62, 74, 75, 79, 88, 118, 141, 
144, 145, 187, 188 
Rolt 514 
Rome 171 

Ross, E. Denison 23, 41, 42, 43, 66, 409 
Royal Record Office 2 
Rowlandson 518 
Rubicon 110 
Rud-i-Kauthar 631, 678 
Rudolf, Fr. 159, 679 
Rudrakavl 610 
Rudra Pratap 376 
Rudra Simha, Raja 643 
Ruh-ullah Khan 281 
Rukminibibhd 564 
Rukmini-harana 583 
Rukminikalyana 607 
Rukmini-krishna vivaha 607 
Rukminl parinayamu 596 
Rukminisavijaya 608 
Rukmini Swayamvara (of Ekanath— 
Marathi) 579 





INDEX 


993 


Rukmini-svayamvara (of Vithal 
Bidkar) 583 
Rukn Khan Lohani 107 
Rukn Khan NuhanI 98 
RumI Khan 47, 51, 52, 74, 397 
Rum! Khan, Chelepi 425 
Rupa-bhavanI 578 
Rupa Gosvamin 644 
Ruparama Chakravarti 646 
Rupamati (Princess of Kishangarh) 
346 

Rupamati (qn. of Baz Bahadur) 112 
Rupar 33, 220, 221 
Ruqqat-i-Abu’l-Fazl 1, 5, 623, 707 
Ruq’at-i-Hamid-ud-din Khan 11 
Ruquaiah Begam 197 
Rustum 98 
RustumI 629 

Sabara-Sankara-Vilasa 598 
Sabda-kalpa-druma 675 
Sabdakaustubha 614 
Sabdanusasana 600 
Sabirid Khan 562 
Sabk-i-Hindi 621 
Sabuk.tigln 324 
Sadar-uS-Sudur 667 
Sadashiva (k. of Vijayanagar) 487, 
488-89, 495, 497 
Sadasiva (Oriya poet) 564 
Sadhana 654 
Sadhuram 313, 661 
Sadiq Khan 150, 151 
Sadr(s) 115, 178 
Sadr-us-Sudar 83, 108, 115 
Sa‘d-ullah Khan 211, 345, 529 
Safavi Shahs of Persia 31, 40, 59 
Safdar Jang, tomb of 801 
Safinat-ul-Auliyd 14, 626 
Safiyat-un-nisa 290, 356 
Sagar (place) 386 
Sagar (s. of Maharana Uday Singh) 
340, 341 

Sahendra-Vilasa 610 
Sahibganj 222 
Sahib Devi 322 
Sahibjl 703 
Sahibiyd 14 
Sahib-i-Zamdn 138 
Sahib Kaul_ 578 
Sahityasudha 609 
Sahr Banu Begam 461 
Shahr-i-nau 225 
Sa’ib 621 
Saibai 253 
Sa‘ida-i-Gilam 625 
Sa’id Beg 316 

Sa‘Id Khan (Sultan of Mughulistan) 
402 

Sa‘id Khan (k. of Kashghar) 38, 39, 
152 

Saif-'Ain-ul-Mulk 420, 421, 450 
saifi 39 

Saiful-mulk badiuj-jamdl 562 
St. Francis 159, 509, 518 


§aivas (Saivism) 641, 646, 652 
also see under Mughul period, 
Hindu religion 
Saiyad Sultan 562 
Saiyids 474 

Sajjangarh 269, 273, 274, 652 
Sakinat al-Auliyd 626 
Sakrigall 73 
Saksena, Dr. 201 
Saksena, B. P. 218 
Sakta (Sakti) cult, see Mughul 
period, Hindu Religion 
Saktakarma 639 
Saktananda-tarangini 639 
Sakta Pithas, The 675 
Sakta Singh 384 
Sakwarbai 274 

Salakaraju Tirumal, see Tirumal 
Salar Jang, Sir 414 
Salabat Khan 161 
Salbancke, Master Joseph 21 
Saletore, B. A. 501, 709, 710 
Salher 245, 266 
—battle of 266 
Salih ‘Aqil 147 

Salim, Prince 5, 8, 125, 133, 136, 147, 
162, 166, 167, 168, 169, 175, 180, 340, 
376, 410, 811, 812, 816 
also see Jahangir 
Salima Begam 107, 167, 172 
Salima Sultana 702, 709 
Salimgarh 216 
Salim-ullah 11 
Salsette 450, 513 
Saluva Narasimha 486 
—rebellion against Achyutadevaraya 
486 

Saluva Timma 446 
Salva 597, 600 
Sambhuraja-charita 609 
Samalbhatt 571 
Samana 63 
Samaraj 583 

Samarqand 25, 26, 28, 29, 35, 38, 40, 
41, 204, 207, 730 
Samasloki Gita 583 
Samayasundar 572 
Sambar lake 725 
Sambhaii (br. of Shivaji) 248, 256 
Sambhal 35, 36, 39, 46, 53, 75, 92, 105, 
120, 123, 307 
Sambhar 113 
Sdmbopakhyanamu 593 
Samdhara 202 
Samel 82 

Samira Kumdra Vijayamu 593 
Samkshepa Rdmayana 583 
Sam Mirza 620 

Samogarh, battle of 215, 220, 346, 379 
Samoilovich, A. N. 3 
Sanatana Gosvamin 635, 640, 644, 646, 
675 

Sanchi Honnamma 599 
Sanchor 290 
Sangameshwar 273, 288 
Sangitadarpana 614 





994 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Sangita Makaranda 580 
Sangitasara sarvasva 614 
Sangitasudha 
Sangola 284, 462 

Sangram Sirhha, Rana 30, 35, 36, 131, 
702 

Sanga, Rana 334, 336, 392 
Sangrana 312 
San jar 624 
Sankanna Nayak 491 
Sankara (Agamacharya) 639 
Sankaradeva 560, 561, 562, 635, 642, 
643, 644, 675 

Sankusala Nrsimha Kavi 590, 591 
Santaji Ghorpar(d)e 294, 295, 366, 
369 

—dismissal from service 369 
Santaji Teli 581 
Santalinga 641 
Santalingappa 580 
San Thome 491, 506, 515, 520, 731 
Santi Chand 15 
Santikirti 597 
Sdntinatha-purdna 597 
Sanwala 812, 81.6 
Saqi Musta’ad Khan 627 
Saqi-ndma 624 
Sarada Vildsa 600 
Serai Bir 167, 174 
Sara’is 87, 93, 176, 177 
Saran, Dr. P. 68, 69, 102, 103 
Sarangadhara-Charitra 595 
Sarangarh 152 

Sarangpur 47, 80, 112, 328, 330 
—battle of 112 
Sarangu Tammyya 592 
Sarasabharati 608 
Sarasvati Bhavan Library, Udaipur 
4, 7, 23, 24 

Sarasvati Gangadhara 580 
Sarasvati Vildsa 675 
Sarbuland Khan 349 
Sardar Khan, see Abdullah Pani 
Sardesai, G. S. 278, 279, 370, 390 
Sarja-Hanumendra-Charite 599 
Sarkar, Sir J. N. 23, 24, 44, 65, 78, 102, 
103, 205, 211, 219, 232, 245, 246, 277, 

278, 279, 280, 288, 294, 297, 304, 309, 

312, 323, 325, 326, 354, 359, 366, 387, 

409, 414, 480, 484, 544, 692, 703, 709, 

710, 711, 712, 718, 733 
Sarkar, S. C. 22, 553, 554, 738 
Sar-i-pul 25 
Sarkhej 50, 146, 718 
Sarmad 626 
Sarnaik, Nilopant 255 
Sarnal 127, 133, 170 
S arnaubat ( Sendpati ) 268 

Sarvadesavrittant Sangrah (alias 
Akbar-nama) 15 
Sarvajha 579, 598 
Sarvalakshana Siromani 594 
Sarw Azad 632 

SaSaram 69, 70, 71, 73, 83, 84, 88, 743, 
744, 751 
Sasisena 17 


Sastri, K. A. N. 482, 483, 484 
Satamukha 583 

Satara 243, 269, 296, 297, 367, 369, 370, 
453, 454 
Satasai 568 

Satgaon 77, 130, 201, 715 
Sati 138, 174, 194, 234, 540, 701 
Sati May ana (Lor Chandrani) 561 
Satnamis 236 
Satta 664 

Sattvika-Brahma-Vidya-Vildsa 599 
Satyabhamd-parinaya 612 
Satyabhdrrvd-sdntvanamu 596 
Satyanathayati 615 
Saubhagya Singh 345 
Saugor 517 

Saundarya Katharatna 600 
Saurashtra 126, 145, 803 
Sayyid Abu Bakr 184 
Savantvadi 282 

Savaram Chennappa Nayadu 496 
Savaramu Chinanarayana Nayaka 
597 

Sawai Jai Singh, Maharaja 709 
SawdtVal-Ilhdm 616 
Saxena, B. P. 387 
Sayanacharya 606 
Sayyid (s) 29, 112, 134, 178 

Sayyid ‘Abdul Jalil Bilgrami 619 
Sayyid Abu Bakr 184 
Sayyid Ahmad 475, 477 
Sayyid Ahmad, Sir 68 
Sayyid Ahmad Barha 127 
Sayyid Ahmad Khan 23, 791, 802 
Sayyid ‘Ali al-Mutlaqi 616 
Sayyid ‘All Khan Ibn Ma'sum 618 
Sayyid ’Ali Tabataba 11 
Sayyid al-Sharif ‘All bin Muhammad 
Jurjani 618 
Sayyid Beg 154 
Sayyid dynasty, history of 12 
Sayyid Hasan ‘All 281 
Sayyid Jamal-ud-din 14 
Sayyid Mahmud Khan Barha 127 
Sayyid Makhdum (Sharza Khan) 462 
Sayyid Mir 705 
Sayyid Mubarak 406 
Sayyid Muhammad Banda-Nawaz 
Gesu-Daraz 629 
Sayyid Muzaffar 477, 478 
Sayyidpur 31, 306 
Schacht, Joseph 553 
School of Oriental and African Studies, 
London 809 

S eh wan 57, 58, 80, 151, 152 
Selections from the Sacred Writings of 
the Sikhs 324, 676 
Selections from Tukaram 676 
Sen, Kshitimohan 676 
Sen, S. N. 22, 485, 710, 711 
Sen, Sukumar 630 
Sena 636 
Sera 288 
Serum 286 
Seshadharma 599 
Sesh-Krishna 612 



INDEX 


995 


Sevantika-parinaya 612 
Sewell, Robert 482, 674 
Seyur Kalambakam 587 
Shadakshara 597, 598 
Shad man 144 

Shafaat Ahmad Khan 22, 712 
Shafaq, Dr. Rida Zada 622 
Shah ‘Abbas 6, 473, 814 
Shah Abu-T-Ma‘all 62, 63, 64 
Shah Alam 14, 245, 281, 282, 286, 287, 
296, 363 

Shah ‘Alam II 13 
Shah Ali 166, 432 
Shah ‘Ali Muhammad Jan 
Gamodhani 629 
Shahabad 54, 69, 76, 102, 144 
Shahbaz Khan 95, 127, 132, 141, 142, 
162, 338, 385 
Shah Beg 27, 31 
Shah Beg Arghun 31, 66 
Shah Beg Khan 154 
Shahdara 778 
Shah Fathullah Shirazi 616 
Shah Ghazi Sultan 154 
Shah Hussain 576 
Shah Husain Arghun 56, 57 58, 60 
Shdhid-i-Sadiq 626 
Shah Ismail Safavi 448 
Shahjahanabad 783, 787 
Shah Jahan 1, 2, 8, 9, 10, 11, 16, 17, 
19, 88, 139, 195-219, 220, 225, 247. 
248, 249, 258, 263, 312, 314, 315, 344, 

345, 346, 377, 440, 441, 443, 444, 456, 

457, 459, 475, 484, 499, 508, 522, 523, 

524, 525, 534, 541, 542, 544, 546, 552, 

576, 605, 617, 618, 621, 625, 626, 670, 

672, 673, 683, 686, 687, 689, 690, 696, 

705, 713, 715, 716, 717, 718, 723, 726, 

732, 757, 765, 772, 774, 775, 776, 777, 

779, 780, 781, 782, 783, 784, 785, 786. 

787, 790, 791, 792, 793, 795, 799, 800. 

801, 813, 817, 818, 819 
—administration of 212 
—an estimate of 216-18 
—as a builder 783-99 
—campaigns against Ahmadnagar 
and Bijapur 208 

—campaign against Golconda 208 
—conquest of Balkh 206, 207 
—coronation of 198 
—court of 777, 780, 781 
—death of 226 

—degeneration of Mughul army 205 
—diplomatic relations 205 
—disorder in the Deccan 211 
—encouragement to painting, see 
under Mughul period, painting 
—expeditions against Persia 205 
—his last years 213 
—imprisonment of 220, 225 
—rebellion of Jagat Singh 199-200 
—rebellion of Khan Jahan Lodi 200 
—reform in Muslim society 212 
—relations with the Portuguese 
201-202 


-—religious conversions 213 
—religious policy 212, 213, 

218, 219, 312 

—treaty with Bijapur 211 
—treaty with Golconda 210 
—war of succession amongst sons 
211, 213, 214-16, 220 
—wrath on conversion of Muslims to 
Hinduism 312 

Shahjahan-ndma (of Bhagawan Das) 
628 

Shdhjahdn-nama (of Inayat Khan) 9 
Shahajahan-ndma (of Muhammad 
Sadiq Khan) 9 

Shah Isma‘Il 3, 28, 29, 31, 32, 185 
Shahji (r. of Tanjore) 610, 612 
Shahji Bhonsle 208, 209, 242, 247, 248, 
249, 251, 253, 254, 255, 269, 278, 444, 
445, 456, 457, 458, 609 
—death of 260 

—imprisoned by Bijapur Sultan 256 
Shah Mansur 144, 173 
Shah Miri dynasty 406 
Shah Mir Lahauri 218 
Shah Mirza 120, 127 
Shah Muhammad Qilatl 153 
Shahna 94, 98 
Shdh-indma 707, 805 
Shah Nawaz Khan 12, 222, 439, 808 
Shah Nur-ud-din (Nand Rishi) 577 
Shahr Banu, alias Padishah Bibi 283 
Shah Rukh Mirza 164 
Shahryar, Prince 186, 187, 197, 198, 
524 

Shah Safi 203, 204 
Shah Shuja, Prince 516 
Shah Tahir 470 

Shah Tahmasp 4, 38, 59, 78, 154, 155, 
157, 184, 451, 667, 807 
Shahu 289, 370 
Shahzada 263 

ShaibanI Khan 25, 26, 27, 29, 156 
Shaibani-ndma 3 
Shaikh ‘Abd al-Haq 631 
Shaikh ‘Abd al-Nabl Sadra Sudur 616 
Shaikh ‘Abdul Haq Dihlawi 623 
Shaikh ‘Abdul Haq Muhaddis 
Dehlavi 14, 212, 616 
Shaikh ‘Abdul Haqq 673 
Shaikh ‘Abdullah 704 
Shaikh ‘Abdul Qadir 673 
Shaikh ‘Abdun-Nabi 548 
Shaikh ‘Abul-Wahhab 14 
Shaikh Ahmad 

alias Mujaddid Alf-i-Sani 15, 139, 
175, 192, 194, 212, 309, 617 
Shaikh ‘All Muttaqi 14 
Shaikh Amanullah Panipati 621 
Shaikh Bayazid Qarmali 35, 37, 38, 

46, 67 ' 

Shaikh Buhlul 29, 53 
Shaikh Daniyal 5, 6, 125, 164, 165, 166, 
168, 189, 197 
Shaikh Faizi 709 




996 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Shaikh Farid, alias Nawab Murtaza 
Khan 192, 617 

Shaikh Farid Shakarganj 125 
Shaikh Gadal 108, 109 
Shaikh Husain 157 
Shaikh Ibrahim 708 
Shaikh Ibrahim Baba 194 
Shaikh Jalal-ud-din Thanesarl 15 
Shaikh Khub Muhammad 629 
Shaikh Minhaj 286 

Shaikh Mubarak 5, 134, 135, 167, 668, 
669 

Shaikh Muhammad 580 
Shaikh Muhammad Baqa 13 
Shaikh Muhammad Khaus 15, 108, 109 
Shaikh Nabi 567 
Shaikh Nasr-i-Zahuri 707 
Shaikh Nizam 618 
Shaikh Nur ul-Haqq 7, 617 
Shaikh Sa‘du’l-lah BanI Isra’Il 616 
Shaikh Salim Chishti 125, 176, 668, 
759 

—tomb of 765, 766 
Shaikh Taj al-Din Sambhali 617 
Shaikhul Islam 667 
Shaikh Wajlh al-Din ‘Alwi 619 
Shaikh Zahid 202 
Shaikh Zain al-Din 620 
Shajarat al-Ddnish 620 
Shakti and Shakta 675 
Shal (Quetta) 58 
Shalimar Bagh 777 
Shambhuji (s. of Shivaji) 241, 262, 

265, 273, 274, 275, 276, 281, 282, 283, 
284, 285, 288, 294, 295, 352, 355, 359- 
65, 462, 609, 634, 637 
—attack on Portuguese 363 
—capture and confinement of 282 
288, 365 

—coronation of 360 
•—declares himself king 359 
—defects with Shivaji 273, 359 
—escape from Panhala 273 
—execution of 289 
—expedition against Siddis of 
Janjira 362 

—invasion of Portuguese territory 
281, 363, 364 

—parts with Dilir Khan 273 
—peace treaty with Portuguese 363 
—raid on Mughul territories 281 
—rebellions and desertions in 
Maratha kgm. 282 
—sent to Mughul camp at 
Aurangabad 265 
—treaty with Mughuls 281 
Shambhuji II 296 
Shamsabad 726 
Shamsher Khan 231 
Shamshir-ul-Mulk 466 
Shams-i-Burhani 708 
Shams-i-Siraj ‘Afif 803 
Shams-ud-din (k. of Kashmir) 402, 
410 

Shams-ud-din Atga Khan 109, 110, 

111, 113 


Shams-ud-din Muhammad Shah Ghazi 
94 

Shankarji Malhar, Sachiv 294, 395, 

366 * 

Sharaf-ud-din HuSain 121, 141 
Shark Wiqaya 619 
Sharifabad 77 
Sharifjl 444 
Sharif Khan 123 
Sharma, G. N. 194, 383, 384, 386 
Sharma, Sri Ram 324 
Sharqi Kingdom 76 
—rulers 805 

Sharza Khan 284, 295, 462 
Shastri 630 

Shayista Khan 203, 229, 230, 243, 259, 
260, 517 

Shea, David 24 
Sher Afgan 185 
Shergarh 119, 726 
Sher Khan Fuladi 126, 127, 128, 145 
Sher (Khan) Shah Sur 38, 45, 46, 50, 
51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 63, 65, 
66, 68-90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 100, 103, 
113, 124, 171, 279, 332. 333, 395, 403, 

533, 539, 552, 698, 711, 742, 744, 745, 

746, 474, 751 

—abolition of imposts 86 
—achievements as a ruler 89 
—administration of 79, 80, 83-88, 89 
—administration of justice 86 
—an estimate of 83-90 
—as a builder 88 
—as a reformer 88, 89 
—as a soldier and a general 89 
—attempts to wrest Bengal 73-77 
—campaign against Gakkhars 79 
—captures Kalinjar 82, 83 
—captures Raisen 81 
—captures Rohtas 74 
—celebrates his coronation 75 
—conquers upper Sind 80 
—currency and tariff reforms 85, 86 
—death of 83 
—development of trade and 
commerce 87 
—early life 69-71 
—encounters with Humayun 73, 
78-79 

—feudal levy and standing army 87 
—his espionage system 87, 88 
—his military establishment 87-88 
—improvements in communication 
system 87 

—invades Malwa and Gujarat 80 
—invasion of Marwar 81 
—land revenue system 84, 85 
—monuments at Delhi 745 
—mausoleum of 743-45, 751 
—police system 86 
—policy towards Hindus 90 
—second coronation 77 
—seige of Chanderi 81 
—subdues Baluch chiefs 79 





INDEX 


997 


—taxation measures 85 
—transfering of officers 84 
Slier Shah 383 

Sher Shah and his successors 68-101 
Sher Shah and His Times 102 
Sherwani, Abbas 383 
Sherwani, Prof. H. K. 480, 481, 482, 
484, 631, 632 

Shiab-ud-din Ahmad 114 
Shiab-ud-din Ahmad Talish 10 
Shibli Nu‘mani 617, 622, 631, 712 
Shibyah 702 

Shihab-ud-din Ahmad Khan 109, 110, 
120, 123, 133, 145, 161 
Shihab-ud-din Ghuri 324 
Shiab-ud-din Khan 281, 282 
Shiah(ism ) 40, 59, 65, 105, 108, 109, 

117, 131, 134, 136, 154, 190, 417, 446, 

447, 451, 455, 456, 466 469, 476, 522, 

666, 667 
ShikabI 625 
Ship building 721-722 
Shipman, General 513 
Shiqddr(s) 79, 80, 84, 86 
Shiqddr-i-Shiqdardn 79, 84, 86 
Shi‘ru-l- Ajam 631, 712 
Shitab Khan, alias Sitapati 469 
Shivaji 17, 233, 242, 243, 244, 245, 247, 

248, 252, 253, 254, 255, 258, 260, 261, 

262, 264, 265, 266, 267, 268, 269, 270, 

271, 272, 273, 274-78, 279, 283, 292, 
293, 316, 327, 359, 362, 368, 458, 459, 

460, 461, 478, 513, 516, 568, 583, 584, 

609, 634, 637, 638, 651 
—achievements and attainments of 
274-78 

—administration of his kingdom 
268, 269, 276 

—Afzal Khan overcome 257-59 
—alliance with Golconda 245, 271 
—and Aurangzib 242-45 
—an estimate of 274-78 
—annual revenue 277 
—assumption of marks of Royalty 
267-68 

—attitude towards other religions 
276 

—cabinet of eight ministers 267-68, 
276 

—captures Javali 256 
—captures Sinhagarh and other 
forts 245 

—character of 277 
—conquests in Madras, Carnatic and 
Mysore 245 

—coronation of 245, 266-69 
—court language 268 
—creation of a navy 257 
—death of 245, 274, 359 
—early life 248-50 
—escape from Agra 244, 263 
—fight with Ekoji’s forces 272 
—first conflict 252-54 
—first experiment in Swaraj 251-52, 
255-56 


—friendship with Europeans 257 
—his education 249, 250 
—his last days 274 
—jagir system 276 
—last venture in Carnatic 269-72 
—naval expedition to Malbar coast 
261 

—new era, introduction of 268 
—peace treaty with Aurangzib 245 
—plundering of Surat (1664 & 1670) 
243, 513, 514 

—raids on Mughul territory 245 
—reaction to Aurangzib’s religious 
fanaticism 265-266 
—relations with Ekoji 270-71, 272 

—rise of the Bhonsles 247-48 
—Shambhuji’s defection 273-74 
—Shayista Khan scared away 
259-61 

—submission to Mughuls 244, 261, 
262 

—surrenders Sinhagarh to Bijapur 
256 

—titles of 267, 268 
—treaty of Purandar 244, 262 
—visit to Bijapur 253 
—wrests Ponda from Portuguese 
269 

Shivaji III 296, 370 

• Shivaji and His Times 278, 279, 280 
Shivgaon 200 
Sholapur 441, 442 
Short History of Aurangzib, A 245, 
304, 325 

Shri Ekanath 676 
Shringarpur 257, 273 
Shuja, Prince 10, 206, 214, 220, 221, 222, 
225, 226, 293, 626 
—death of 222 
Shuja‘at Khan (a gnl. of 
Aurangzib) 232, 290 
Shuja'at Khan (a gnl. of Sher 
Shah) 78, 92 
Shuja‘at Khan (gr. of 
Gujarat) 356, 357 
Shu'un al-Munazzalat 616 
ShyamaldaS, Kaviraj 333, 334, 342, 343, 
' 344, 353, 382, 384, 385, 386, 387 
Shyam Singh 353 

Sialkot 31, 33, 147, 324, 705, 706, 715, 
716, 718 
Siam 506, 728 
Sibi 58, 153 

Siddhdnta Kaumudi 614 

Siddhendra Yogi 590 

Sidi ‘Ali Rafis 20, 104, 158 

Sidi Jauhar 243 

Sidi Mas‘ud 283, 284, 285, 461 

Sidi Misri 276 

Siddhi Chandra Upadhyaya 15 
Siddi(s) of Janjira 269, 282, 363, 364 
Sih Nathr 624 
Sijda 123, 194, 212 
Sikandar 391, 400 







998 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Sikandar bin Muhammad 11 
Sikandar Khan, The Uzbeg 63, 64 
Sikandar ‘Adil Shah 283, 284, 285, 286, 
461-63, 478 

—submits to Mughuls 463 
Sikandarndma 69 
Sikandar ndma-yi-Bahri 805 
Sikandar Lodi, Sultan 29, 44, 70, 71, 
306, 733, 749 

Sikandar Shah Sur 62, 63, 94, 95, 98, 
104, 105, 106, 107 
—captures Delhi and Agra 95 
Sikandra (Akbar’s mausoleum) 770, 
772, 773, 774, 775, 778 
Sikh(s) (Sikhism) 137, 179, 193, 305-26, 
655-65 

—persecution of, under Muslim rule 
305-06 

—as a political and military power 
305-26 

—transformation into military power 
307 

also see under 
Mughul period, Religion 
Sikh Religion, The 173, 324, 677, 

710, 711 

Sikkim 656, 659-665 
SikrI 36, 125 
Silhadi 47, 328, 393 
Sinam 742 

Sind 30, 31, 45, 56, 57, 58, 60, 67, 78, 
151, 154, 188, 201, 215, 221, 222, 296, 
299, 324, 718, 720, 722 
—history of 11 
Sindhia 370 

Sindhudurg (Maivan) 257 
Singararya 599 
Singhana 725 

Sinhgarh 242, 245, 254, 256, 262, 265, 
296, 297, 458 

—wresting from Mughuls 265 
Sinsani 291 
Sipah-Sdlar 80 
Siphir Shukoh 223 
SiprI 107 
Sircar, D. C. 675 

Sirhind 32, 33, 56, 62, 63, 104, 105, 106, 
111, 145, 324, 704, 705 
—battle of 63 

Sirohl 13, 126, 127, 132, 154, 335, 345 
Sironj 292, 293, 715 
Sirr-i-Akbar 14 
Sisodla(s) 291, 329, 330, 331 
—clan 267 
Sisu Isvaradasa 564 
Sisu Sankara Dasa 564 
Sita Devi (Sita Thakurani) 645 
Sitapur 118 
SItaram 559 

Sitdsvayamvara (of Anandatanava) 

583 

Sita-svayamvara (of Nagesa) 583 
Si^d-svayamvara (of Vamana Pandit) 
583 


Sitasvayamvara (of Vithal Bidkar) 

583 

Sitikanthavijaya 607 

Sitn-un-Nisa 702 

Sivaba Kasara 581 

Siva Bharat 278 

Siva-Charitra-Pradipa 17 

Siva-Charitra Sahitya 17 

Siva-Chhatrapatichen Charitra 17 

Sivadhikya Bhaktadhikya 597 

Siva-Digvijaya 17 

Sivakalin-Patra-Sar-Sangraha 17 

Sivakalydna 580 

Sivakaradasa 676 

Sivalilamrita 584 

Sivalilarnava 607 

Siva-mangala (Sivayana) 559 

Sivaprakasa I 641 

Sivaprakasa II 641 

Sivaprakasar 586, 587 

Siva Pratapa Shedgaonkar Bakhar 17 

Sivdrkamanidipikd 614 

Sivayana 641 

Siwalik (hills) 63, 93, 95, 107, 111, 311, 
317 

Siwana 81, 131, 290 
Six Voyages of Tavernier Jean Bap- 
tista through Turkey into Persia 
and the East Indies 709, 710 
Siyar-ul-Aqtab 14 
Siyar-ul- Arifln 14 
Skanda Purdna 585, 635 
Sketch of the Sikhs 677 
Smith, E. W. 18 

Smith, V. A. 18, 19, 100, 101, 103, 172, 
174, 216, 218, 288, 304, 339, 383, 384, 
385, 410, 739, 740 
Smriti-Kaustubha 634 
Smrtitattwa 636 
Soares, Lopo 504, 506 
Sacial and Political Life in the 
Vijayanagar Empire 501, 709 
Social History of Islamic India, A 246, 
304 

Social Life under the Mughals 709, 

710 

Society and Culture during the 
Mughal Age 709, 710, 712 
Socio-Economic History of Northern 
India 711 
Socotra 506 
Sofala 502, 503 
Soghor 291 

Sohan Pal (Bundela) 376 
Sohra 725 
Somanatha 609 

Somasundar Desikar, Pandit 585, 587 
Some Aspects of Muslim 
Administration 173 

Some Coins of the Mughal Emperors 

19 

Somesvara Sataka 597 
Sonargaon 87, 715 
Sonpat 144, 163 
Sopur 147, 148 
Soraba 460 








INDEX 


999 


Soumelpur 725 

South Kensington Museum 19 
Soyrabai 274, 281, 359, 360 
Spain 159, 171, 507, 510, 511, 518 
Spaniard (s), the 137, 510, 511 
Spanish monopoly 510 
Spear, P. 631 

Spencer Churchill, Collection of 818 
Spice Archipelago (Islands) 503, 506, 
507, 510, 511, 518 
Spiers, Rhene 18 
Srlbhatta 647 
Sri Chaitanya Mangala 16 
Srlchandra Sudharma 561 
Sridhara 583 
6rIdharaSvamin 635 
Sridhara Venkatesa 610 
Sri Digambar Jaina Atlsya Kshetra, 
Jaipur 806 
Sri Hargobindpur 313 
Srlkara Nandi 560 
Srinagar 148, 153 
Srlnatha Acharya Chudamani 636 
Sringara Kathe 600 
SringarmdM 570 
Sringdra Malhana Charitra 593 
Sringaramma 599 
Sringdra-Sarvasva 613 
Sringaratilaka 613 
Srinivasa Acharya 644, 645 
Srlnivdsa-champu 611 
Srinivasachari, C. S. 484 
Srinivasa Bhatta Gosvamin 639 
Srinivasa Dikshita 607, 612, 613 
Srinivasa Kavi 598 
Sripadaraya 652 
Sri Ram Sharma 553 
^rlranga I 452, 497 
Slrranga III 458, 498-99, 500, 520 
J^rirangam 486, 653 
Srlrahgapattana 497 
Sri Sampradaydchi Kagadpatre 17 
Sritattva-Chintamani 639 
Sri Tukaramache Charitra 676 
Sri Vaishnavas 634, 635 
Srivastava, A. L. 553, 554, 739 
Steel, Richard 21 
Stephen, Carr 18 
Stephens, Fr. Thomas 512, 580 
Stewart, C. 23 
Storey, C. A. 710 

Storia do Mogor of Niccolao Venetian 
Manned 22, 304, 553, 554, 676, 711 
Straits of Sunda 508, 510 
Student’s Manual of the History of 
India, A 484 

Studies in Aurangzib’s Reign 738, 739 
Studies in Indo-Muslim History 65 
Studies in Islamic Culture in the Indian 
Environment 631, 632 
Studies in Medieval Indian History 
102, 103 

Studies in Mughal India 24, 304, 712 
Studies in the History of Gujarat 409 
Study of Muslim Inscriptions, A 18 
Subhadra-Dhananjaya 612 


Subhadva-parinaya 612 
Subhagasahdesa 611 
Subhakarna 342 
Subhan Quli 470 
Subhat-al-Marjdn 631 
Subh-i-Sadiq 13, 626 
Sudakshina Parinayamu 593 
Suddhitattva 675 
Sudra Kamalakara 675 
Sudrakriya-vichara-tattva 638 
Sufi(s), (Sufism) 14, 15, 133, 135, 138, 
212, 568, 618, 623, 654, 655, 665, 668, 
671, 673, 674 

—Chistiya school 665, 668 
—Indian Sufism 671 
—Naqshbandi saints 14, 15, 309, 617, 
665 

—Naqshabandiya sect 670, 671, 673, 
674 

—other schools 678 
—writers and poets 566 567. 576-77, 
629 

Sugriva Vijaya 592 
Suhail Khan 163, 164, 432, 433 
SuhrawardI saints 14 
Sujan Rai Khattirl 721, 722, 724, 726, 
738 

Sukadeva Gosvamin 640 
Sukakhydna 580 
Suka-Rambha-samvdda 583 
Sukasaptati 599 
Sukh Sen 217 
Sukha Singh 325 

Sulafat aVAsr fi Mahasin ol-Shu’ara bi 
kull Misr 619 

Sulaiman (a minister of Arakan) 561 
Sulaiman (br. of Sher Shah Sur) 70, 
129, 169 

Sulaiman (r. of Turkey) 158, 169 
Sulaiman KararanI 118 
Sulaiman MIrza 32, 38, 60, 61, 69, 142, 
143, 145, 155 
Sulaiman Pasha 398 
Sulaiman Shukoh 214, 220, 223, 226 
—death of 223 

Sulh-i-Kull 40, 106, 113, 139, 171 
Sulldm al-‘Ulum 618 
Sultan Abu Sa‘Id Mirza 25, 26 
Sultan Adam 61, 62 
Sultan Ahmad Khatvi 708 
Sultan ‘All 812 

Sultanates of the Deccan 412-485 
Sultan Bahadur 328, 329, 330, 331 
Sultan Bahu 576 
Sultan Buhlul Lodi 29, 47, 68 
Sultan Husain Mirza Baiqara 26, 27, 
31, 120, 153, 171 
Sultan-i-ddil 135 
Sultan Ibrahim 32, 33, 36, 70 
Sultanlya 59 

Sultan Jalal-ud-DIn 99, 148, 150, 151, 
156 

Sultan Junaid Barlas 46 
Sultan Mahmud (of Ghazni) 324, 372 
—fight with the Jats 372 
Sultan Mahmud of Malwa 328 



1000 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Sultan Mahmud Khan 25, 51, 52, 66 
Sultan Mahmud Lodi 35, 38, 46, 52, 71, 
72 

Sultan Mahmud Mirza 27, 50 
Sultan Mahmud Shah 

see Mahmud Shah of Bengal 
Sultan Muhammad, see Bihar Khan 
Lohani 

Sultan Muhammad Khudabanda 154, 
162 

Sultan Murad II of Turkey 445 
Sultan Nusrat Shah 38 
Sultanpur 32, 56, 65 
Sultans of Delhi and their Metrology 
102 

Sultans of Golconda, history of 475 
Sultan Singh 346 

Sumatra 506, 510, 518, 717, 728, 729 
Sundaracharya 639 
Sundar Das 217, 654 
Sundardas (Ray Rayan) 343 
Sunder Singh 326 

Sunni 40, 65, 90, 93, 105, 109, 117, 134, 
135, 139, 154, 190, 205, 446, 447, 449, 
454, 455, 456, 466, 537, 666, 667 
Sunni Samarqand 28 
Sunya-samhitd 646, 676 
Supa 242 

Supasanahachariyam 804 
Supa Sastra 600 
Surahhi Madhavarayalu 594 
Surappa Nayak (r. of Gingee) 613 
Surajgarh 51, 72, 73, 130 
—battle of 73 
Suraj Mai 183 
Suraj Prakash 677 
Sur-dasa 16, 566, 630, 647, 648, 664, 
693, 694 

Surjan Hara, Rai 15, 107, 124, 125 
Surat 49, 127, 128, 158, 189, 190, 209, 
215, 243, 245, 259, 260, 265, 511, 512, 
513, 514, 515, 518, 715, 717, 723, 725, 
727, 729, 730 
—English factory at 511 
—plundering of (1664 and 1670) 

259, 260, 261, 265, 266 
Sur dynasty 12 
Suria Rao 471 

Surjan-Charita Mahdkavyam 15 
Surhurpur 117, 118, 119 
Sur sugar 67 6 
Sur-Saravali 648 
Sur Sen 217 

Surya Mai Had(r)a 327, 328, 383 
Sutanuti 517, 521 
Suvarnadurg 257 
Svyurghal 141 
‘al-Suyuti 616 
Svaramelakalanidhi 614 
Swally 508, 511 
Swaminathan, K, D. 484 
Swarajya 268, 271 
Swat '30, 148, 149, 150 
Swayamjyoti 630 
Syamaldas 66 
£5yamananda 645, 647 


Syed Ahmad 483, 671, 672 
Syed, Dr. Mahmud 44 
Syed Mohammad 666 
Syria 126, 716 
Syrian Christians 508, 509 

Tabaqat-i-Akbari 6, 7, 44, 65, 66, 102, 
103, 390, 689 
Tabaqat-i-Nasiri 621 
Tabaqat-i-Shahjahani 14 
Tabarhinda 111 
Tabashir al-Subh 622 
Tab‘I 629 
Tabriz 29 

Tadhkira ‘Allama Shaikh Muhammad 
bin Tahir 678 
Tadhkira-i-Gul-i-Rdna 628 
Tadhkira-i-Humdyun wa Akbar 621 
Tafsir-i-Baidawi 619 
Tagore, Rabindranath 798 
Tahavvur Khan 240, 241, 350, 351, 532 
Tahir Khawandi 620 
Tahir Muhammad 9, 11, 23 
Tahmurs 197, 198 
Taj KararanI 98, 129 
Taj Khan 71, 98, 427 
Taj Mahal 217, 218, 773, 780, 783, 793- 
99, 800, 801 
Takhta Beg 151 
Takht Mai 107 
Takmil-i-Akbar-ndma 7 
Talib-i-Amuli 621, 625 
Talib IsfahanI 625 

Talikota, battle of 414, 424-26, 451, 
467, 468, 471, 481, 489, 492-95, 629 
Taliqan 60, 61 
Tallapakam Chinnanna 593 
Tallapakam Pedda Tirumalayya 593 
Talwandl 220, 322 
Tamerlane 40 
Tamgha 176 
Tanaji Malusare 265 
Tanda 130, 131, 141, 142, 222, 715 
Tandalayar Satakam 588 
Tanjavur Cha Silalekh 17 
Tanjore 248, 269, 270, 272, 277, 299, 
366, 367, 595, 596 
—Nayaks of 270, 460, 595 
Tankas 204 
Tansen _ 124, 567, 649 
Tantrasdra 639, 640 
Tantras—Studies on Their Religion and 
Literature , The 675 
Tapatisamvarandpakhyanamu 592 
Tara 812 

Tara Bai 296, 322, 370, 371, 703 
Tarachand, Raja 314 
Tarain 324, 372 
Taran Taran 179, 307 
Tdra-rahasya 639 
Tdrd-rahasyavarttika 639 
Tarbila 26 
Tarbiyat Khan 225 

i TardI Beg Khan 50, 63, 96, 99, 105, 
109 

I Tarif-i-Husain Shahi 820 







INDEX 


1001 


Tarigoppula Mallana 593 
Tdrlkh-i-Adabiyyati-i-iran 631 
Tarlkh-i-Akbar Shahl 4, 172 
Tdrlkh-i-Alfl 13, 65, 172, 623, 678, 811, 
816 

Tarlkh-i-All ‘Adil Shah Sanl 11 
Tdrikh-i-.Almdrai ‘Abbdsi 3, 43 
Tdrlkh-i-Assam 12 
Tarikh-i-A‘ zami 12 
Tdrikh-i-Bad&dni 6 
Tarlkh-i-Dd’udl 12, 66, 324 
Tarlkh-i-Firishta 7, 324, 414, 456, 482 
483, 624 

Tarikh-i-Firuz Shdhi 707 
Tdrikh-i-Gujardt 11, 65 
Tarlkh-i-Haqql 7, 623 
Tarikh-i-Humdyun 4 
Tarikh-i-Humdyun Shahl 7, 623 
Tarlkh-i-Kashmlr 12, 628 
Tdrikh-i-Khdnddn-i-Timiria 19, 44, 65, 
811 

Tdrlkh-i-Khdn-Jahanl-wa-Makhzan- 
i-Afghanl 12 

Tdrlkh-i-M‘asumi, see Tarikh-i-Sind 
Tarlkh-i-Mubarak Shahl 12 
Tdrlkh-i-Muhammad Qutb Shdhi 11, 
414, 475, 482, 484 
Tarlkh-i-Nizdml 385 
Tarlkh-i-Qutb Shahl 624 
Tarlkh-i-Rashldl 3, 12, 102, 410 
Tdrlkh-i-Salatin-i-Afghania 
see Tdrikh-i-Shdhi 
Tdrlkh-i-Shdh Shujd‘l 10, 12 
Tdrlkh-i-Shahl 12, 44, 66, 82 
Tarlkh-i-Sher Shahl 8, 66, 383 
Tarlkh-i-Sind 11 
Tarlkh-i-Tdhlri 11 
Tdrlkh-Khandan-i-Timurid 12 
Tarkatdndava 615 
Tartary 716, 717, 734 
Tashkent 25 

Tatar Khan 47, 120, 329, 383, 395, 396 
Tatar Khan Kashi 62, 95 
Tatimma-i-Tuzuk-i-Jahdnglrl 483 
Tatimma Waqi c dti-i-Jahangiri 8 
Tatta 56, 58, 152 
Tattvatraya 599 
Tauhid-i-Wujudi 15 
Tavarlkh-i-Bangala 11 
Tavernier, Jean Baptist 22, 277, 484, 
709, 710, 717, 724, 727, 737, 738, 739 
Tavers, Manvel 201 
Tawarikh-i-Qutb Shdhi 624 
Taylor, Bayard 798 
Taylor, Meadows 455, 483, 484 
Tayumanavar 641 
Tazkirat-i-Tahmdsp 4 
Tazkirat-ul-Mulk 11, 414, 482, 483 
Tazkirdt-ul-Wdqi‘dt 4, 102 
Tazkirat-us-Salatin-i-Chaghtaia 12 
Tegh Bahadur (Sikh Guru) 237, 315, 
316, 322, 665 
—execution of 316 
Tehran 3, 23, 184 
Teja Singh 325, 660 


Telingana 209 

Teliyagarhi 52, 66, 73, 74, 75, 130, 131, 
141, 142 
—battle of 73 

Temple, Richard 21, 22, 277 
Tenali Annayya 593 
Tenali Ramabhadra Kavi 593 
Tenali Ramakrishna (Ramalinga) 

590 

Tenasserim 731 
Tengalai school 634 
Terry, E. 20, 190, 192, 554, 720, 738, 
739 

Thackarey, K. S. 675 
Thakuria sect 644 
Thdna(s) 80 
Thana‘1 625 

Thanesari, Shaikh Jalal-ud-dln 15 
Thaneswar 306, 706 
Thatta 704, 705, 726 
Thevenot, Monsieur de 476, 690, 709, 
712 720 

Thomas, Edward 18, 102, 103 
Thondaimandala Satakam 588 
Thoothi, N. A. 676 

Thrones, Chairs and Seats used by the 
Indian Mughals 710 
Thunchathu Ezhuthachan 601, 602, 

603, 604 

Tibet 134, 314, 656, 717 
Tiele, P. A. 20 
Tihara 111 

Tikkana Somayaji 592 
! Tikota 273 
Tilwara 111 
Timma 600 
Timmakavi 599 
Timmanna 598 
Timmarasa 600 
Timoja 503, 505 

Timur 5, 25, 29, 30, 35, 39, 55, 120, 135, 
190, 324 

Timurids 27, 117 

Timurid dynasty, history of 8, 10, 12 

Timur-nama 811 

Tippera 725 

Tipu Sultan 709 

Tirah 148, 150, 151 

Tirgiran 60 

Tirhoot (Tirhut) 53, 141, 704, 709 
Tirukkalurkunra Puranam 587 
Tirukkaruvai Paditruppattanthatl 
585 

Tirthaprabandha 608 

Tirumal I 425, 486, 487, 488, 495, 496 

Tirumalamba 609, 703 

Tirumala Nayak of Madura 500, 596 

Tirumalarya 599 

Tirumalvadi 272 

Tirumale Vaidya 598 

Tirupati 653 

Tiruvadi 486 

Tiruvilayadal Puranam 587 
Tobhya-charitra 594 
Toda Bhim 725 
I Todarananda 634 











1002 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Todar Mai, Raja 118, 119, 120, 128, 
130, 131, 133, 141, 148, 149, 167, 181, 
183, 209, 251, 382, 408, 444, 455, 529, 
535, 567, 627, 633 

Tod, Col. James 36, 43, 334, 336, 384, 
385, 649, 701, 712 
Tondaimandalam 490, 495 
Tonk 81 ‘ 

Toma 242, 295, 297, 458 
Transactions of the Archaeological 
Society of Agra 18 
Transformation of Sikhism 195 
Transoxiana 25, 117, 127, 156, 158, 191, 
204, 205 

Travancore 486, 490 
—chiefs of 606 

Travels and Adventures 20, 172 
Travels in India 22, 739 
Travels in the Mogul Empire 22, 710 
Travels of a Noble Roman into the 
East Indies and Arabian Deserts 
709, 711 

Travels of Monsieur de Thevenot into 
the Levant 22, 709, 710 
Travels of F. S. Manrique 710 
Travels of Peter Mundy 21 
Travels of Pietro Della Valle in India 
21 

Travels of Sebastian Manrique 21 
Travels of Thevenot & Careri 711 
Trichinopoly 460 
Trilochan Singh, Dr. 677 
Triloka Sataka 597 
Tripura 557, 642 
—kings of 562 
Troyer, Anthony 24 
Trumpp, Dr. 372 
Tryambakaraj 580 
Tubingen State Library 805 
Tufal Khan 113, 465, 466 
Tuhfa-i-Akbar Shdhi 8 
Tuhfa-i-Sami 620 
Tuhfat-ul-Kiram 11, 518 
Tukabai 233 

Tukarama (Santa) 578, 581, 583, 635, 
650, 651, 652, 653, 694 
Tukaroi 130 
Tula Dan 193, 213 
Tulghama 36 
Tuluva dynasty 606 
Tuisi Das 16, 564, 565, 566, 603, 635, 
647, 649, 693, 694, 704 
Tungabhadra, battle of 488 
Tura (breastworks) 42 
Turan 150, 156, 206, 692 
Turanians 206 
Turbat Khan 205 
Turk(s) 34, 38, 40 

Turkey 39, 126, 158, 169, 505, 622, 685, 
716, 718 

Turkistan 730 
Tuticorin 731 

Tuzuk-i-Bdburi 1, 2, 324, 383, 553, 
620, 710, 712, 737 
—popularity of 2 


Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri 1, 8, 9, 174, 195, 324, 
325, 382, 386, 387, 483, 553, 625, 678, 
701, 710, 711, 739, 772 

‘Ubaidullah Ahrar 666 
‘Ubaid-ullah Khan 28 
Ubhayagrastardhudaya 613 
Uchh 56, 57, 673 

Udaipur 131, 132, 239, 247, 265, 266, 
267, 301, 333, 350, 725 
Udayagiri 471, 497, 498, 499 
Uday Singh, Rana 82, 107, 114, 121, 
327, 330, 331, 332-35, 336, 381, 383, 
384 

Udbhatarddhya Charitra 591 

Uddhavasuta 582 

Udgir 467 

Udipi 652, 653 

Udugani 460 

Uighur Khan 232, 291 

Ujjain 47, 80, 120, 122, 215, 220, 715 

Ujjainiya 203 

Ulama 134, 135, 136 

Ulema(s) 192, 474, 616 

Ullugh Beg 26, 43 

Ulugh Mirza 27, 120 

Umar Caliph 544 

‘Umarkot 58 

‘Umar Shaikh Mirza 25, 120 
Ummattur 486 
University of Allahabad 5 
Unnayi Varyar 605, 606 
Unnichairutevi-charitam 601 
Unnunili Sandesam 602 
Upanishads 626, 654 
Upendra Bhanja 564 
Urdu, birth of 628, 629 
‘Urfi 621 

‘Urfi Shiraz! 622, 707 
Urganj, see Khiva 
Urva 307 
Ushabhilasa 564 
Ushd-parinaya 594 
Usha-parinayamu 593 
Usman 567 
‘Usman Khan 183 

Ustad Ali Quli 29, 34, 36, 37, 41, 42, 
43 

Ustad ‘Isa 797 
Uttara-champu 611 
Uttar Pradesh 721, 722 
Uttara Ramayanamu 593 
Uzbak Khan 431 

Uzbegs 25, 27, 28, 29, 32, 33, 38, 45, 
60, 61, 117, 118, 119, 132, 143 
—rebellion against Akbar 117, 118 

Vadagalai school 634 
Vadiraja 608 
Vadirajatirtha 615 

Vaghela kings of Bhatt (Rewa) 15, 606 

Vaidyanatha Bhanjadeo 647 

Vaidya Sdngatya 600 

Vaidya Sara Samgraha 600 

Vaidya, V. K. 630 

Vaijay anti Vilasamu 592 







INDEX 


1003 


Vaishnava literature 555, 556, 558, 

56i, 563, 566 

Vaishnava movement, see 
Vaishnavas 

Vaishnavas of Gujarat, The 676 
Vaishnavas (Vaishnavism) 640, 642, 
643, 645, 646, 647, 651, 652, 653 
Vaishnava-toshani 675 
Vaisikatantram 601 
Vakil 71, 111, 113, 114 
Valigandapuram, battle of 272 
Vallabhacharl sect 647, 649, 652 
Vallabhacharya 566, 647, 648, 676 

V allabhakhydna 652 
Vallam 460 

Valle, Della 703 
Valmlki-charitra 595 
Vamachara doctrine 640 
Vamana Pandita 583 
Vambery, A. 20 
Vambery, H. 3, 23, 172 
Vamsavali 599 
Varhsi Gopaladeva 643 
Vanavlr 331, 332 
Vdnlvilasa Vanamdlikd 593 
Van Linschoten, J. H. 20 
Varadambika 487 
Varaddmbikd-Parinaya 608, 703 
Varanasi see Banaras 

V aranga-Charita 597 
Var Asa 677 

Varathunga Pdndyan 584, 585 

V ardhamdna-Charita 597 
Varthema, Ludovico di 737 
Vasant Vilasa 804, 805 

Vasco da Gama 502, 503, 504, 509, 729 
—Indian expedition (1502) 504 

Vasco da Gama and His Successors 
518 

Vasu Charitra 590, 592, 594 
Vasudeva 611, 704 
Vdyu Purdna 635 
Vazir Khan (gr. of Gujarat) 133 
133 

Vazir Khan of Sirhind (a gnl. of 
Aurangzlb) 322, 323 
Vedahgaraja 16 
Veddntasurya 584 
Vedas, the 654, 661, 664 
Veetapur 717 

Vellore 245, 295, 458, 499, 500 
Ve(i)ngurla 282 
Venkata I 487 
Venkata II 473, 497, 608 
Venkata III 475, 498 
Venkatadhvarin 608, 611 
Venkatadri 423, 425 
Venkatamakhi 614 
Venkatapati (br. of Tirumal, k. of 
Vijaynagar) 497 

Venkatapati Deva (Sudra priest) 634 
Venkatesa 607 
Venkatesa-mdhdtmya 584 
Venubai 582 
Verma, R. C. 174 
Vetriverkai 585 


Victoria and Albert Museum, London 
808, 811, 815, 818 
Victoria Memorial, Calcutta 19 
Vidya-Sundara Kavya 559, 562 
Vijayadurg 257 

Vijayanagara 30, 248, 252, 414, 418, 
419, 420, 475, 486-501, 503, 588, 589, 
593, 595, 596, 614, 685, 691, 733 
—plunder and destruction of 425-26 
Vijayaraghava Nayak 460, 595, 596 
Vijayaranga Chokkanatha Nay aka 597 
Vijayasena Suri 137 
Vijaya-Vilasamu 595 
Vijayendra Suri, Collection of 806 
Vijayindratirtha (Pontiff) 615 
Vijayindratirtha (S. dramatist) 612 
Vikat Kavi Gopalarayadu 596 
Vikramaditya (s. of Sanga) 327, 328, 
329, 330, 331 

—submits to Sultan Bahadur of 
Gujarat 329 

Vikramajit, Raja 35, 105 
Vikrampur 142 
Vimalaprabandh 572 
Vinaya-Patrika 565 
Vindhyas 83 
Vinukonda 471 
VIrabhadra Nayak, Raja 457 
—accepts surzerainty of Bijapur 457 
Vira Bhadra Raja 600 
Vira-bhdnudaya Kavyam 15 
Vira Hambir 644 
Vlramitrodaya 610, 634 
Viraraghav Mudaliar 587 
Virasaivamritapurdna 597 
Virasimha of Orchha 634 
Vira Simha Deva Charitra 16 
Virupaksha Pandita 597, 598 
Vlrvinod 66, 383, 384, 385 
Vishalgarh 295, 297 
Vishnudasanama 580 
Vishnu Purdna 563, 599, 637 
Visvagunadarsa-champu 611 
Visvesvar Bhatta 267, 637 
Vithal Bidkar 583 

Vithal Nath Gosvami 13, 647, 648, 652 

Vitha Renukanandana 580 

Vithalraj 444 

Vitthala 490, 491 

Vitthala Krishna 610 

Vitthalanatha 676 

Vivartavilasa 646 

Vizagapatam 731 

Voltaire 169 

Voyage in the Year 1689, A 709 
Voyage of John Huyghen Van Lin- 
schoten to the East Indies, The 
20 

Voyage of Peter Floris to the East 
Indies (1611-15 ) 21 
Voyage of Thomas Best ( 1612-14 ) 21 

Voyages and Travels, etc. of Albert 
Mandelslo (1638-39), The 22 
Voyage through India, Persia, etc., of 
Master Joseph Salbancke (1609-10) 
21 








1004 


THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Voyage to East Indies, The (1614-15) 

21 

Voyage to Surat in 1689, A 22 
Voyage to the East Indies, etc. of 
Francois Pyrard 20 
Vrindavana 13 
Vrindavana Das 13 
Vrindavana Das Thakur 16, 644 
Vrittivdrtika 613 
Vyankoji, see Ekoji 
Vyasaraya (Vyasatirtha) 615, 652, 653 
Vyasayogicharita 609 

Wagingera 297 
Wahadt-ul-Wujud 15 
Wai 258 
Wairagiri 725 
Wais Mirza 27, 28, 31 
Waite, Sir Nicholas 415 
Wa’iz Kashlfi’s 617 
Wakaskar, V. S. 17 
Waliullah 705 

Walters Gallery, Baltimore 811, 812 
Walvis Bay 502 
Wandiwash 288 

Wanta grant, resumption of 400 
Waqai 10 
Waqaya 8 

Waqi‘at, see Zafar-ndma-i-Alamgiri 
Waris Shah 575, 576 
Warangal 469 
Whitehead, R. B. 19 
White King, L. 19 
White way, R. S. 409 
Williams, (Prof.) Rushbrook, L. F. 5, 
41, 43, 44 

Wilson, H. H. 676 
Winter, Sir Edward 516 
Withington, N. 20 
Woodroffe, Sir John 675 
Wright, H. Nelson 18, 102, 103 

Xavier, Fr. Jerome 159, 189 
Xavier, Fr. Wendel 390 

Yadgar Nasir Mirza 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 
58, 60, 61, 409 

Yadavas of Devagiri 247, 578 
Yadava-Raghavlya 608 
Yadgar Sultan 157 
Yadgar Sultan Rumlu 155 
Yahiyabin-'Abdul Latif 8 
Yahiya bin Ahmad 12 
Yale, Elihu 516 
Yaman 225 

Ya'qub (k. of Kashmir) 146, 147. 148, 
407, 408, 411 

—accepts Mughul suzerainty 408 

Yaqut 165 

Yar ‘All Beg 154 

Yasin, Dr. 302 

Yasoraj Khan 557 

Yasovanta-dasa 646 

Yasovant Singh 16 


Yathdrtha-dipikd 583 

Y ayati-charitra 592 
Yazd 184 

Yazdani, G. 481, 484 
Yemen 707 
Yesubai 273, 365, 366 
—gives new lead to the Marathas 
365-66 

Yogasahgvdma 580 

Y oga-vdsishtha 626 
Yogi(s) 133, 136 
Yunus Khan 25 

Yusuf ‘Adil Khan 412, 445-47 
Yusuf bin Muhammad 621 
Yusuf Husain 632 

Yusuf Shah 147, 148, 169, 406, 407, 
408, 410, 411, 577 

Yusufzal(s) 30, 31, 230, 231, 232 
Yusuf-u-Zulaikha 621, 629 
Zad-ul-Muttdqin 14, 623 
Zafar al-Walih hi Muzaffar wa Alih 
619 

Zafar Beg 132 
Zafar Khan 625 

Zafarnama (of Guru Govind Singh) 
321, 326 

Zafar-nama (of Sharafuddin 'Ali 
Yazdi) 707 

Zafar-ndma-i-Alamgiri 10 
Zafar-nama-i-Kangra 707 
Zafar al-Walih hi Muzaffar wa Alih 
11, 481 

Zafarwal 716 
Zahid Beg 53, 60 

Zahlr-ud-DIn Muhammad Babur 25 

Zahir-ul-Insha 11 

Zahur bin Zahuri 11 

Zain, Khan 2, 149, 150, 151 

Zain-ud-din 528 

Zain-ul-‘Abidin Sultan 577 

Zakat 85, 299 

Zamaniya 129 

Zaminhos 212 

Zamindari system 85 

Zamln Dawar 154 

Zamorin(s) 427, 451, 503, 504, 505, 508, 
606, 607, 611 
Zanzibar 503 
Zarb-zan (swivel) 42 
Zend Avesta 134 
Zib-un-Nisa 14, 626, 702, 708, 709 
Zide, N. 676 
Zil-ul-lah 475 
Zinat-un-Nisa 708 
Ziya-ul-mulk Qazvlnl 155 
Zorawar Singh 321 
Zoroastrian(ism) 134, 135, 137, 138, 
140 

Zubaid Ahmad 617, 631 
Zuhdat-ut-Tawdrikh 7, 172 
Zu’l Fiqar Khan 294, 295, 520 
Zu-’n-Nun Arghun 27, 31 










Plate 1. 


Sasaram: Tomb of Sher Shah. (pp. 744-45) 



Plate 2. Delhi, Purana Quila: Gateway, (p. 746) 







Plate 4. Delhi, Purana Quila: Quila-i-Kuhna Mosque, (pp. 746-47) 





















Plate 5. Delhi, Purana Quila: Quila-i-Kuhna 
Mosque, Principal Mihrab. (p. 747) 



Plate 6. Delhi: Tomb of Humayun. (pp. 748-50) 






































Plate 7. Delhi : Tomb of Isa Khan. (p. 751) 



Plate 8. Delhi: Tomb of Ad.ham Khan. (p. 751) 














Plate 9. Gwalior: Tovxb of Muhammad Ghaus. (pp. 751-52) 



Plate 10. Gwalior Fort: Rampart from the east. (p. 754) 
























Plate 11. Gwalior Fort: Elephant gateway. (p. 754) 
























Plate 13. 


Agra Fort: Elephant Gate. (pp. 756-57) 



Plate 14. Agra Fort : Jahangiri Mahal, View from front, (p. 758) 


















Plate 16. Fathpur Sikri: Jami Masjid, Principal Mihrab. 

(pp. 762-63) 
































Plate 17. Fathpur Sikri: Buland Darwaza. 


(pp. 763-65) 



••aww 


****&*» 








Plate 18. Fathpur Sikri: Tomb of Shaikh Salim Chisti. (pp. 765-66) 
















































Plate 21. 


Fathpur Sikri: Jodha Bai’s Palace, view from court. 


(pp. 767-68) 



Plate 22. Fathpur Sikri : Jodha Bai's Palace, another view. (pp. 767-68) 




















Plate 23. Fathpur Sikri: House of Birbal. (p. 768) 



Plate 24. Fathpur Sikri: House of 
Birbals’ Brackets, (p. 768) 



























Plate 25. Fathpur Sikri: Turkish Sultana’s House with the Hauz. (p. 769) 



Plate 26. Fathpur Sikri: House of Mariam, (p. 769) 


















Plate 27. Fathpur Sikri• Pcincli Mahal. 


(pp. 769-70) 



Plate 28. Agra, Sikandra: Mausoleum of Akhar, Facade, (pp. 772-74) 
























Plate 29. Agra, Sikandra : Akbar’s mausoleum, Gateway, (p. 773) 



Plate 30. Agra: Tomb of Itimad-ud-Daula. (pp. 778-80) 































Plate 31. 


Agra: Tomb of Itimad-ud-Daula, General view. 


(pp. 778-80) 







Plate 32. Agra: Tomb of Itimad-ud-Daula, Marble grilles, (p. 779) 




















Plate 33. 


Delhi: Tomb of Abdur Rahim Khan-i-Khanan. 


(p. 780) 

















Plate 35. Agra Fort: Diwan-i-Am, Interior, (p. 784) 






















Plate 38. Agra Fort: Musamman Burz, View from the river. (p. 786) 













Plate 39. Agra: Moti Masjid. (pp. 786-87) 



Plate 40. Delhi , Ped Fort: Lahore Gate. (p. 788) 






















Plate 41. 


Delhi, Red Fort: 


Diwan-i-Am, 


General view. (p. 789) 



Plate 42. Delhi , Red Fort: Diwan-i-Am. (pp. 788-89) 










Plate 43. Delhi, Red Fort: Diwan-i-Am, Interior with 
throne platform, (pp. 788-89) 
























Plate 45. Delhi, Red Fort: Scales of Justice, (p. 790) 


















































Plate 47. Delhi , Red Fort: Rang Mahal, (pp. 790-91) 





Plate 48. 


Agra: Jarrti Masjid. (pp. 792-93) 



Plate 49. Agra: Taj Mahal, View from front, (pp. 794-95) 





























Plate 50. Agra; Taj Mahal, Gateway, (pp. 793-94) 



Plate 51. Agra: Taj Mahal, Gateway , Back view. (p. 794) 
































Plate 52. 


Agra: Taj 


Mahal, View from the river, (pp. 


793-95) 



Plate 53. Agra: Taj Mahal, Marble rail around cenotaphs, (p. 795) 













































Plate 54. Agra: Taj Mahal, Cenotaphs, (p. 795) 



Plate 55. Agra: Taj Mahal, Mosque, (p. 794) 























































































































Plate 58. St. Mathew writing, Mughul Copy hy Plate 59. Folio from the Diwan-i- 

Kesavdas , Bodleian Library, Oxford. Raza Library , Rampur. 










Plate 60. Portrait of Raja Birbal , Bharat Kala Plate 61. Portrait of Suraj Mai by Nanha, 

Bhavan, Banaras. Indian Museum, Calcutta. 






































Plate 62. Jahangir hunting a Lioness, Plate 63. Jahangir celebrating the festival of 

Indian Museum, Calcutta. ‘Ab-Pashi ’ by Govardhan, 

Raza Library , Ramyur. 






















































































Plate 66. Madonna and Child , Mughul Copy, Plate 67. Shah Jahan witnessing Sufis dancing, 

Indian Museum, Calcutta. Indian Museum, Calcutta. 











Plate 68. Portrait of Shah Johan in old age, Plate 69. Portrait of a Mughul Officer. 

Prince of Wales Museum, Bombay. 




































.. 

■|1 Hi i^pgidilgi^ii^SMsiiiiiiwlSpiit^^^^is^ 


H 

wSBSllllMlr 

a 

I MBWi 

•:< 

1 > iB ?,; ‘lpW 

I 

If | 

[ML 

— 

i w 11PI * i 

I ]§1 I 

§« 

i in 


; : . : iiii 


V, V:. 


Mi m 

fed* - fc': 

ill IIIII WIIIIIMI II K mmmMml 


?%*£&&&. 

•- f • A:«ffc#; 




MmuI 


■ 


' :■> 


MM 


■ :?f “->!■■.. 

i #1 ^ .-■-.-.. :.- s . „ I 

,' - IWi 




Plate 71. Lady with a Myna, Bijapur School, 

Plate 70. A Mughul Princess, Indian Museum, Chester Beatty Library, Dublin . 

Calcutta. 


























Plate 72. Sultan with his Minister, Golconda School , 
Indian Museum, Calcutta. 


















Colour Plate 1. Folio from the Nimatnama. India Office Library, London. 


















Colour Plate 2. Folio from Dastan-i-Amir Hamza. Freer Gallery of Arts, 

Washington D .C. 










Colour Plate 3. Folio from the Anwar-i-Suhaili. School of Oriental and 

African Studies, University of London. 

























Colour Plate 4. Celebration of the Birth of a Prince. Folio from the dispersed 
Akbarnama. Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 





























Colour Plate 5. Folio from the Raj Kunwar. Chester Beatty Library, 

Dublin. 


\ 














/ 


954 

H67 

v.7 






























