





OF THE 

INDIAN PEOPLE 

■ : ★ -■ ^ 





Hpp^ .MUMBAI . ■ 

Agartala * Agra * Ahmedabad 45 Allahabad * Amritsar * Andheri * Aurangabad 
Bagalkot * Bangalore * Baroda * Belgaum * Bellary * Bharuch * Bharwari 
Bhatpara * Bhimavaram * Bhopal * Bhubaneshwar * Bhusawal 45 Chandigarh 
Chatrapur (Bhatti Mines) * Chennai * Coimbatore * Dakor * Dehradun * Guntur 
Guruvayur * Guwahati * Haldia * Hazira * Hosur * Hubli-Dharwad * Hyderabad 
Indore * lrinjalakuda * Jabalpur % Jaipur * Jalgacm * Jammu Tawi *' Jamftagar 
Jodhpur * Kakinada * Kammam * Kanchipuram * Kannur * Kanpur * Khor * Kochi 
Kodagu * Kodaikanal * Kodinar * Kodungallur * Kolhapur * Kolkata * Kollam 
Korba * Kosamba * Kota * Kottayam * Kozhikode * Kurkunta * Kutch * Lucknow 
Machilipatnam * Madurai * Malkhed * Mangalore *. 'Munkapur * Modipuram 
Mukundgarh * MUMBAI H.O. * Mysore f. Nadiad * Nagercoii * Nagpur * Nasik 
Navi Mumbai * New Delhi * Palakkad * Panehkula * Patna * Ponnani 44 Pune 
Puthucode * Raipur * Ramachandrapuram * Ramanattukara * Ratangarh 
Reddipalayam * Renukoot * Roorkee * Rourkela * Salav * Satna * Secunderabad 
Serampore *. Shimoga * Silgiri * Suehindrahr; * Surat * Tadepalligudam 
Taliparamba * Thirunavaya * Thiruvananthapuram * Thrissur * Tirupati * Udipi 
Manipal * Ujjain * Valanchery * Varanasi ;* Visakhapatnam * Wardha * Wayanad 































irt the seventh volume of -this series it was stated that the 


phase oPconquest and expansion of the two great military 
powers in India — the Marathas and the Sikhs — and of the 
foreign powers one of which was ultimately to play a* 
dominant role in the history of this continent, would be set 
forth in Volume VIII Which/woaki complete this series of 
"The History and Culture of the Indian People’'. This has 
now been done in this volume. It deals with the period from 
the death of Aurangzib (1707) to the third Anglo-Maratha 
War (IBIS), ' ; "b . V' •' 


Irwas an eventful'period that witnessed the end of 
Muslim rule, the rise and fall of the Maratha empire and the 
foundation of British empire in India, 

This period—the eighteenth century—is rightly looked 
on as the age of Maratha Supremacy. The Maratha 
dominated the Indian political scene right upto the end of 
the century. With the death of emperor Aurangzib vanished 
the glory and pregtige of the Mughul empire. The governors 
of distant provinces assumed independence for all practical 
purposes. The Afghans started sweeping down to the plains 
of India from their eyries in the mountains in the north west. 
Among the Hindu populace of the empire, there were revolts 
against foreign rule and resurgence. The Rajputs, the Sikhs, 
the Jats; the Bundelas and the Marathas all started thinking 
in terms of independence and challenged the might of the 
empire. The Marathas proved the most successful of the lot, 
liberated their homeland and carried the war into the 
enemy’s country. Peshwa Balaji Vishwanath set on the bold 
adventure of participating in the imperial affairs by the 
treaty of 1718. Under his son and grandson, Peshw3 Baji Rao 
and Balaji Rao, participation made wav for direction and 
control. The Marathas succeeded to a large extent in 
conquering Malwa. Gujarat and a part of Bhundelkhand and 
levying tribute from Bengal to the Punjab and from Agra to 
Arcot. Unfortunately they were unable to develop 
satisfactory administrative, political and cultural institutions 
to evoke the cooperation of the local people and win their 
loyalties. The defeat at Panipat (1761) and the First Anglo- 
. Maratha War created in the MaratKas State which were 
never healed. 


All this While, the British were pushing forward their 
conquests from the East and the South, and it was dear they 
would one day clash with the Marathas for supremacy. This 
fact remained hidden temporarily by Mahadji Sindia's 
assumption of the powers of a king-maker at Delhi (1784-94). 
During the decade that followed his death, all the great and 
wise leaders of the Maratha State departed from the earthly 
scene and the great proconsul Wellesley found himself 
dealing with small men who could not understand that their 
interest lay in cohesion and unity. British diplomacy created 
disarray among Maratha chiefs and fought them separately 
Maratha supremacy was gone. A sleepy, inert, feudal society 
was overpowered by an aggressive imperialism deriving its 
strength from the new learning and new science. 


Religious reformers arose who tried to interpret tenets of 
Hindu religion in a liberal way. among the Muslim there was 
a harking back to the old days of simplicity in religion. The 
sel ient economy based on domestic consumption was 
shattered first fey extraordinary privileges the British 
conquerors claimed for themselves, and later by the unequal 
competition of the Industrial Revolution of the West. AH this 


would be found discussed in the present volume. 

The contributors to the vojume are eminent scholars 
such as Prof. B. P. Saksena, Prof. K. K.. Datta, Prof. H. R. 
Gupta, Dr. Raghubir Singh, Prof. Puntamfcekar, Prof. C S. 
Sririivasachari, Prof. A. P. Dass and Prof. R. K. Mukherjee 
and others. ' 7 


















t 


V-.V W tv 

- 




£ V'.. j;v- ‘A .• 


. -Tv 











3TT Tt ^r: SFcfcfr fqw: 

Let noble thoughts come to us from every side 


Rigveda, I-89-i 


BHAVAN'S BOOK UNIVERSITY 


General Editor 

S. RAMAKRISHNAN 


History and Culture of the Indian People 

Volume VIII 


THE MARATHA 
SUPREMACY 






Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
Public.Resource.Org 


https://archive.org/details/marathasupremacy08bhar 


BHAVAN'S BOOK UNIVERSITY 


History and Culture of the Indian People 


Volume VIII 


THE M AR AT H A 

SUPREMACY 


General Editor 


R. C. MUJUMDAR, M.A.,Ph.D., D. LiTT. (Hony.) 


Vice-President of the International Commission for a History 
of the Scientific and Cultural Development of Mankind set up 
by UNESCO: Hon. Fellow of the Asiatic Society, Kolkata 

Hon. Head of the Department of History, 

Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Bombay; 

Formerly Vice-Chancellor, University of Dacca: 
Principal, College of Indology, Hindu University, Banaras: 
and Visiting Professor of Indian History, Universities 
of Chicago and Pennsylvania (U.S.A.) 

ASSISTANT EDITOR 



Formerly Senior Research Officer, Ministry of External Affairs: 
Senior Scholar, Ministry of Education, New Delhi. 



2001 


BHARATIYA VIDYA BHAVAN 

Kulapati K.M. Munshi Marg, 
Mumbai - 400 007. 




All rights reserved by the Publishers 


© Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan 
Kulapati Munshi Marg, Mumbai-400 007. 


First Edition 1977 
Second Edition 1991 
Third Edition 2001 


Price Rs.: 500.00 


PRINTED IN INDIA 

By Atul Goradia at Siddhi Printers, 13/14, Bhabha Building, 
13th Khetwadi Lane, Mumbai 400 004 and published by 
S. Ramakrishnan, Executive Secretary, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, 
Kulapati Munshi Marg, Mumbai-400 007. 


CONTRIBUTORS 


R. C. MAJUMDAR 

M. A., Ph.D.,D.LITT. (Hon.) 

General Editor. 

B. P. SAKSENA 

M. A., Ph.D. 

Formerly Professor of History, Allahabad University. 

V. G. DIGHE 

M. A , Ph D. 

Formerly Senior Research Officer, Ministry of External 
Affairs; Senior Scholar, Ministry of Education, New Delhi. 

K. K. DATTA 

M.A., Ph.D. 

Formerly Professor of History, Patna, & Vice-Chancellor , Magadha University. 

H. R. GUPTA 

M.A , Ph.D. 

Formerly Professor of History, Punjab University. 

RAGHUBIR SINH 

M.A., D. LITT., LL.B. 

J. N. CHAUDHURI 

M.A., Ph.D. 

Formerly Lecturer, Brahmananda Keshabchandra College, Barrackpur. 

(Late) S. V. PUNTAMBEKAR 
m.a., (Oxon), Bar-at-Law 
Professor of Politics , University of Nagpur. 

A. C. BANERJEE 

M.A., Ph.D. 

Formerly Professor of History, Calcutta University db Jadavpur University. 

(Late) RAO SAHIB C. S. SRINIVASACHARI 

Professor of History, Anmamalai University. 

A. P. DAS GUPTA 

Formerly Controller of Examinations & Inspector of Colleges. 

Calcutta University. 

S. N. SEN 

M.A., Ph.D. 

Lecturer in History, Vidyasagar College , CalOutta. 

(Late) N. K. SINHA 

M.A., Ph.D. 

Professor of History , Calcutta University. 


S. N. QANUNGO 

M.A., Ph.D. 

Lecturer in History , Lucknow University 


(Late) D. N. BANERJEE 

M*A.» PlU>. 

Professor of History, Dacca St Calcutta Universities. 

RAMANLAL C. SHAH 

M.A., Phj». 

Head, Department of Gujarati, University of Bombay 

R. V. HERWADKAR 

M.A., B.T., Ph.D. 

Professor and Head of the Department of Marathi, 

St. Xavier's College, Bombay. 

EL R. SRINIVASA IYENGAR 

M.A., D.UTT. 

Formerly Professor and Vice-Chancellor, Andhra University. 

S. V. JOGA RAO 

M.A., Ph.D. 

Head. Department of Telugu, Andhra University Postgraduate Centre, Guntur. 

S. SRIKANTHA SASTRI 

M.A., Ph.D. 

Formerly Professor of History, University of Mysore. 

S. K. NAYAR 

M.A., Ph.D. 

Professor, University of Madras. « 

PROF. A. N. JAFREE 

M.A , Ph.I>. 

RAM PANJWANI 

M.A., Ph.D. 

Head, Department of Sindhi, University of Bombay. 

ABDUS SUBHAN 

M.A., Ph.D. 

Lecturer, Maulana Azad College, Calcutta. 

S. A. UPADHYAYA 

M.A. 

Jt. Director (Academic), Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Bombay. 

(Late) BIMAN BEHARI MAJUMDAR 

M.A., Ptl.D. 

Professor of History, Patna University. 

(Late) RADHA KAMAL MUKHERJEE 

Head of the Department of Economics, Lucknow University. 



FOREWORD 


The publication of this volume completes “ THE HISTORY AND 
CULTURE OF THE INDIAN PEOPLE ” Series published by the 
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Bombay. It was originally planned to con¬ 
sist of only ten volumes; and the first six volumes, ending with the 
history of the Delhi Sultanate, were published between 1951 and 1960. 

In the meanwhile the idea had gradually gained ground that the 
British period of Indian history ending with the independence of 
India was so important both from practical and sentimental points 
of view that it must take precedence over the other volumes and 
should be dealt with in three volumes instead of two, assigned to it. 
So Volumes IX, X and XI, dealing with the British rule in India, 
were published between 1963 and 1969. Volume VII dealing with 
the Mughul period was then taken up and published in 1974. The 
present Volume VIII, dealing with the period from 1707 to 1818, 
completes the scheme, initiated in 1944, of writing the history and 
culture of the Indian people from the earliest times. 

The project of writing this history was conceived by Dr. K. M. 
Munshi and the idea lying behind it is stated by him in the following 
words in the Foreword to Vol. I of this series: 

“In the course of my studies I had long felt the inadequacy 
of our so-called Indian histories. For many years, therefore, I 
was planning an elaborate history of India in order not only 
that India’s past might be described by her sons, but also that 
the world might catch a glimpse of her soul as Indians see it. 
The Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, an educational society which 1 
founded in 1938, took over the scheme. It was, however, realiz¬ 
ed only in 1944, when my generous friend Mr. G.D. Birla, one 
of India’s foremost industrialists, lent me his co-operation and 
the support of the Shri Krishnarpan Charity Trust of which he 
is the Chairman. As a result, ‘The Bharatiya Itihas Samiti*, the 
Academy of Indian History, was formed with the specific ob¬ 
ject of preparing this series, now styled “THE HISTORY AND 
CULTURE OF THE INDIAN PEOPLE. ” 

In the same Foreword Dr. Munshi defined the scope and object 
of history (quoted again in Vol. VII, p. vii) which have always been 
kept in view by the Editor in preparing this series. 

• • 

Vll 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


When, in 1944, Munshiji conceived the project of writing this his¬ 
tory, there Were two other schemes of writing such a history of 
India, respectively, in twenty and twelve volumes. Only two 
volumes of each of these projects have been so far published. This 
clearly indicates the handicaps under which such projects have to 
be carried out in this country and is cited here not as an excuse or 
explanation of the long period of thirty-two years required for the 
completion of this series of eleven volumes, containing about 9,000 
pages, 283 plates and 20 maps. 

When I naturally feel a sense of relief and exaltation that I have 
lived long enough to see the completion of the hardest and most 
arduous and ambitious literary work in my life, I cannot but recall 
without deep, sorrow that Munshiji is no longer with me to share 
this emotion. Fortunately, Gunanidhi Shri Ghanshyamdas Birla, 
whose munificent donation enabled Munshiji to start this project, as 
mentioned albove, is still with us to see the completion of the project. 

I take this opportunity to offer my heart-felt thanks to the scholars 
—about seventy-five in number—who have enriched this series by 
their contributions. Many of them, alas! are no longer with us to 
share our joy. To this category belongs Dr. A. D. Pusalkar, the 
Assistant Editor of the first six volumes. I cannot express in words 
the deep obligations I owe to him for helping me in various ways 
in preparing the first six volumes. I take this opportunity to place 
on record my deep obligations to the other Assistant Editors who 
rendered Very valuable service in preparing this series. These are 
Dr. A. K. Majumdar, Dr. J. N. Chaudhuri, Dr. D. K. Ghose, Dr. S. 
Chaudhuri and Dr. V. G. Dighe, who are all happily alive to share 
my joy at the completion of this series of eleven volumes. 

I also convey my thanks to the editors of the various journals 
whose favourable reviews of the different volumes proved to be a 
great source of inspiration and enthusiasm that sustained me in carry¬ 
ing on thi$ arduous task of editing the eleven volumes. I still re¬ 
member hOw encouraged I felt when I read the review of the First 
Volume in the Times Literary Supplement containing the following 
appreciative remarks: “.....This history, unlike its predecessors, 
is first and foremost a history of India and of her people, rather than 
a history of those who have invaded her from time to time. The 
standard, in a word, is very high.” 

The following expressions—to quote only a few—-in the reviews 
of the subsequent volumes in pre-eminent journals, both Indian 

viii 





FOREWORD 


and European, offered very flattering tributes beyond our highest 
•expectation: will transform the study of Indian histbry”; 

".... authors are not only writing history, they are making his¬ 
tory.. “ magnificent piece of exact and unbiased scholar- 

ship_“_ will be accepted as the standard and authorita¬ 

tive work on Indian history....”. 

Today, when this 32-year old scheme has had a successful com¬ 
pletion, the 88-year old Editor considers it as the proudest day in 
his life and takes leave of the readers of this series by uttering Nunc 
Dimittis, “Oh my Lord, let me die in peace.” 

4 , Bepirt Pal Road, 

Calcutta-26 . 

October 2, 1976, 

Vijayadasami. R, C. MAJUMDAR 


ix 

























« 






















1 - 






















. 

, 





































. 































































\ 


























Of 


t 




PREFACE 


This volume deals with the history of India from the death of 
Aurangzlb (1707) to the Third Maratha War (1818). It was an 
eventful period that witnessed the end of Muslim rule, the rise and 
fall of the Maratha Empire and the foundation of the British Empire 
in India. 

The period began with political disintegration leading to strug¬ 
gle for power, not only among the Indian States but also between 
the French and the British trading companies in India. This chao¬ 
tic political situation facilitated, if not invited, foreign invasions, 
notably those of Nadir Shah and Ahmad Shah Abdali, which bear 
comparison, both in nature and effect, with those of Sultan Mahmud 
and Tamerlane. 

But there is no cloud without a silver lining. This period of 
political disruption leading to great disasters also witnessed the rise 
of great personalities—not less than ten within a century—that shed 
lustre on the age. These were Balaji Vishwanath, BajI Rao I, Nana 
Phadnis, Mahadji Sindia, Haidar ‘All, Ranjit Singh, Robert Clive, 
J. F. Dupleix, Warren Hastings, and Marquess Richard Colley 
Wellesley. 

But the political history, highly important though it was, was 
not the only important feature of the period. It paved the way for 
India's transition from the Medieval to the Modem Age in the 
nineteenth century. It was during this period that India first came 
into close contact with the Western World—Europe and America— 
which was big with future consequences so far as Indian culture 
is concerned. It brought about those remarkable changes in almost 
all aspects of Indian culture in the nineteenth century, which is 
generally referred to as Indian Renaissance. It was during the 
period under review that the Indians first learned the English lan¬ 
guage, which may be regarded as the most important single factor 
that brought about those far-reaching changes in Indian life, 
thought and education as well as social and' religious concepts in 
the course of one hundred years in the 19th century, such as were 
not noticed during the previous thousand years. That the nine¬ 
teenth century India was a New India was mainly due to those 
forces and factors which began to influence India during the period 
under review. To realise this truth, it is only necessary to point 

xi 


PREFACE 


out that the Fort William College was founded in 1800 and the Hindu 
College was established in Calcutta in 1817. The Pandits of the 
Fort William College laid the foundation of modern Bengali lan¬ 
guage and literature, which served as the model for the rest of 
India, while at the Hindu College the young generations of Bengalis 
imbibed the ideas of free thinking and social and political reforms. 
And these formed the foundation on which New India was built. 

Against this background of all-round signs of progress must be 
seen the deterioration in the economic condition to such an extent 
that it would be hardly an exaggeration to say that India, which 
was one of the wealthiest countries in the world, sank to the posi¬ 
tion of one of the poorest in the world during the period under re¬ 
view. This was as much due to the British rule in India as the 
brighter features of cultural regeneration noticed above. The ruth¬ 
less economic exploitation of India by the British was undoubtedly 
the cause of the deplorable poverty in India following the ruin of 
trade and industry by the unfair competition of British merchants 
and manufacturers aided by the political power of Britain. 

Many of the chapters were written long ago, and the Editor 
places on record his deep regret at the death of Prof. C. S. Srini- 
vasachari, Prof. S. V. Puntambekar, Prof. Biman Behari Majumdar, 
Dr. N. K. Sinha and Prof. D. N. Banerjee who contributed scholarly 
chapters to this volume. 

My special thanks are due to Dr. V. G. Dighe not only for his 
contributions to this volume but also for the valuable service he 
rendered as Assistant Editor. Owing to my serious illness while this 
volume was in the press, the editorial work had mainly to be carried 
on by him, and I am deeply grateful to him for his ungrudging per¬ 
formance of this duty with conspicuous success. 

I also convey my sincere thanks to Dr. C. M. Kulkami for the help 
I received from him and to the several contributors for the services 
Tendered by them in the preparation of this volume. 

There is no separate Chapter on Art in this volume as the art 
of this period has already been dealt with in Chapter XLV of 
Vol. XI of the Series. 

Before I take leave of this stupendous project, it is my plea¬ 
sant duty to thank the staff of the Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan lor the 
devotion they have shown in this work throughout the long period 
-of thirty-two years. I would specially like to mention the very 


xii 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


capable Executive Secretary, Shri S. Ramakrishnan, whose sustain¬ 
ed interest in this project made it possible to complete the History 
Series. The former Production Manager Shri S. G. Tolat and his suc¬ 
cessors Shri M. K. Rajagopalan (who died prematurely in 1975), 
and Shri B. Srinivasa Rao, the present holder of the post, have all 
bestowed great care in the printing and publication of the present 
as well as the earlier volumes, for which I am much indebted to 
them. I also take this opportunity to thank the Library authori¬ 
ties of the University of Bombay and the Director of Archives, Gov¬ 
ernment of Maharashtra, for granting facilities to our contributors 
and editors to use their vast treasure-houses. 

The printing of this History Series was made possible because 
the Bhavan hag behind it the experience and willing help of the 
Associated Advertisers and Printers, and my thanks are also due 
to the staff of the Press. 

4, Bepin Pal Road , 

Calcutta-26. 

October 2, 1976. 

Vijayadasami. R. C. MAJUMDAR 


XIII 




























' 

' 


' 

' 

t 

, 






























































































































































CONTENTS 


Page 

Foreword by the General Editor .. .. .. ., vii 

Preface by the General Editor .. .. .. .. .. xi 

Abbreviations .. .. .. .. .. .. .. xix 

CHAPTER I 

INDIA ON THE DEATH OF AURANGZIB .. 1 

By B. P. Saksena 

CHAPTER II 

SUCCESSORS OF AURANGZIB .. .. 7 

By B. P. Saksena 

CHAPTER III 

RISE OF THE PESHWAS — BALAJI VISHWANATH 43 

By V. G. Dighe 

CHAPTER IV 

PESHWA BAJI RAO*I (1720-40) .. .. 63 

By V. G. Dighe 

✓ 

CHAPTER V 

DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE .. 104 

(a) Bengal Subah—By K. K. Datta .. .. .. 104 

(b) Awadh—By K. K. Datta .. .. .. .. .. 113 

(c) The Deccan—By K. K. Datta .. .. .. .. 119 

(d) Invasions of Ahmad Shah Abdali—By H. R. Gupta .. 123 

(e) The Sikh—By H. R. Gupta .. .. .. .. 126 

(f) The Rohillas—By H. R. Gupta .. .. .. 133 

(g) The Bundelas—By H. R. Gupta . . . . .. .. 138 

(h) Rajasthan—By H. R. Gupta .. .. .. .. 140 

(i) Malwa—By Raghubir Sinh .. .. .. 144 

f j) The Jats—By J. *N. Chaudhuri .. .. .. 152 

(k) Jammu and Kashmir—By H. R. Gupta .. .. .. 161 




CONTENTS 


CHAPTER VI 

PESHWA BALAJ! RAO (1740-1761) .. 170 

By S. V. PUNTAMBEKAR 

APPENDIX 

Note by the General Editor .. .. 198 

CHAPTER VII 

PESHWA MADHAV RAO I 201 

By A. C. Banerjee 

CHAPTER VIII 

PROVINCIAL MARATHA DYNASTIES—Part I 225 

PROVINCIAL MARATHA DYNASTIES—Part II 251 

By V. G. Dighe 

CHAPTER IX 

THE ENGLISH, THE FRENCH AND OTHER 
EUROPEAN COMPANIES IN INDIA (1700-1763) 311 

By C. S. Srinivasachari 

♦ 

CHAPTER X 

CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH POWER IN 

BENGAL—Part I .. .. 339 

CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH POWER IN 

BENGAL—Part II. 366 

By A. P. Das Gupta 

CHAPTER XI 

MARATHAS AND NORTH INDIAN STATES .. 387 

By S. N. Sen 

CHAPTER XII 

MARATHAS AND THE SOUTH INDIAN STATES 422 

By S. N. Sen 

CHAPTER XIII 

MYSORE: HAIDAR ‘ALI AND TIPO SULTAN 452 

By N. K. Sinha 

CHAPTER XIV 

PROGRESS OF THE BRITISH POWER (1785-1798) 472 

By N. K. Sinha 

xvi 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER XV 

DECLINE AND FALL OF THE 

MARATHA POWER (1799-1818) .. ,. 486 

By S. N. QanunGo 

CHAPTER XVI 

CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH RULE IN INDIA 521 

By N. K. Sin ha 

CHAPTER XVII 

ADMINISTRATIVE AND MILITARY SYSTEM 

OF THE MARATHAS .. . . 535 

By V. G. Dighe & S. N. Qanungo 

CHAPTER XVIII 

ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH 
TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818) .. 578 

By D. N. Banerjee 

CHAPTER XIX 

LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE 
EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 

Bengali — By R. C. Majumdar 640 

Hindi—By R. C. Majumdar 647 

Assamese—By R. C. Majumdar 648 

Oriya—By R. C. Majumdar 648 

Gujarati — By Ramanlal C. Shah 649 

Punjabi—By G. S. Talib 656 

Marathi—By R. V. Herwadkar 661 

Tamil—By K. R. Srinivasa Iyengar 669 

Telugu—By S. V. Joga Rao 672 

Kannada—By S. Srikantha Sastri 678 

Malayalam—By S. K. Nayar 681 

Urdu—By N. A. Jafree 685 

Sindhi—By Ram Panjwani 690 

Arabic—By Abdu Subhan 692 

Persian—By Abdus Subhan 695 

Sanskrit —By S. A. Upadhyaya .. ., 700 

xvii 






CONTENTS 


CHAPTER XX 

RELIGION 

Hindu Religion—By B. B. Majumdar .. 714 

Islam—By R. C. Majumdar .. ,. .. .. 727 

CHAPTER XXI 

ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS 
Economic Condition—By Radha Kamal Mukherjee .. 736 

Social Condition—By K. K. Datta .. .. .. 749 

CHAPTER XXII 

TRADE AND INDUSTRY .. 767 

By Radha Kamal Mukherjee 


Select Bibliography 

Chronology 

Index 


797 

813 

845 


XVIll 


ABBREVIATIONS 


Titles of works referred to in the volume run into hundreds and 
have been indicated in full at the end of each chapter, as far as pos¬ 
sible. But some of the series and publications have been so frequent¬ 
ly referred to, that it was deemed proper to use abbreviations in¬ 
stead of the full titles of books every time. In most cases primary 
sources have been utilised; elsewhere secondary sources of great im¬ 
portance have been used: 


ALS 

BISMQ 

BISMSV 


Aitihasik Lekha Samgraha, ed. by V. V. Khare, 
sometimes indicated as Khare, Vols. 1-14. 

Bharat Itihas Samshodhak Mandal Quarterly. 

Bharat Itihas Samshodhak Mandal Sammelan 
Vrittd. 


MIS 

KSPY 


Ait. Patra 

S.P.D. 


Marathyanchya Itihdsachi Sadhanen, ed. by 
V. K. Raj wade, Vols. I, II, III, IV, VIII, XII, 
XIII, XV, XX have been used. 

Kavyetihas Sangraha Patre Ycudin Vagaire, ed. 
by Sardesai, Kale and Vakaskar (3rd edi¬ 
tion, 1930). 

Aitihasik Patravyawahar, ed. by Sardesai, 
Kale and Kulkarni. 

Selections from Peshwd Daftar (45 Vols. in 
Marathi, ed. by G. S. Sardesai (1930-33). 

Four or Five Bakhars of major importance 
have been used. 

They are: Chitnis, Malhar Ram Rao, Sapta - 
prakaramatmak Charitrd or Shiva Charitrd 
(ed. by R. V. Herwadkar). 

Sambhaji Maharaj and Thorle Rajram Maha - 
raj Yanchi Charitren, (ed. by R. V. Her¬ 
wadkar). 

Bhau Sahebanchi Bakhar, ed. by S. N. Joshi 
(1959). 

Shiv Chhatrapatiche Charitrd, by Sabhasad, 
Krishnaji Anant, edited by Sane (1923). 


xix 


ABBREVIATIONS 


Holkaranchi Kaifiydt f ed. by Y. N. Kelkar 
(1954). 

Peshwyanchi Bakhar, by Sohani, Krishnaji 
Vinayak, edited by Sane, (1925) used only 
for the events of the last days of the Peshwa 
regime. 


P.R.C. 


History 


New History 


Fall 


Shivaji 


Among English works used are: 

Poona Residency Correspondence series, ed. 
by Sardesai and Sarkar (14 Vols). 

History of the Mahrattas, by James Grant Duff 
(1921 edn. in two Volumes). 

New History of the Mar at has, by G. S. Sar¬ 
desai, three volumes. 

Fall of the Mughal Empire, by Jadunath Sar¬ 
kar, 4 volumes. 

Shivaji and His Times, by Jadunath Sarkar, 
(4th Edn. 1948). 


Maratha Series Selections from the Letters, Despatches and 

other State Papers preserved in the Bom¬ 
bay Secretariat, Home Series volumes and 
Maratha Series, ed. by G. W. Forrest. 


Central India A Memoir of Central India (2 vols. 1880), by 

Sir John Malcolm. 

Some of the contributors worked in record offices and have uti¬ 
lised the material which is shown under the full title Public, and 
Pol. and Secret Department Diaries are from the Maharashtra State 
Archives; Madras Military Consultations are from Madras Record 
Office, etc. 


xx 



CHAPTER I 


INDIA ON THE DEATH OF AURANGZ1B 

Retrospect and Survey 

When the last of the Great Mughuls was in the throes of death, 
his mighty empire was convulsing with upheavals of far-reaching 
nature. Aurangzlb’s successes and failures had neutralised each 
other; the traditional glory and greatness of his house was tottering 
to a fall. His vast empire presented a pathetic picture of a body 
without soul—a body in the grip of the process of disintegration and 
decay. Everywhere centrifugal tendencies were raising their heads, 
and the inexorable forces of history were converging fast, one upon 
the other, to lead to the inevitable dissolution. The dying monarch’s 
mind Was torn with pangs of bitter failures and frustration. He had 
pitched his ambition too high and had played the political game for 
heavy stakes. He lost more than what he could gain and the con¬ 
sequences of his fruitless aggressive policy proved more tragic than 
he could ever imagine. 

Thus, imperial politics towards the close of the first decade of 
the 18th century was in a state of flux. The foundations of 
peace and stability had been steadily eroded during the last fifty 
years; now they had to bear the stress of more violent and virulent 
forces which, though shaping for a considerable time before, gained 
terrible momentum from the blunders of Aurangzib. But it must 
be frankly admitted that he was neither the author nor the sole 
cause of the downfall of the Mughal empire. His role, at the worst, 
was that of a passive agent. He failed to ride successfully through 
the political storm of his age; he was simply swept off by it. 

Bengal: 

The first province to react to the process of disintegration was 
Bengal. Throughout mediaeval history, it had been a headache to 
the rulers of Delhi or Agra. Its distance from the headquarters 
rendered its effective control almost impossible. The ruling turbu¬ 
lent Afghans, backed as they were by the other sections of the in¬ 
digenous population, could never reconcile themselves to the new 
order initiated by the Mughul; and they never missed the oppor¬ 
tunity of challenging the central authority. But such intervals 
of disorder alternated with periods of peace and prosperity. The 

1 

M.S.—1 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


last was under Murshid Qull Khan 1 who raised the province to the 
highest degree of affluence; but he was loath to play the second 
fiddle to the Viceroy, Prince ‘AzIm-ush-Shan, who hatched a plot to 
murder him. 2 Murshid Qull, however, outwitted his enemy, and to 
guard himself against any attempt on his life in future, he took up 
his residence at a new place called Maqsudabad 3 which he renamed 
Murshidabad. In January, 1703, Prince ‘AzIm-ush-Shan was 
ordered to Bihar, 4 while his son Farrukh-siyar remained at Dacca 
as his deputy. In the following year Murshid Qull Khan was pro¬ 
moted to the rank of 200 + 1100 and the diwani of Bihar was added 
to his charge. Henceforward he became the virtual Governor 
of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, because he wielded the financial as 
well as the executive authority. It was his writ which was obeyed 
in these provinces, the authority of the emperor having been reduced 
almost to a cipher. 

The Sikhs: 

The state of affairs at the other end of northern India in the 
Punjab was perhaps much worse. During the emperor s absence in 
the Deccan, the Sikhs had organised themselves into a solid mili¬ 
tary fraternity under the leadership of the last of the Gurus, Guru 
Govind Singh. He embarked upon a plan of sporadic forays into the 
imperial territories and the neighbouring hill states. His uninter¬ 
rupted successes alarmed the government officials in the Punjab and 
they became equally a source of grave anxiety to the hill chiefs. 
The latter addressed a petition to the emperor saying, “He (Govind 
Singh) has vowed to avenge the death of his father. He wanted 
us to join him in his seditious projects. On our refusal to prove 
false to our most just and merciful emperor, he has become hostile 
to us and our people. He has founded a new sect which he calls the 
Khalsa or the Pure, but which in reality is the impurest medley of 
sundry low-born castes in the world. To these low-born people he 
holds out hopes of power and sway in this world, and of salvation 
in the next. Their heads are turned; they allow us no rest. We, 
Your Majesty’s humble slaves, have turned our combined strength 
against them, but have not been quite successful. We are in a sore 
plight. To whom should we turn for help, but to our benign em¬ 
peror?- kindly send a large army. We shall pay all its ex¬ 

penses.” 5 

In other words, the Punjab, the key province of the Mughul 
empire was passing through a grave political crisis. Such a state 
of affairs could be tolerated only at a serious risk to the peace of 


2 



INDIA ON THE DEATH OF AUHANGZiB 


the western region; hence strenuous efforts were made to deal with 
the insurgence of the Sikhs. Guru Govind Singh was driven from 
pillar to post till in sheer frustration and disappointment he had to 
retire to Damdamah, and he even made up his mind to come to 
terms with the emperor. He composed in exquisite Persian verse 
an address known as Zafarnama. 6 It is a mixture of words of 
threat and conciliation. The author prophesied that a day would 
come when the Sikhs would avenge fully the injuries inflicted upon 
them; and there is no doubt that for a considerable time they remain¬ 
ed a running sore to the empire. 

The Jats: 

The Sikh obduracy and spirit of defiance proved to be very 
catching. The Jats, living within striking distance of Delhi and 
Agra and hitherto a hard-working and peaceful community engaged 
in agricultural pursuits, abandoned the plough am} took to arms. 
In view of the fact that a vast majority of Sikhs were originally 
Jats, it may be reasonably presumed that the former were in con¬ 
stant contact with their brethren who inhabited the region south of 
the two capitals of the empire. No wonder, therefore, that the Jats 
would have received inspiration and encouragement from their 
neighbours and erstwhile kinsmen. Their resistance was organised 
under the leadership of an intrepid adventurer named Gokla. It is 
difficult jio ascertain the cause or causes of their grievance. Sir 
Jadunath Sarkar has attributed it to their religious resentment; but 
there is little evidence to show that the Jats were a community of 
strong religious convictions and over-sensitive about their faith. On 
the other hand, Prof. Irfan Habib has ventured to suggest that the 
Jat rising was primarily agrarian, the consequence of financial dis¬ 
tress which had overtaken the Mughul empire. But this contentioii 
also cannot be sustained, because beyond the general presumption 
that the rate of revenue demand had increased during the reign of 
Aurangzlb, there is no record to show that it had become exorbitant 
or back-breaking. Moreover, there were no such agrarian 
risings in other parts of northern India. So, the only conclusion 
which appears to be convincing is that the slackening of central 
administrative machinery and its consequent ineffectiveness en¬ 
couraged the sturdy Jat community to make a bid for freedom. And 
what is more striking is that, in comparison with the Sikhs, their 
rise was far more phenomenal. Within the space of a decade or so, 
the Jats became a power to be reckoned with. They proved them¬ 
selves as dangerous to the Mughul empire as to the neighbouring 
State of Amber. In other words, the Jat rising was primarily a 


3 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


political phenomenon having very little concern either with religious 
susceptibilities or economic distress. If there were any such con¬ 
siderations they were merely a cloak and a pretext. 

The Bundelas: 

On the direct line of communication between northern India 
and the Deccan lay Bundelkhand, the home of a warlike and adven¬ 
turous community. Ever since the time of Akbar the Great, it had 
off and on proved a source of anxiety to the government. But like 
the rulers of Rajasthan, the chiefs of Bundelkhand lacked unity of 
outlook and the sense of common brotherhood. In the famous war 
of succession, Chhatrasal had helped Aurangzlb; 7 but his ambition 
could ill reconcile itself to a life of abject subordination. At one 
stage he even thought of joining hands with Shivaji; the latter, how¬ 
ever, advised him to return to his homeland and work for its salva¬ 
tion. But he was sternly dealt with and even compelled to go to 
the Deccan and join the imperial service. Here he was appointed 
commander of Satara fort. 8 But he resigned his post soon after and 
returned to Bundelkhand to reorganise resistance to the central gov¬ 
ernment. As a result, much earlier than expected, the problem of 
the Bundelas assumed proportions which sorely tried the wits of the 
politicians as much as the genius of the military commanders of the 
Mughul empire. And, though unlike the Jats, they were unable to 
establish an independent unified state, their insurgence ate into the 
vitals of the central administration. 

Malwa: 

During the closing years of the seventeenth century, the two pro¬ 
vinces of Malwa and Gujarat had also begun to suffer from the 
effects of mal-administration and Maratha encroachments. In 
November, 1699, a Maratha contingent of troops crossed the Nar¬ 
mada and raided Malwa up to Dhamuni. 9 Four years later Nemaji 
Sindia burst into Berar, defeated and captured the Mughul general 
Rustam Khan. 10 Then he marched to Sironj, plundering the villages 
and towns on the way; though Nemaji was repulsed and put to flight 
by Firoz Jang, great was the consternation and alarm which had 
seized the people and local officials alike. Upon this, Prince Bidar 
Bakht was appointed Viceroy of the province with instructions to 
deal effectively with the marauders. 11 When two years later the 
prince was transferred to Gujarat, Malwa was placed in charge of 
Khan-i-Alam. But conditions did not improve; they became worse. 
The Marathas, the Bundelas and the Afghans constantly fomented 
trouble there and Malwa was completely ruined. 


4 


INDIA ON THE DEATH OF AURANGZIB 


Rajasthan: 

Like the Sikhs in the Punjab and the territory immediately to 
the south of Agra and Delhi, most of Rajasthan was also seething 
with discontent on the eve of Aurangzlb’s death. The emperor had 
failed to suppress the resistance movement which had originated in 
the latter part of Shah Jahan’s reign. It was sheer coincidence that 
Mewar and Marwar had allied themselves to face the common 
enemy. In the end, Aurangzlb made peace with Mewar on terms 
which did little credit to him. But, worse than that, he left behind 
him bitter feelings of rancour and resentment. Disaffection con¬ 
tinued to blaze in Marwar, and its leaders were not inclined to keep 
quiet or modify their spirit of defiance. But in striking contrast to 
these two States, Amber maintained its loyalty to the Mughul em¬ 
peror and its rulers played an important role in the imperial politics 
of the post-Aurangzib period. Similarly, the Rajput chiefs of Kotah, 
Bund! and Sirohi maintained their allegiance to Delhi. Therefore, 
the statement that Aurangzlb went to the Deccan with one of his 
arms amputated is not wholly correct. He had forfeited the con¬ 
fidence of Marwar and Mewar, but not of the entire Rajput com¬ 
munity. Indeed, in the last part of his reign the Rajputs consti¬ 
tuted 17.6 per cent of the total imperial nobility. They were not 
humiliated either. 12 On the other hand, they were given higher 
status than was conceded to the Hindus in general, and they were 
also exempt from jizya. In 1704, even Ajlt Singh and Durgadas 
made peace with the emperor. 

The Deccan and Far South: 

Aurangzlb spent the last twenty-five years of his life in a fruit¬ 
less conflict against the Marathas and in satisfying his long cherish¬ 
ed ambition of subduing the two semi-independent States of Bijapur 
and Golconda. Although he had the morbid satisfaction of wiping 
out the existence of these two States, he had to realise in the end 
that the success which he had achieved was fraught with fatal con¬ 
sequences for his own empire. It indirectly encouraged the Mara- 
thas who now ravaged with impunity the entire* region south of the 
Narmada. Furthermore, they were emboldened to play a game of 
hide and seek with the imperialists whom they harassed incessantly 
by plundering their convoys and by interrupting their lines of com¬ 
munication. 

Indeed the failure of Aurangzlb’s Deccan policy brightened the 
prospects of Maratha imperialism. The Marathas could now dream 
of unrestrained expansion not only in the south, but also towards 
the north. Hence it would not be too much to assert that Aurangzlb 


5 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


prepared the way for the future Maratha empire. It may sound 
paradoxical that he inadvertently strengthened the hands and en¬ 
hanced the prestige of the Maratha chiefs by granting them high 
mansabs. And towards the end of his reign, the proportion of the 
Maratha mansabdars had risen to 16.7 per cent, 13 which gave them 
a place of influence in the Mughul governing class. In the long run 
it proved disastrous to the empire. 

This brief review of the political condition of the Mughul em¬ 
pire on the eve of Aurangzib’s death brings into bold relief some of 
its interesting aspects. That it was tending towards decline admits 
of no doubt. The process of incessant expansion had sealed its fate. 
It was impossible to manage and control this vast region with the 
resources and means then available to the central government. 
Similar experiment had been tried by Muhammad Tughluq, but it 
had miserably failed. And though history is a stern teacher, few 
learn the lesson. Moreover, a succession of military campaigns in 
various parts of the empire, either for fresh conquests or for the 
suppression of internal risings, was gradually but steadily, leading 
to economic crises. Though for another fifty-five years or so the 
sea-borne trade of India still remained in a flourishing condition, its 
profits did not flow into the imperial coffers. Similarly, although 
there is reason to believe that agriculture also expanded, it did not 
add to the financial resources of the empire, because of the pre¬ 
valence of the jagir and ijara (contract) systems. Finally, the ad¬ 
ministrative machinery had not only become expensive but also 
cumbersome, top-heavy and obsolete. Neither could it be effectively 
controlled, nor did it function to the advantage of the empire. The 
administrators were turning more and more into politicians, forming 
cliques and groups with a view to seize power, which they saw, was 
falling from the hands of the emperor. The era of despotism was 
at an end and that of anarchy and dissolution had set in. 

NOTES 

1. Riyaz-us-Salatin by Ghulam Husain Salim, pp. 254-60. 

2. Ibid, p. 249. 

3. Ibid, p. 251; Sarkar, Jadunath, History of Aurangzib, Vol. V, p. 401. 

4. Ibid , p. 252. 

5. See Zaluki (Zahiruddin), Aurangzib and His Times, pp. 255-56; Nijjar Bakshis 
Singh, Punjab Under the Great Mughuls, p. 94. 

6. Macauliffe, The Sikh Religion, Vol. V, p. 201. 

7. Chhatraprakash (Pogson), p. 32. Manucci and BhimSen confirm it. Irvine, 
Later Mughuls, Vol. II, p. 224. 

8 Ibid, p. 229. For Chhatrasal’s life, see Sarkar, Aurangzib, Vol. V, pp. 390-99. 

9. Bhimsen, Dilkushd, f. 129 a; Akhbardt (1699)—The expedition was led by 
Krishnaji Sawant. 

10. Sarkar, op. cit., Vol. V, pp. 383-85. 

11. Inayat Ullah, Letters (Aligarh MS), f. 43 a, 45; Sarkar, op. cit., p. 384. 

12. Athar Ali, The Mughul Nobility under Aurangzib, p. 25. 

13. Ibid, p. 30. 


6 


CHAPTER II 


SUCCESSORS OF AURANGZIB 

During his reign of about half a century Aurangzlb had created 
more problems than he was in a position to solve. Certainly some 
of them he had inherited from his forbears, but many were of his 
own making. These together shook the empire to its very founda¬ 
tions. No wonder that at the time of his death the political and 
financial horizon betokened the dark prospects of decline, decay and 
dissolution. The far-famed glory of the Mughul empire was now 
becoming past history; its tragic end was in the offing. The follow¬ 
ing half a century witnessed many a blood-curdling event. It was a 
period of clash of ambitions, of group rivalries, of base intrigues, of 
licentious orgies and, above all, of the decline of moral and ethical 
values. The political field was crowded with individuals devoid of 
sober vision or abiding loyalty. They were permeated with callous 
indifference towards the interests of the very institution which was 
the main source of their honour and sustenance. These courtiers 
failed to realise that they were playing with fire—a fire, the flames 
of which would consume the empire more speedily than they could 
imagine. Thus, the history of the Mughul empire in the 18th cen¬ 
tury is, an agonising story of its steady disintegration. 

Despotic Militarism : 

Multitudinous were the causes which dragged the empire to 
this tragic end, some inherent in the political system of the mediae¬ 
val age, whereas others were its concomitants or corollaries. As in 
other parts of the contemporary world, the Mughul political system 
derived inspiration and vitality from militarism, which reduced it 
to a machine for incessant territorial expansion. And when it was 
capped by the vices of absolute despotism, the inexorable fate could 
not be avoided or postponed. Thus, there arose a situation when the 
army, instead of becoming a bastion of the imperial fabric, turn¬ 
ed into an agency for its destruction. The military leaders, immersed 
in narrow selfishness, began to grind their own axes. Moreover, 
the army which the successors of Aurangzlb had inherited was 
matched in its cumbersomeness by its rank inefficiency. It could 
neither be controlled nor be dispensed with. On the other hand, 
the rulers were called upon to meet its over-growing demands which 
caused constant financial drain. In other words, the military system 
had begun to sink under its own weight. 




7 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Unwieldy Expansion and Degeneration of the Nobility: 

Again, the uninterrupted territorial expansion extending over 
a period of 150 years, had increased the dimensions of the Mughul 
empire to almost unmanageable proportions. In an age when 
scientific inventions had not yet eliminated the barriers of time and 
distance, the administration of an extensive empire required a host 
of loyal and efficient officers. For a variety of reasons the supply 
of officers of the right calibre was falling short of the actual demand. 
The Rajputs were not only reluctant to enrol themselves to defend 
the cause of the empire, but also lacked the qualities and military 
leadership of a Man Singh, Jagat Singh or Jay Singh. Immigration 
from Persia and Trans-Oxus region had almost come to a dead stop. 
A life of pleasure and opulence had adversely affected the morale 
and physique of those foreigners who had settled in this country. 
They could only still boast of their pride of birth; as to their worth, 
it had become conspicuous by its absence among them. They had 
plenty of ambition; but they sought to satisfy it at the cost of the 
empire. Like the proverbial wood-cutter they cut the very branch 
on which they were perched. 

If the officials and nobles were greedy and inefficient, the sove¬ 
reigns who were expected to set the ideal, were immersed in licen¬ 
tiousness. Their vision hardly ever travelled beyond the four walls 
of their palaces. They spent most of their time in the harem-mak¬ 
ing merry with the cup and their concubines, or in the gay com¬ 
pany of poets and musicians in utter disregard to their own duty. 
Such debased specimens of humanity could hardly evoke sympathy 
or inspire respect. They could not but be the architects of their 
own doom and passive witnesses to the tragic fate besetting the em¬ 
pire. With the partial exception of Bahadur Shah, the immediate 
successor of Aurangzib, none was gifted with even a modicum of 
initiative. They were reduced to the unenviable position of being 
the nominees of their supporters instead of being their leaders. 

Centrifugal Tendencies: 

To add to the distraction of their puppets and their protagonists, 
the entire sub-continent Was overtaken by a mixed wave of regene¬ 
ration and reaction, which intensified the centrifugal tendencies. 
The States of Awadh, Rohilkhand and Bengal represented one phase 
of the movement, and the Maratha expansion and the foundation of 
Hyderabad symbolised the other phase. But, in the context of the 
empire the result was the same, i.e., the dismemberment of the 
parent body. It would, however, be erroneous to presume that any 


8 


SUCCESSORS OF AURANGZlB 


of these States were moved by religious fervour. They were pri¬ 
marily political entities, each struggling against the other to pre¬ 
serve its existence or to promote its own growth and expansion. In 
fact, religion had almost ceased to influence either political or moral 
values. Selfishness and narrow parochialism had gained the upper 
hand. It was an age of fortune-hunters and of bold military ad¬ 
venturers. 

Thus passed the first three decades after the death of Aurangzib, 
and during this period the internal conditions became more and 
more complicated. On the one hand, there were local risings of the 
Sikhs, Jats and Bundelas, and on the other the Maratha aggression 
was fast enveloping the entire sub-continent. So, it became almost 
impossible to focus attention on one particular source of peril; the 
outbreaks were at times simultaneous and sometimes the insurgent 
groups were in league with each other. Moreover, it was not un- 
often that the leaders of cliques in the court themselves encouraged 
defiance as and when it suited the promotion of their selfish ends. 
On the top of it all, came foreign invasions, which dealt stunning 
blows to the dwindling prestige of the emperor and the empire. 

Contemplated Partition: 

In the closing years of his life, Aurangzib was much perturbed 
at the gloomy prospects of a bloody civil war amongst his sons. 
Like his father, therefore, he also attempted an equitable distribu¬ 
tion of the empire among the future claimants. It reminds one of 
a similar scheme adumbrated by Babur, the founder of the Mughul 
empire. Aurangzib, on his part, had intended that the eldest, 
Mu'azzam, should receive 12 subahs with his capital at Delhi; the 
second, A‘zam, should have Agra, the subahs of the Deccan, Malwa 
and Gujarat; the youngest, Kam Bakhsh, should have the two pro¬ 
vinces of Bijapur and Hyderabad. Though the will (alleged to have 
been found by Hamid-ud-din Khan) confirming this distribution 
is of doubtful veracity, the presence of Mu‘azzam in Kabul, deputa¬ 
tion of Kam Bakhsh by his father to Bijapur, and that of A‘zam to 
Malwa, lend support to the presumption that Aurangzib did not 
want his sons to be near one another or to be at each other’s throat. 1 

A‘zam Proclaimed Emperor: 

But his wish in this respect, as had happened in the past, was 
not respected. It would have violated the hoary Timurid tradition 
of fratricide. When the frightful tradition had been followed by 
the father, why should his sons lag behind? So, when the emperor 




9 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

had breathed his last, Vazlr Asad Khan who was master of the situa¬ 
tion, assembled the other amirs and in consultation with them, sent 
messengers to A‘zam asking him to return post-haste to Ahmad- 
nagar. 2 Accordingly Prince A‘zam arrived there and was nroclaim- 
ed king on 14 March, 1707. 3 

Although most of the officers and commanders, present in the 
camp of the late monarch, had tendered their submission to the 
new emperor, there were others who were indifferent towards him. 
Even Asad Khan, so enthusiastic in the beginning, became luke¬ 
warm later on. As to the Turanis like Chin Qilich Khan, his father 
Ghazi-ud-Din Khan Firoz Jang, and Muhammad Amin Khan, they 
were definitely unwilling to take any risk by extending support to 
a prince having Shl‘a inclinations. 4 Undeterred by the dubious at¬ 
titude even of his supporters, A‘zam decided to march straight 
to Agra. This was what Shah Jahan had attempted in the past. 
Indeed, the project of seizing Agra had emanated from Prince Bidar 
Bakht, and his father A‘zam had already commissioned him to under¬ 
take it. But on subsequent considerations, he countermanded his 
earlier instructions, and thus inadvertantly ruined his chances of 
success. 5 

Mvfazzam's Activities: 

While A‘zam was making for the north, his elder brother 
Mu'azzam was not sitting idle. He left Kabul and arrived at Pul- 
i-Shah Daulah where he celebrated his accession, assuming the title 
of Bahadur Shah. 6 He had already conciliated Budh Singh Hada of 
Bund! and Bijay Singh Kachhwaha of Amber and had, through them, 
enlisted a large number of Rajputs. 7 Luckily for Mu : azzam, his 
second son, Prince Muhammad ‘Azim-ush-Shan, was on his way to 
the Deccan in response to the summons of his grand-father. 8 It 
was at Shahzadpur that he heard of the latter’s death. 9 He lost no 
time in grasping the situation, and made straight for Agra where he 
joined his father. The capital thus fell into the hands of Mu'azzam, 
who thereby scored a march over his rival. 10 Because, though Bidar 
Bakht had succeeded in forcing through the line of the Chambal 
held by Muhtashim Khan, on behalf of Mu'azzam, the fate of 
A‘zam had been sealed. The rival armies faced each other at Jajau 
near Samugarh. A bloody conflict ensued in which A‘zam was kill¬ 
ed, and so also his sons Bidar Bakht and Wala Jah. 11 

Kam Bakhsh: 

But Jajau did not end the struggle for succession. There was 
yet another claimant in the field. Kam Bakhsh had already the 


10 


SUCCESSORS OF AURANGZlB 


Khutba recited and coins struck in his name in the Deccan. He 
assumed the style of Din Panah, 12 and appointed Ahsan Khan as 
his Bakhshi and Taqarrub Khan as Vazir. n He next turned his at¬ 
tention to recovering places which had either shaken off allegiance 
to the imperial authority or had declined to recognise him as sover¬ 
eign* Wakinkhera, Arcot, Kurnool and Hyderabad were reduced to 
submission one after the other; but the commandant of Golconda re¬ 
fused to surrender the fort on the plea that he had received a com¬ 
munication from Bahadur Shah. 

It must be said to the credit of Bahadur Shah that before pro¬ 
ceeding to extremes, he made a sincere effort at conciliation. He 
wrote a very affectionate letter to his brother asking him to resign 
himself to God’s will. 14 But Kam Bakhsh suspecting the messenger 
who had brought the letter to be a traitor, subjected him to cruel 
indignities, and put to death many innocent young men suspected 
to be in league with him. 15 Nor did the remonstrances of the Vazir 
Taqarrub Khan have any effect on the mind of the young man. He 
turned a deaf ear to all overtures for peace. 

Bahadur Shiah was thus left with no other alternative than to 
make an appeal to the sword. He marched to Hyderabad and arriv¬ 
ed there in January, 1709. On the eve of the decisive battle which 
occurred on January 13, 1709, the position of Kam Bakhsh was very 
pitiable. He had neither men nor money; still he bore the brunt of 
the imperial attack very bravely. His son, Muhi-us-Sunnat, also dis¬ 
played remarkable courage. But in the face of superior numbers, 
their efforts proved of little avail. They were wounded and capture 
ed. The same afternoon Kam Bakhsh was brought in a palanquin 
to Bahadur Shah who was very affectionate towards him. He wiped 
off the dry blood from his brother’s wounds, and even persuaded him 
to take some food. But he died at night. 16 This was the last war 
of succession in which the initiative lay in the hands of the royal con¬ 
testants who made their own plans. After this, it was the Vazir or 
some other influential noble who shuffled the cards and coaxed his 
trump piece to the forefront. 

Bahadur Shah’s Character: 

Bahadur Shah was now the undisputed lord of the Mughul em¬ 
pire. He was the first and the last of the Mughuls to have exercised 
real authority associated with their names. Though his administra¬ 
tive talents were not of a high order, by his affable temperament and 
conciliatory attitude he managed to retain the support of every one 
of the numerous factions and groups in the imperial court. His per¬ 


il 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

sonality had a very sobering effect on the rivalry and bitterness 
among his nobles and officers. By nature he was not stern; but he 
had a full grasp of the political situation. He attempted to dis¬ 
charge his-onerous responsibilities by a skilful process of adjustments 
and compromises. At times he was even able to assert himself. 

After the battle of Jajau, the task to which he addressed him¬ 
self was the reconstitution of his government. In doing so, he was 
called upon to pay due consideration as much to the tradition as to 
the exigency of the moment. His father had left behind a number 
of capable and experienced officers whose record of past services 
could not be bypassed. Nor could he leave in the lurch those who 
had advocated his cause and had stood by him through thick and 
thin. Ministerial changes after every accession were a normal fea¬ 
ture of the Mughul politics, and Bahadur Shiah would have been fully 
justified in brushing aside the claims to office of the previous incum¬ 
bents. But the situation in which he was placed was peculiar in so 
far as he could not afford to lose even a grain of sympathy, if he was 
to steer successfully through the troubles which lay ahead of him. 
Therefore, he decided upon the only feasible course in the circum¬ 
stances, that of making as little change in the political and admini¬ 
strative set-up as possible. 

Raj put and: 

After the distribution of posts and honours the emperor turned 
his attention to tackling political problems. Embers of disaffection 
were still alive in Rajputana. The Rathor ruler, A jit Singh, had ex¬ 
pelled the imperial officers after the death of Aurangzib and occupied 
his capital Jodhpur. 17 The Kachhwaha chief, Jay Singh of Amber, 
a young man of about 21, had, by throwing in his lot with A‘zam 
Shah, given a cause of offence to the new sovereign who had been 
for considerable time befriending a rival claimant in the person of 
Bijay Singh. 18 Rana Amar Singh of Udaipur also was not well in¬ 
clined towards the changed order in the Mughul empire. 19 The ruler 
of Kotah, Ram Singh, was in the Deccan with Zu’lfiqar Khan and the 
Raja of Bundl, Budh Singh, was with Bahadur Shah. The strategic 
position of these States in relation to the far-flung possessions of the 
emperor required bold and immediate action. 

Bahadur Shah was not slow to react to the gravity of the situa¬ 
tion, He resolved to march to Jodhpur by way of Amber and Ajmer. 
His departure from Agra, which betokened his firmness, cowed down 
the spirits of the Rana of Udaipur and he sent to the emperor his 
brother Bakht Singh with a letter of congratulations and numerous 


12 


SUCCESSORS OF AURANGZIB 


costly presents. 20 As to Amber, the country was made over to Bijay 
Singh who was distinguished by the title of Mirza Raja. 21 Mean¬ 
while A jit Singh had been defeated and put to flight by Miharab 
Khan, the faujdar of Jodhpur, and the fort of Merta had been oc¬ 
cupied. 22 Further resistance being out of question, A jit Singh de¬ 
cided to tender his submission. He was pardoned, given a special 
robe of honour and the title of Maharaja, and his rank was fixed at 
3500 zat and 3000 sawar. His two sons, Abhay Singh and Rakhi 
Singh, were also enrolled as mansabdarsP 

But the peace thus restored in Raj putana did not prove to be 
enduring, mainly because it did not satisfy the ambitions of the 
hostile parties; and incidentally because the emperor could not pro¬ 
long his stay there owing to the distraction caused by the activities 
of Prince Kam Bakhsh in the Deccan. Taking advantage of the 
change in the political situation, Ajit Singh, Jay Singh and Amar 
Singh formed a confederacy with the object of completely rooting 
out the Mughul influence from Rajputana. The Maharana married 
his daughter to Jay Singh on the specific condition that the son born 
of the wedlock would be the heir-apparent of the State of Amber 
to the exclusion of any other elder male progeny by other wives. 24 
The allies invested Jodhpur and compelled the faujdar to abandon 
the fort. Encouraged by these successes they marched towards Agra 
and defeated the faujdar of Hindaun and Bayana. Then proceeding 
by way of Ajmer and Merta, they bore down on Sambhar which was 
the garrison town of the imperialists; but they were repulsed by 
the combined forces of the faujdars of Mewat and Narnaul. 25 

The situation had indeed become very critical. To meet it the 
emperor issued urgent instructions to Asad Khan and other promin¬ 
ent officers in and near the capital to assemble their armies and 
march to the place of trouble. On the other hand, the policy of con¬ 
ciliation too, was not altogether discarded and it bore fruit. Jay 
Singh opened negotiations for a peaceful settlement, and upon the 
intercession of Prince ‘Azim-ush-Shan, he and Ajit Singh were re¬ 
stored to their former ranks. 26 It is, however, evident that Bah§dur 
Shah regarded the arrangement to be tentative only, because when 
he had settled the affairs of Kam Bakhsh, on his way back to the 
north he paid a second visit to Rajputana. But the outbreak ot 
trouble in the Punjab precipitated his departure from there. In 
short, Bahadur Shah’s Rajput policy fully reveals his temperament 
and political sagacity. He was firm in suppressing the insurgents, 
but was not averse to. holding out an olive branch towards them. 
He displayed the strength of his arms, and subsequently, in keeping 


13 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

with the exigency of the situation, he restored to Jay Singh and Ajit 
Singh their capitals and homelands. Later, when in October 1711, 
the two kings arrived at the court they were sent to Sadhaura to 
guard the foothills from the raids of the followers of Banda. 27 

The Sikhs: 

Bahadur Shah had for a considerable time past been on friendly 
terms with Guru Govind Singh. 28 The Guru met the new emperor 
at Agra and was received with honours due to him; and he was suc¬ 
cessfully persuaded to accompany the imperial army to the Deccan. 
On reaching Nanded, the Guru separated himself from the emperor, 
and being attracted by the natural beauty of the spot, decided to pass 
the rest of his earthly life there. It was here that he was murdered 
on 17 November, 1708 A.D. 29 

At Nanded, the Guru came in touch with a bairagi named Lach- 
hman Das who enrolled himself as a disciple and styled himself 
Banda or slave. The Guru commissioned Banda to go to the Punjab, 
act as the temporal leader of the Khalsa, and in consultation with 
five of his councillors to punish the enemies of the Khalsa. He was 
strictly warned against assuming or aspiring to the spiritual leader¬ 
ship of the Sikhs. Fired with the zeal of his new mission and burn¬ 
ing with feelings of revenge, Banda arrived in the Punjab, collected 
a large army, and making his way into the hilly districts, establish¬ 
ed himself at Sadhaura. 30 

Swift was the conflagration which spread in the country be¬ 
tween the Sutlej and the Jamuna. The Sikhs chose Sir hind as the 
main target of their attack, and succeeded in capturing it. 31 They 
then moved towards Thaneshwar, but their progress was checked by 
a local Muslim Rajput Zamlndar. They, however, crossed the Jamuna 
and occupied half of Sarkar Saharanpur. The demoralisation of the 
imperial officials was complete. Taking advantage of it, the Sikhs 
moved westward to seize Sultanpur, and they extended their depre¬ 
dations to the Shalimar gardens, a suburb of Lahore. For several 
months they closed the north-western road from Delhi. 32 

The plundered inhabitants of Sirhind, Thaneshwar etc., arrived 
at Ajmer to represent their tales of woe and misery to the emperor. 
Winding up the Rajput affairs, Bahadur Shah left Ajmer on 27 June 
1710, and hurried to the scene of trouble. He even bypassed Delhi, 
prohibited his soldiers from visiting the capital, and issued orders to 
the Hindus in his train to shave off their beards, 33 so that they may 
be distinguished from the enemy. Extensive preparations were 
made to suppress the insurrection. In the face of such heavy odds the 


14 


SUCCESSORS OF AURANGZlB 


Sikhs were unable to keep firm to their ground. They were driven 
out of Thaneshwar, ousted from Sirhind, expelled from Lahore, close¬ 
ly invested at Lohgarh, and made to suffer crushing defeats at nume¬ 
rous places. Nevertheless, they did not give up their plan of haras¬ 
sing the imperialists and plundering those who sided with them. 
Thanks to the mutual rivalry between the two imperial generals, 
Muhammad Amin Khan and Rustam Dil Khan, Banda was able to 
effect his escape; but the moment the storm had abated a little, he 
reappeared and raised fresh disturbances in the Bari Doab. But he 
was defeated and repulsed by Muhammad Amin Khan, Banda was 
now exposed to a grave peril, but the sudden death of the emperor, 
and the departure of Muhammad Amin to participate in the war of 
succession staved off the doom. The Sikhs succeeded in recovering 
Sadhaura and Lohgarh. 34 

Death of Bahadur Shah: 

As to the Deccan, it appears that Bahadur Shah was unable to 
formulate a clear-cut and decisive policy. After the defeat and death 
of Kam Bakhsh, Zu’lfiqar Khan was appointed Viceroy of the Deccan. 
He favoured conciliation with the Marathas, whereas the Vuzlr 
Mun‘im Khan counselled a different approach. Striking the mean 
between the two conflicting views, the emperor restored to Shahu his 
former mansab ; but he was reluctant to recognize his claims of 
chauth and sardeshmukhi on the six subahs of the Deccan. But this 
half-hearted concession did not cut much ice and the Marathas re¬ 
started their plundering raids. They ravaged even the jagirs of 
Zu’lfiqar Khan. His representative secretly concluded a pact with 
Shahu, conceding his claims; but this was not formally confirmed by 
the emperor. And so the Deccan remained a scene of confusion and 
lawlessness. After bringing under control the trouble created by the 
Sikhs, Bahadur Shah marched to the Punjab. He arrived at Anwala 
near Lahore on 11 August, 1711 and pitched his camp there. For 
some time past no Khutba had been recited at Lahore because of the 
objections of the learned divines, who resented the addition of the 
word Wasi after the name of *Ali, as an indication of the emperor’s 
ShVa proclivities. 35 The latter now assembled together the learned 
men of the city and attempted to convince them of the propriety of 
his innovation. But he failed and he lost his temper. An ugly situa¬ 
tion was averted only when the emperor gave way to the popular 
demand, viz., that the word Waisi should be dropped. But he was 
very much distressed. He now busied himself in improving and al¬ 
tering the Shalimar Gardens. About the middle of January 1712 
his health began to decline and he died on 27 February, 1712. 


15 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


With the death of Bahadur Shah disappeared even the last sem¬ 
blance of the glory and greatness of the Mughuls. Though mild, 
generous and accommodating, he held the reins of administration fast 
in his hands. In matters of state, his word was final. He rose high 
above party factions and court intrigues and rarely allowed himself 
to be swayed by passion or prejudice. But it was impossible for him 
to liquidate the evil consequences of the mistakes of his predeces¬ 
sors. Compared to them his outlook was limited and his equipment 
poor; yet unlike his successors, he cannot be said to have played the 
role of a mere puppet. When Banda escaped capture, the emperor 
did not fail to reprimand his favourite Prime Minister Mun‘im Khan. 
Jn his dealings with the Rajputs he displayed both firmness and dis¬ 
cretion, though the final solution of the Rajput problem proved to 
be beyond him. He might have succeeded in suppressing the Sikhs, 
but his untimely death left the situation in a state of flux. To sum 
up the policy and administration of Bahadur Shah, it may be stated 
that he remained in power for too short a period to achieve any per¬ 
manent results. He could overawe the Rajputs, could persecute the 
Sikhs, but he failed to find even a temporary solution to the Maratha 
problem. Though his attitude towards the Hindus was less intolerant 
than that of his predecessor, he did not abolish the jizya or rescind 
discriminatory regulations, but the rigour of their application was 
considerably softened. Nor could he arrest the acceleration of 
financial crisis. He granted jagirs recklessly and gave promotions 
and rewards to all and sundry. When he ascended the throne, he 
found 13 erores worth of coined and uncoined gold and silver in the 
treasury at Agra. By the end of his reign all of it had been spent 
away and the salary of artillery men had fallen into arrears. 

The Last War of Succession: 

Bahadur Shah left behind him a numerous progeny. When he 
died at Lahore, his four sons Jahandar Shah, ‘Azim-ush-Shan, Rafi- 
ush-Shan and Jahan Shah were with him. Of these, the second was 
by far the most capable and resourceful. But the arch-intriguer 
ZuTfiqar Khan, who was keen to play his own game, succeeded in 
combining the eldest with the other two. ‘Azim-ush-Shan was de¬ 
feated, and he disappeared in a sand-storm which swept the bed of 
the Ravi. But the victors could not agree among themselves, and 
the conflict reopened. Jahan Shah, who was the* first to strike the 
blow, was killed in an encounter with Zu’lfiqar Khan when on the 
brink of success. In the end, Rafi-ush-Shan also drew sword to de¬ 
fend his claims. Deserted and deceived, he fought valiantly and 
faced death with the supreme courage of a soldier. 36 


16 


SUCCESSORS OF AURANGZlB 


Jahandar Shah: 

Jahandar Shah proclaimed his accession at Lahore. Though 
about fifty years of age, he behaved like a frivolous young man of 
eighteen. His morals were highly depraved. He drank heavily and 
passed most of his time in the company of his mistress—-Lai Kunwar, 
whose relations had obtained high posts in government service. Nor 
could his Vazir Zu’lfiqar fill in the void successfully. He had been 
overtaken with senile decay. He devolved his entire responsibility 
on his favourite, Sabha Chand. 37 So he lost all the influence Which 
he had built up; nay, he was bitterly hated, as was his master. With 
such persons at the helm of affairs, the fate of the empire can better 
be imagined than described. 

Farrukh-Siyar's Bid jor Power: 

While Jahandar Shah and his Prime Minister were living in 
fool’s paradise in Delhi, a severe political storm was brewing in the 
eastern provinces. Here ‘Azim-ush-Shan’s son, Farrukh-siyar, had 
succeeded in winning the support of Sayyid Husain ‘Ali, the governor 
of Patna, and Sayyid ‘Abdullah, the governor of Allahabad. 38 He 
advanced with a large following towards the west to contest the 
throne with his uncle. On the way he overcame the opposition of 
his cousin A‘zz-ud-Din who blocked his path at Khajuha. 39 Near 
Agra he confronted the hastily assembled hosts of his uncle. Trea¬ 
chery in his camp, combined with improper disposition of his forces ; 
brought defeat upon the head of Jahandar Shah, who, with his mis¬ 
tress, fled to Delhi in a bullock cart. 40 Zu’lfiqar Khan was already 
making fast for the capital. The fallen emperor took protection with 
Asad Khan, the VakilA-Mutlaq who betrayed him to his enemies. 41 
For such an act of treachery, he and his son Zu’lfiqar, had to pay 
dearly; one suffered disgrace, the other was put to death. 

Farrukh-siyar ascended the thronO burdened with a deep debt 
of gratitude to his supporters, particularly the Sayyid brothers, 
Husain ‘Ali and ‘Abdullah. The latter became the Prime Minister 
with the title of Qutb-ul-Mulk , and the former was appointed Mir 
Bakhshi and was styled Amir-ul-Umara. During his seven years of 
the so-called regal authority, the new emperor was constantly afflict¬ 
ed by mental conflict caused, on the one hand, by his will to assert 
his power and prerogative, and by his concern, on the other, not to 
wound the susceptibilities of his benefactors. But in the midst of 
deceipt and dissimulation, his weakness of will prevented him from 
faking bold decisions and suppressing his enemies. He proved him¬ 
self unfit to be a sovereign. Fate had raised him to the throne; the 
very same fate hurled him down from it. 

17 

M.S.—2 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Military Campaigns: 

Three military campaigns were undertaken during the reign to 
suppress the spirit of defiance which was prevailing in northern 
India. In Marwar, Ajit Singh had re-asserted his independence, and 
even occupied Ajmer. The Amir-ul-Umara marched against him 
and pursued him from pillar to post. In the end, Ajit Singh begged 
for peace which was granted on condition that he gave one of his 
daughters in marriage to the emperor, sent his son Abhay Singh to 
the court, and promised to attend in person whenever summoned. 42 
Similarly, an army was sent against Banda who was compelled to 
evacuate Lohgarh and retreat to Gurdaspur. Even here he was 
not allowed to live in peace. The place was stormed and Banda was 
forced into submission, brought to Delhi where he was brutally put to 
death. 43 The third military project related to the suppression of the 
Jats who had again become obnoxious under the leadership of Chura- 
man. He had commenced levying unauthorised road-tolls, terroris¬ 
ed the local jagirdars and constructed a stronghold at Thun. Raja 
Jay Singh pressed him hard, and Churaman approached the Vazir to 
secure pardon for him. Farrukh-siyar had to give in. 44 

Party Politics: 

Both during the Marwar and Jat campaigns, factions at the court 
resorted to underhand dealings. Ajit Singh was encouraged in his 
opposition to the Amir-ul-Umara and was promised rich rewards if 
he succeeded in frustrating the plans of the latter. During the Jat 
campaign the Vazir asked Churaman to foil the attempts of Jay 
Singh. 45 Such were the earlier rumblings of the violent storm which 
was to burst upon the political atmosphere. That the emperor did 
not trust his constitutional adviser, the Qutb-ul-Mulk, became a mat¬ 
ter of common knowledge—a knowledge which produced a rich crop 
of intrigues and counter-intrigues. 

Thus party politics formed an important phase in the court life 
during the reign of Farrukh-siyar. But these parties conformed 
neither to religion, nor to race—nor even to nationalities. As to prin¬ 
ciples, there was none whatsoever. It were the individuals and their 
satellites who mattered. Their governing passion was self-interest, 
and tneir guiding maxim personal aggrandisement. The Sayyid bro¬ 
thers wanted to lord it over the emperor. Others like Mir Jumla, 
Jay Singh and Muhammad Murad Kashmiri were equally keen to do 
the same. And none cared for the fairness or foulness of the means 
to achieve his end. The repercussions of such display of rivalry and 
disunity were very far-reaching on the fortunes of the empire and 
disastrous for those of Farrukh-siyar. 


18 


SUCCESSORS OF AURANGZlB 

Farrukh-siyar and the Sayyid Brothers: 

The relations between the emperor and the Sayyid brothers 
were very much strained from the very beginning. The breach wid¬ 
ened with the lapse of time. It was made up temporarily when 
Farrukh-siyar’s favourite, Mir Jumla, was sent away to Patna, and 
the Amir-ul-Umara, Sayyid Husain ‘Ali, left for the Deccan as the 
Viceroy of the six subahs of the Deccan. 46 The fire of misunder¬ 
standing was fanned to full fury again when Mir Jumla came back 
from Patna 47 and the Nizam-ul-Mulk from the Deccan, 48 and when 
‘Inayatullah Kashmiri was appointed Diwan-i-Khalsd , 49 much against 
the wishes of the Vazir, Sayyid ‘Abdullah. The quest by Farrukh- 
siyar of a substitute for the Vazir brought the quarrel to a head. 
The elder Sayyid succeeded in weaning away from the side of the 
emperor all his adherents. He then sent express messages to his 
brother in the Deccan asking him to return to Delhi as quickly as 
possible. 

Husain ‘Ali and the Peshwd: 

To buttress himself against all eventualities, Husain ‘Ali open¬ 
ed negotiations with Peshwd BalajI Vishwanath. The latter demand¬ 
ed the recognition of Shahu’s succession to Shivajl’s kingdom, of the 
right of levying chauth and sardeshmukhi on the six provinces of 
the Deccan, confirmation of recent Maratha conquests in Berar, Gond- 
wana, Karnatak and the return of Shahu’s mother and his family to 
the Deccan. In lieu of these concessions, the Peshwd promised to 
pay a tribute or peshkush for the sardeshmukhi, to preserve and 
guard peace in the Deccan, and in return for the chauth place 15,000 
Maratha horsemen at the disposal of the Mughul Viceroy. The 
terms being advantageous to both parties, the bargain was soon struck. 
But when these were laid before the emperor for final confirmation, 
he rejected them with indignation. 50 

End of Farrukh-siyar: 

Thus commenced the final act in the tragedy of Farrukh-siyar. 
The more he strove to thwart the plans of the Sayyid brothers, the 
greater the troubles he had to face. At length Husain ‘Ali arrived 
at Delhi with his Maratha allies. The city was thrown into a state 
of alarm and so was the emperor. He now made desperate efforts 
to undo the mischief by placating the Brothers, but they were im¬ 
pervious to tears and threats alike. Farrukh-siyar had, by this time, 
been completely isolated. Even his father-in-law, Ajit Singh, desert¬ 
ed him . 51 He was overpowered, arrested, and consigned to prison. 
He was subjected to all sorts of tortures by his jailors. Bitter and 


19 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


over-salted dishes were served to him; even slow poisoning was at¬ 
tempted for some time. But he survived all these base experiments. 
At last, executioners were sent and they strangled him to death in 
April 1719. 52 This was the first instance of a sovereign of the Mu- 
ghul dynasty losing his life at the behest of a noble. The Brothers 
had to pay for this dastardly crime with their blood. 

R afi-‘ud-Darajat: 

But for the moment the Sayyids were maddened with their suc¬ 
cess. They raised to the throne Rafi‘ud-Darajat, a puppet. The 
Marathas were permitted to return to the Deccan. They carried 
with them three farmans granting the concessions which they had 
demanded. 53 

The Brothers now found they were sticking their hands in a 
hornets’ nest. Their cruelty to Farrukh-siyar was resented by the 
people of Delhi; their ally Ajit Singh was subjected to insult and 
ridicule; and their rivals set up Niku-siyar, 54 another puppet emperor 
at Agra. Add to this, the growing mistrust and rivalry between the 
Brothers themselves. The Vizir favoured settlement with Niku- 
siyar; the Amir-ul-Umara insisted upon a fight with him. The latter’s 
view prevailed. 

Rafi‘ud-Daulcvh: 

Meanwhile Rafi‘ud-Darajat’s health began to decline fast, and 
on his suggestion, the Sayyids raised to the throne his elder brother 
Rafi‘-ud-Daulah on 6 June, 1719. The new sovereign, Shah Jahan II, 
was virtually a prisoner, in charge of Sayyid Himmat Khan Barha. 
He was not permitted to attend the Friday prayers, nor to go out 
hunting, nor even to converse with any noble, except in the presence 
of his custodian. He fell ill and died on 17 September 1719. 55 

The tragic end of Farrukh-siyar and the succession of two pup¬ 
pets, one after the other, brought to the fore certain political compli¬ 
cations which, in the absence of a master-mind, defied solution. In 
the first place, it was patent now that henceforward the Mughul 
emperor was to reign only and not to rule. He was not the master 
of his destiny; it was to be shaped by others. Secondly, group rival¬ 
ries became more acute than ever, and conflict of interests render¬ 
ed the pursuit of a strong and effective imperial policy not only diffi¬ 
cult but almost impossible. Zu’lfiqar Khan had advocated pro-Mara- 
tha attitude; but the Vazir Mun‘im Khan was against it. So the court 
circle became divided on this vital issue, which continued till 1761. 
Thirdly, there was clash between the liberal and conservative out¬ 
looks. The Sayyid brothers favoured conciliation of the Hindus; 


20 


SUCCESSORS OF AURANGZlB 


whereas the Turani leaders like the Nizam-ul-Mulk pressed for the 
revival of Aurangzlb’s methods of coercion and suppression of non- 
Muslim elements as the only remedy for preserving the integrity of 
the empire. Even so, if the Brothers befriended the Jats and the 
Bundelas, they did not look with a kindly eye on Jay Singh. This 
was the paradox of the situation. For the moment, however, the 
Maratha peril was the gravest, and strenuous efforts were needed to 
meet it. 

Muhammad Shah : 

The ‘King-Makers' now selected another puppet, Prince Roshan- 
Akhtar, son of the late Khujista Akhtar Jahan Shah, the fourth son 
of the emperor Bahadur Shah. He was proclaimed emperor on 28 
September, 1719, and assumed the style of Abul Muzaffar Nasir-ud- 
din Muhammad Shah Badshah Ghazi. 56 

Never before did a more care-free sovereign sit on the throne 
of Delhi. This lad of 17 had passed most of his time within the four 
walls of the palace, in the society of eunuchs and ladies of the 
harem. None had oared for his education, because few could fore¬ 
see the good fortune which lay in store for him. Though fairly in¬ 
telligent, he never attempted to make of his wits. He was of a 
generous disposition and never gave his consent to shedding of blood 
or doing harm to God’s creatures. ‘Timid and wavering, he was 
free from insolent pride’. He was a lover of pleasure, indolent and 
addicted to loose habits. He made it a rule of his life never to de¬ 
cide anything for himself; his favourites did it for him. He readily 
lent his ears to the advice of others without pausing to reflect •upon 
the consequences of accepting it. He had no initiative, nor even 
the dash of some of his predecessors. He was utterly ignorant of 
the elementary rules of the game of politics; he was not even an¬ 
xious to know them. Rustam ‘Ali, the author of Tarikh-i-Hind, says 
that ‘Muhammad Shah was negligent of his duties; but the fact is 
that he did not know if he had any duties to perform’. His reign 
may justly be styled as the period of the ascendancy of favourites. 

For full one year after his accession, Muhammad Shah remain¬ 
ed a virtual prisoner in the hands of the Sayyid brothers. He was 
surrounded by ‘numbers of their trusted adherents; and when occa¬ 
sionally, in the course of two or three months, he went out hunting, 
or for an excursion into the country, they went with him and 
brought him back’. After the disappearance of the * King-Makers 9 
he fell into the clutches of Rahmat-un-Nisa KokI Jiu, the eunuch 
Hafiz Khidmatgar Khan, the necromancer Shah ‘Abdul Ghaffar, and 


21 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Turrabaz Raushan-ud-Daulah Zafar Khan Panlpatl. In 1732 they 
were supplanted by Khan Dauran Samsamud-Daulah and his brother 
Muzaffar Khan. After their death in 1739, they were succeeded by 
another set consisting of Amir Khan, Muhammad Ishaq, Asad Yar, 
who in 1743 were joined by Safdar Jang. 57 

The reign of Muhammad Shah divides itself into two broad 
periods of unequal duration, the dividing point being the invasion 
of Nadir Shah. Besides the petty court intrigues, the main interest 
in the political sphere centres round the steady expansion of the 
Maratha influence, and its pressure on imperial possessions. They 
spread the network of their activity from Gujarat to Bengal, and 
from the Narmada to the Jamuna, and even up to the Ravi. Their 
leader was the second Peshwa, BajI Rao, the strong man of action. 
Under his inspiration the Marathas cut across the limits of the Deccan 
and carried their arms right to the very heart of the Mughul empire. 
There was none to obstruct this terrific onrush of their progress. 

Fall of the Sayyid Brothers : 

The indignities which the Sayyid brothers had heaped upon 
the royal house had made them sufficiently odious; but in their ex¬ 
treme greed for power, they failed to discover the halter which was 
speedily closing in round their necks. They conciliated Jay Singh, 
who never made a secret of his pro-Farrukh-siyar sympathies, by 
assigning to him the Sarkar Sorath in the Subah of Ahmadabad. 58 
They suppressed and killed Budh Singh, and seated their ally Bhim 
Singh on the gadi of Bundl. 59 They attempted to disperse the 
Turani group, by sending away Nizam-ul-Mulk to Malwa. They 
sent forces against Chhabela Ram, the rebellious Governor of Allaha¬ 
bad who was devoted to Farrukh-siyar. On his death, his nephew 
Girdhar Bahadur was persuaded to surrender Allahabad, and in lieu 
thereof he was made Governor of Awadh and received 30 lakhs of 
rupees. 60 

So far, events had moved in favour of the Sayyids, but soon 
alarming reports began to upset their equanimity. The Nizam-ul- 
Mulk, after reaching Malwa, 61 gave free play to his ambitions. He 
marched to the South, defeated and killed in two separate battles 
Dilawar ‘Ali Khan and ‘Alam ‘Ali Khan, and seized the Deccan 
Subah. 61 The apple-cart of the Sayyid supremacy was now over¬ 
turned. The Brothers were now on the horns of a dilemma. 
‘Abdullah did not trust Husain ‘Ali, and neither of the two could 
count upon the support of a few faithful adherents. After pro¬ 
longed discussion they decided that ‘Abdullah should remain at 


22 


SUCCESSORS OF AURANGZfB 


Delhi and Husain ‘Ali and the emperor should go to the Deccan to 
deal with Nizam-ul-Mulk. 63 This marked the beginning of their 
end. 

Accordingly, Muhammad Shah and the Mir Bakhshi Husain ‘Ali 
left Delhi. They chose the Ajmer route in the hope of meeting 
Raja A jit Singh and reinforcing the imperial army by his Rajputs. 
Up to Agra nothing untoward happened. But after the departure 
from the place, the conspirators became more active. Muhammad 
Amin Khan, Qamar-ud-din Khan, Haidar Quli Khan, Mir Jumla, 
Sayyid Muhammad Amin and Sa’adat Khan began to think out 
schemes for the assassination of the Mir Bakhshi. They even suc¬ 
ceeded in winning over the emperor’s mother. At last on 8 October, 
1720, their plans bore fruit, and Husain ‘Ali was stabbed to death. 64 
This was followed by the arrest of Ratan Chand and Muhkham Singh 
Jat who were the supporters of the Qutb-ui-Mulk ‘Abdullah. 65 The 
very next day after the murder of Husain ‘Ali, Muhammad Shah ap¬ 
pointed Muhammad Amin Khan minister and other' conspirators 
were rewarded by promotion to higher ranks or offices. The con¬ 
spirators then marched northward against ‘Abdullah and the im¬ 
perial army reached Hasanpur, fifty miles south of Delhi on 14 
November, 1720. 

When ‘Abdullah heard of the assassination of his brother, he re¬ 
monstrated with the emperor against the perfidy and demanded 
dire punishment of the miscreants. Not being hopeful of a favour¬ 
able response from Muhammad Shah, he set up a rival at Delhi in 
the person of Prince Ibrahim, brother of Rafi‘-ud-Daulah and pro¬ 
ceeded to meet the advancing imperial army. But ‘Abdullah suffer¬ 
ed a crushing defeat at the battle of Hasanpur. He was taken pri¬ 
soner and handed over to the charge of Haidar Quli. He was poison¬ 
ed and killed two years later, and was buried by the side of his 
mistress Kesar Bai. 66 

Gujarat: 

After the fall of the Sayyid brothers, thanks to the pusillanimity 
of the central government, the distant provinces of the empire 
began to yield rapidly to the Maratha incursions. Gujarat witness¬ 
ed a conflict between the representatives of Nizam-ul-Mulk and Sarbu- 
land Khan to whom the province had been assigned after the former’s 
resignation from the vizaratf 1 Though Sarbuland Khan succeed¬ 
ed in expelling his rival’s nominees, he failed to prevent the Mara- 
thas from overrunning the province, their help having been pur¬ 
chased by Nizam-ul-Mulk. 68 He was replaced by Abhay Singh in 


28 


THE MABATHA SUPREMACY 

1730, and to overawe the Marathas he assassinated one of their 
leaders, Pilaji Gaikwar. 69 This occasioned a widespread upheaval 
among the local population. Pilajfs brother MahadajT seized 
Baroda; 70 his eldest son Damaji reduced eastern Gujarat and even 
invaded Jodhpur. Gujarat was finally lost to the empire in 1737. 

Malwa: 

Nizam-ul-Mulk remained, with a few breaks, the governor of 
Malwa till 1724. After this, the vigorous administration of Girdhar 
Bahadur and his nephew Daya Bahadur, along with the pre-occupa¬ 
tion of the Peshwd elsewhere, reduced Maratha fortunes here to the 
lowest ebb for two years—1726-27. But the very next year the 
Peshwd despatched a large army under his brother Chimnaji Appa. 
He defeated and killed Girdhar Bahadur and Daya Bahadur and the 
Mughul administration in South Malwa collapsed completely. 71 Jay 
Singh and Muhammad Khan Bangash made some attempts to re¬ 
trieve the situation, but in vain. In 1736, BajI Rao made demands 
asking for virtual control over Malwa, Bundelkhand, Bengal and 
the Deccan. 72 Next year (1738 Jan.) he defeated the Nizam-ul- 
Mulk at Bhopal and compelled him to sign a convention whereby 
(a) the whole of Malwa was granted to the Peshwd, and (b) also 
the right to levy tribute from the Rajas in the region between the 
Narmada and the Chambal. 73 After the invasion of NSdlr Shah, Jay 
Singh was once more appointed as Viceroy of Malwa; but he gave up 
in despair the task entrusted to him. He came to terms with the 
Marathas and ceded the province to them in 1741. 

Bundelkhand: 

Barring a few intervals of peace, Bundelkhand had remained 
constantly in a state of unrest against the imperial authority ever 
since the reign of Shah Jahan. The valiant Bundela leader Chha- 
trasal joined Bahadur -Shah in his struggle against Kam Bakhsh and 
vigorously participated in the campaign against the Sikhs. He ap¬ 
pears to have done little to embitter his relations with the imperial 
power till the end of Farrukh-siyar’s reign. But after Muhammad 
Shah’s accession he could not refrain from anti-Sayyid activities. 
At the instigation, of Budh Singh Hada he created trouble on the 
borders of Malwa between Agra and Allahabad. 

In 1720 Muhammad Khan Bangash was appointed to the Subah 
of Allahabad and he decided to deal with the Bundelas who had 
sacked Kalpi and extended help to the rebel Girdhar Bahadpr at 
Allahabad. 74 The Bangash army succeeded in ejecting the insur- 


24 


SUCCESSORS OF ATJRANGZfB 


gents from Kalpi, but its leader Diler Khan was defeated and killed 
by Chhatrasal. The Bundelas now overran the entire Bundelkhand 
and though by the end of 1728 they had been driven to bay, the 
enemies of Muhammad Khan encouraged Chhatrasal to continue his 
resistance. Further support came to him from the Peshwa. When 
the Bundela leader died in 1731, the Marathas occupied a part 
of the province and the imperial hold over it became very feeble. 75 

Rajputana: 

Rajputana too, began gradually to slip out of the imperial 
sphere of influence. The inter-state politics of the region became 
complicated and unsettled. Jay Singh of Amber was ambitious and 
restless, and was keen to assert his supremacy over other Rajput 
States. He reduced Bund! to the status, of a vassal by removing 
Budh Singh and placing Dalel Singh on the throne. 76 In Malwa he 
pursued the policy of appeasing the Marathas, but he had to return 
home disappointed. Subsequently in April 1734, Malhar Rao Holkar 
and Ranoji Sindia stormed Bundi, carried off the Regent, Salim Singh 
and restored Budh Singh. 77 They even extended support to Anand 
Singh and Raj Singh against Abhay Singh in Marwar. The Maha¬ 
raja remained helpless and could do nothing when the Maratha gene¬ 
rals swooped upon Rampura. 78 

Jay Singh convened a conference of all the Rajput chiefs at 
Hurda on July 17, 1734, to explore ways and means for keeping the 
Marathas south of the Narmada, and although they signed an agree¬ 
ment for joint efforts, it virtually remained a dead letter because of 
the absence of a common bond of interest among them. Abhay Singh 
was engrossed in his ambition of extending his domain in Gujarat; 
Budh Singh was preoccupied in his feud with Dalel Singh and Maha- 
rana Jagat Singh considered his elephant fights more important than 
keeping off the common enemy. 79 

In 1735, the Marathas burst into Rajputana, and Malhar Rao and 
Ranoji Sindia after routing the imperial troops cbnverged on Jaipur, 
Kotah and Bundi. Next year they plundered Udaipur, Ajmer, 
Roopnagar and Merta. In distress, Jay Singh in consultation with 
Khan-i-Dauran, extended an invitation to Peshwa Baji Rao to come 
to Jaipur to discuss terms, but the effort proved fruitless. But after 
Nadir Shah’s invasion, the situation became favourable and Jay 
Singh succeeded in persuading the emperor Muhammad Shah to 
grant the deputy-governorship of Malwa to the Peshwa (1741). In 
this \fray, inadvertently he opened the flood-gates of the Maratha 


25 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


advance into Rajputana. When he died in 1743, the political situa¬ 
tion in that region became still more complicated. Bundl, Kotah and 
Jaipur became involved in internal strifes and the Marathas began 
to take sides. 

Awadh : 

It was during this period that Awadh became a strong and al¬ 
most semi-independent political unit. The credit for this change 
goes to Mir Muhammad Amin, surnamed Sa‘adat Khan, who. was ap¬ 
pointed governor of this province in September 1722. 80 He seized 
Lucknow from the Shaikhzadas, suppressed the refractory chiefs e.g., 
the Kanhpurias of Tiloi, the Bais of Baiswara and the Chandels of 
Chachendi; and in this way enlarged his possessions. 81 He was held 
in esteem by Muhammad Shah, because of the part he had played 
in the conspiracy against the Sayyids. Indeed, it was Muhammad 
Amin, who after the assassination of Husain ‘Ali, forced his way into 
the ladies’ apartment taking the head of the Sayyid in his hand, and 
with the humblest apologies snatched the emperor from the lap of 
the Queen-mother and brought him out into the open to assure the 
conspirators and alarm the enemies. It was in his life-time that he 
secured the deputy governorship of Awadh for his nephew and son- 
in-law, Abul Mansur Safdar Jang. 

The Jats: 

Near the capital, the Jats had for a long time been a source of 
trouble. Their leader, Churaman, was an active partisan of the 
Sayyid brothers whom he followed like a shadow. He was with the 
army of Husain ‘Ali at the time of the deposition of Farrukh-siyar. 
and accompanied him to Agra to fight Niku-siyar. After the assas¬ 
sination of his patron, he was persuaded to join Muhammad Shah; 
but he went over to ‘Abdullah and created much confusion in the 
rear of the imperial army. He now set up as an independent chief, 
and allying himself with Ajit Singh of Marwar sent assistance to 
the Bundelas to keep the imperialists busy in the east. But his 
leadership was seriously imperilled when he at first imprisoned his 
nephew Badan Singh,* and then released him at the intercession of 
other Jat Chiefs. 

In 1720 Sa‘adat Khan was appointed subdhdar of Agra with 
specific instructions to deal with the Jat insurgents. But his deputy, 
Nilkanth Nagar, was defeated by Muhkam Singh, the son of Chura¬ 
man. Upon this Sa‘adat Khan was removed from his post and was 
replaced by Jay Singh. Churaman having committed suicide, the 


26 


SUCCESSORS OF AURANGZiB 

new subahdar took up the cause of Badan Singh, and expelled the 
sons of the late Thakur from Thun. Badan Singh was now installed 
on the gadi. Within a very short time he became powerful, shook 
off his dependence upon Jaipur, and dominated over the entire dis¬ 
tricts of Agra and Mathura. He arrogated to himself the title of 
Braj Raj and built a strong fortress at Dig. His followers plunder¬ 
ed a portion of Nadir Shah’s treasure when he was retreating to¬ 
wards the Punjab. 82 

Recall of Nizam-ul-Mulk : 

It was in this atmosphere of distraction and disintegration that 
Muhammad Shah and his court minions were almost compelled to 
select a suitable person to deal with the perilous situation. The 
task was evidently beyond them. They now began to make a 
frantic search for a talented administrator who might stave off the 
impending doom. Their choice fell on Nizam-ul-Mulk, who was 
once more summoned from the Deccan. He arrived at the capital 
on July 12, 1737, and was accorded a warm welcome. He was ap¬ 
pointed governor of Malwa superseding BajI Rao, and also governor 
of Agra vice Raja Jay Singh. He started for the former province 
to drive away the Marathas; but he had to sign a disgraceful conven¬ 
tion at Bhopal on 7 January, 1738. 83 

Nadir Shah’s Invasion : 

Meanwhile, the spectre of a foreign invasion began to loom, 
large over the political horizon of the western parts of the Mughul 
empire. Nadir Qull, after consolidating his position in Persia, had 
assumed the title of Shah-in-Shah. He was warlike and ambitious 
and was keen to earn a name and fame and to raise his country to 
the glory which it had enjoyed under the Safavi rulers. He enter¬ 
tained aggressive designs both eastward and westward. He came 
into conflict with the Turks and he sent troops to punish the gov¬ 
ernors of Balkh and Andkhud. He then decided to conquer Qan¬ 
dahar, which was a running sore to the security of his eastern pos¬ 
sessions. He won remarkable success in this enterprise. Where 
Mughul princes like Aurangzib and Dara Shukoh had met with dis¬ 
grace and disaster, Nadir Shah scored a decisive victory. He cap¬ 
tured Qandahar by storming his way into it. 84 

But he had purchased his victory at a very heavy price. To 
collect adequate resources for the. Qandahar campaign, he had des¬ 
poiled the inhabitants of Gombroon, and so denuded the province 
of Kirman that it was exposed to famine for seven or eight years 


27 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


afterwards. Contributions were extorted from other parts of the 
empire as well. In short, in his hour of triumph, financial stringency 
impeded his further conquests. If he was to implement his future 
plans, he had to replenish his treasury as speedily a possible. And 
here lay the genesis of his Indian invasion. What encouraged him 
in his design was the growing weakness of the Mughul empire and 
the information about the enormous wealth of India, which his suc¬ 
cessive ambassadors must have conveyed to him. In the words of 
Lockhart: “With the spoil of India he could raise and pay more the 
Afghan and Uzbeg levies, and so renew war with Turks; besides by 
invading the Punjab, he would be following the example of Ale¬ 
xander the Great, Mahmood Ghazni, and thereby merit the title of 
‘World Conqueror’.” 843 Thus the real motive for the invasions was 
the greed for wealth. 

It is also suggested by some Indian and European writers 
that both Nizam-ul-Mulk and Sa‘adat Khan, the two rivals in the 
Mughul court, had invited Nadir Shah to invade India. 85 But these 
allegations need definite and decisive proofs. It is likely that 
rumours to this effect might have been circulated by interested 
parties. Dr. Yusuf Husain Khan has rejected the allegation against 
Nizam-ul-Mulk. He says: “Most probably the party of Samsam- 
ud-Daulah and Raja Jay Singh was responsible for spreading this 
rumour in order to discredit Nizam-ul-Mulk in the eyes of the Em¬ 
peror”, and cover up their own incompetence. As to Sa‘adat Khan, 
his behaviour and conduct throughout the tragic episode belies the 
presumption of his complicity. Hanway has rightly remarked, ‘it 
appears to me that Nadir did not stand in need of such instruments 
for the execution of his ambitious designs.’ 853 

Apart from the greed for wealth, the immediate pretext 
for the invasion of India was the alleged disregard for Nadir 
Shah’s repeated requests to the Mughul emperor to desist from 
affording asylum to the Afghan rebels. Indeed, even after the siege 
of Qandahar had commenced, the Mughul authorities did nothing to 
close the western frontier against the refugees. And when Muham¬ 
mad Khan Turkman, the Persian envoy, delivered in person the pro¬ 
test of his master to the emperor Muhammad Shah, instead of giving 
any straight reply, his advisers wasted their time in the controversy 
as to how to address the Persian upstart. Thus tl*e envoy was un¬ 
duly detained much to the chagrin of Nadir Shah who had explicitly 
directed him not to prolong his stay beyond forty days. 86 

Muhammad Khan Turkman had been preceded by two other 
envoys viz., ‘AH Mardan Khan Shamlu and Muhammad *Ali Khan. 


28 


SUCCESSORS OF AURANGZIB 


They had brought similar requests; but they had received evasive 
replies. What added fuel to the fire was the murder of two Persian 
couriers who had been sent to Delhi under escort to bring news of 
Muhammad Khan Turkman. Nadir Shah’s patience was exhausted 
and his ire was inflamed to the highest pitch. He marched straight 
to Ghazni. While leaving this place, to cover up his real intentions, 
he sent word to the Kotw^al of Kabul assuring him that he had no 
territorial ambitions, that he only wanted to extirpate the fugitive 
Afghans and that he was expecting hospitality on his arrival there. 
He used Qandahar as a vital base for his Indian expedition. His on¬ 
ward journey was uninterrupted. He arrived at Ghazni from where 
he marched to Kabul which he occupied after a brief resistance on 
the part of the commander of the citadel, Shirza Khan. Here again, 
he professed his friendly intentions towards the Mughul emperor say¬ 
ing that his sole object was to punish the rebel Afghans and that he 
had no territorial designs. He also accredited an envoy to the Court 
of Delhi, but the envoy was killed at Jalalabad. Soon, however, 
Nadir Shah ruthlessly avenged the murder and sacked the town of 
Jalalabad. 87 

It would be erroneous to believe that the political leaders at 
Delhi were totally unaware of the reaction which the political deve¬ 
lopments in Persia would have on the situation in India. The shrewd 
Nizam-ul-Mulk had advised the Mughul emperor to extend a helping 
hand to the ruler of that country 88 and had volunteered to go there 
himself. But Muhammad Shah took the matter lightly and failed to 
come to any decision. Ultimately, when Nadir Shah came out victo¬ 
rious, Nasir Khan, the governor of Peshawar and Kabul, sent a note 
of warning and appealed for reinforcements. 89 To his representatives, 
the Amir-ul Umara Khan-i-Dauran replied, “know you not that I am 
a man of too great experience to be caught by such stories that are 
often made up to extort gold .... my house is in the plain and my 
imagination only dwells on what my eyes can see. Your house is 
on the mountains and perhaps from its summit you have caught a 
glimpse of the Persian host.” 90 When such was the estimate of 
the Mir Bakhshi of the empire, what preparation could be made for 
the defence of the western frontier? The inevitable happened. 
Indeed, the court atmosphere was so surcharged with intrigue, 
neglect and indifference, that it was impossible to have a clear pic¬ 
ture of the crisis which had developed. 

Nadir Shah left Jalalabad and marched towards Peshawar. 
Meanwhile Nasir Khan had, by his own exertions and at his own 
initiative, collected 20,000 Afghans whom he had stationed in the 


29 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Khyber Pass to check the progress of the Persian army. But by 
making a detour the Persian invader avoided confrontation with the 
Afghans and taking an unfrequented route, he entered the Bazar 
valley, and advanced towards Jamrud. On the way, he came face 
to face with Nasir Khan’s Indo-Afghan troops which he drove 
back with heavy losses. Nasir Khan and a number of his officers 
were taken prisoners. 91 

The Afghans posted in Khyber pass having taken to flight, the 
way was clear for Nadir’s baggage train and artillery which joined 
him in full strength. Peshawar was easily occupied, and the region 
between Peshawar and the Indus was thoroughly sacked. A bridge 
was constructed at Attock and the Persian army crossed over to the 
other side. It then marched towards Wazirabad and crossed the 
Jhelum without any difficulty. At Kunja Mazra, (Irvine reads it as 
Kacha Mirza), an Indian army led by Qalandar Khan barred the 
enemy’s advance; but the general was killed and his troops were dis¬ 
persed. 92 Nadir Shah resumed his march and crossed the Chenab. 
On his way to Lahore the entire region was subjected to wanton 
plunder. Near Lahore, the Mughul governor Zakariyah Khan had 
deployed his troops along the Ravi. But because of inadequacy of 
numbers and carelessness of the imperial officers to send reinforce¬ 
ments, he considered it discreet to come to terms with the invaders. 
He made an abject surrender and by offering a gift of 20 lakhs of 
rupees and several elephants he saved his skin and the property and 
honour of the people of Lahore. 93 Nadir Shah stopped here for 
twelve days. He restored to Zakariyah Khan the governorship of 
Lahore and gave to Nasir Khan the subahdari of Kabul and Pesha¬ 
war. He then marched to Sirhind where he arrived on February 
16, 1739. From here he sent out 6,000 Kurdish cavalry under the 
command of HajI Khan to reconnoitre the Indian position. 94 

From Sirhind he set out for Ambala where he deposited his 
heavy baggage and harem. He then advanced to Shahabad, thirty- 
four miles north of Karnal. Meanwhile, his Kurdish patrols had 
come into conflict with Indian forces, and many of them were killed 
and captured. From Ambala he marched to ‘Azimabad where he 
planned his strategy to meet the Indian army. From ‘Azimabad he 
marched towards Karnal crossing the ‘All Mardan canal. At the 
head of some of his bodyguard, the Shah rode up to the Indian camp, 
but returned quietly without hazarding a battle. 

The fall of Ghazni should have opened the eyes of the emperor 
Muhammad Shah to the grave peril which was threatening the 


80 


SUCCESSORS OF AURANGZlB 


Mughul empire. But he paid no heed to it, and he and his advisers 
remained absolutely inactive. 95 They awoke only after Kabul had 
been occupied by the Persians and the Indus had been crossed by 
them. Now feverish efforts were made to stem the tide which was 
raging in full fury. The Amir-uUUmara sent urgent messages to 
Rajput princes to arrive at Delhi and stave off the impending catas¬ 
trophe. But there was no response worth the name. They remain¬ 
ed silent spectators of the tragedy. 

The emperor summoned Burhan-ul-Mulk, Sa‘adat Khan, from 
Awadh, 96 but did not wait for his arrival. He immediately held a 
council of war with Nizam-ul-Mulk, Khan-i-Dauran and Itimad-ud- 
Daulah and decided that the nobles should march to Karnal and 
wait for the enemy there. The number of combatants in the Indian 
army at the moment was about 75,000. The imperialists pitched 
their camp and laid out fortifications to defend their position. 
Shortly after, arrived Sa‘adat Khan with his exhausted and tired 
troops. He went to pay his respects to the emperor. Meanwhile, 
news was brought to him that the Persians were plundering his 
baggage. Upon this he could not restrain himself. He hurriedly 
left the audience, called his men to arms and rushed to save his 
baggage. Evidently his action was not only desperate, but unwise 
and impetuous. It left no time to the imperial army to work out 
a planned strategy to meet the enemy. When Sa‘adat Khan emerg¬ 
ed from the imperial camp, the Persians feigned retreat. He moved 
ahead to pursue them, and thus he lost all contacts with the base. 
Realising the gravity of his situation he sent urgent appeals to the 
emperor for speedy help. After much discussions Khan-i-Dauran 
with about 8,000 or 9,000 cavalry was sent to the assistance of 
Sa‘adat Khan. But the imperial Mir Bakhshi was only a carpet 
knight, ignorant of military tactics. He knew only how to brag. 

Thus a minor action developed up into the battle of Karnal. 77 
The Persians with regular volleys of swivel guns slaughtered a con¬ 
siderable number of Sa‘adat Khan’s men. But the Khan stood his 
ground firmly. At this critical juncture arrived Khan-i-Dauran, and 
though the two combined chiefs offered brave resistance, they could 
not reverse the situation. Khan-i-Dauran was fatally wounded in the 
face and fell unconscious in the howdah. Likewise Sa'adat Khan 
also received two wounds. Even when everything had been lost, he 
went on boldly shooting arrows to resist capture. At the last mo¬ 
ment, at the instance of a young Persian of Naishapur, he surrender¬ 
ed and was carried a prisoner to the camp of Nadir Shah. 


31 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


It appears strange that emperor Muhammad Shah, his Vazir 
Qamar-ud-dm and his adviser Nizam-ul-Mulk should have compla¬ 
cently watched the terrible carnage which was going on before their 
very eyes. The Indian left wing under their commands remained 
intact to the last. It could have advanced to the succour of the 
hard-pressed imperial forces. Only two explanations may be given 
for this criminal and heartless inactivity. Either Nizam-ul-Mulk 
was taking a malicious pleasure in the humiliation of his two rivals, 
or otherwise he considered it futile to combat the superior tactics 
of Nadir Shah„ Anyway, it is difficult to defend his reprehensible 
conduct. 

When Sa‘adat Khan was led into audience of Nadir Shah, he 
tactfully answered the questions put to him. He proclaimed his 
loyalty to the Mughul emperor, though he hailed from the same 
country as Nadir Shah. He impressed upon the latter that there were 
still vast resources at the disposal of Muhammad Shah and that he 
was in a position to fight on equal terms. He advised him to send 
for Nizam-ul-Mulk, who was the ‘key of the empire’, and negotiate 
with him. Accordingly, an invitation was sent through a trust¬ 
worthy person, with a copy of the Holy Quran as a guarantee for 
good faith. In view of the past attitude of Nadir Shah, the Mughul 
emperor apprehended treachery on his part; but the Nizam dis¬ 
pelled all such doubts from his mind and went to the Persian camp 
along with his nephew ‘Azimullah Khan Bahadur. 

He succeeded in negotiating peace with the Persian invader on 
the following terms: 

(1) That the Persian army would not advance towards Delhi, 

provided an indemnity of 50 lakhs of rupees was paid to the 
invader. , 

(2) That out of this stipulated amount, 20 lakhs would be paid 
immediately—10 lakhs at Lahore, 10 lakhs at Attock, and 
the balance at Kabul. 

(3) That no territorial annexations would be made. 98 

Evidently the terms were satisfactory to both the parties and 
the Nizam returned to the Mughul camp with flying colours. This 
was followed by a visit of emperor Muhammad Shah to the Persian 
camp, where he was received with great honour and consideration. 
Everybody now thought that the storm had blown over and that the 
empire would regain its peace and would be saved from further 
bloodshed. But this was not to be. The mutual jealousy between 
Nizam-ul-Mulk and Burhan-ul-Mulk irretrievably upset the terms of 


82 


SUCCESSORS OF AURANGZlE 


peace which had been concluded and on which the ink was not yet 
dry. 

When Muhammad Shah returned to his camp, he was apprised 
of the death of Khan-i-Dauran. He immediately conferred on 
Nizam-ul-Mulk the title and post of the deceased noble." This was 
bitterly resented by Burhan-ul-Mulk Sa‘adat Khan, who himself had 
for some time past been coveting the post of Mir Bakhshi. Casting 
to the winds his loyalty to the emperor and his devotion to the coun¬ 
try of his adoption, he became eager to take full revenge on his rival, 
the Nizam. He impressed upon Nadir Shah that he had been duped 
by the latter who would have agreed to pay much more. He sug¬ 
gested to him to take Muhammad Shah, the Nizam and others into 
custody, march to Delhi and make himself master of the immense 
treasures in store there. Nadir Shah accepted the suggestion, be¬ 
cause it was after his heart. To make his assurance doubly sure, 
Sa‘adat Khan summoned his troops from the Mughul camp and 
quartered them near the Persian army. 

For the next few days there was a lull in the atmosphere; but 
the storm was steadily brewing. Nizam-ul-Mulk was again invited 
to the Persian camp and on his arrival there, he was asked to fur¬ 
nish twenty crores of rupees in addition to 20,000 cavalry to serve 
under the Shah. When he pleaded his inability, he was placed 
under surveillance. Similarly the emperor Muhammad Shah, Vazir 
Qamar-ud-dln and the royal harem were also placed in custody. 
Sa‘adat Khan was elevated to the post of Vakil-i-Mutlaq, and along 
with Tahmasp Khan Jala’ir was sent to Delhi with instructions to the 
governor Lutf-ullah Khan Sadiq to hand over the keys of the im¬ 
perial palaces and establishments. Preparations were begun, at the 
capital for the reception of the two monarchs—one a captive and the 
other a victor. 

They left Karnal on 12 March ^arid after six days arrived in 
Shalimar Gardens near Delhi. The emperor was permitted to enter 
the city beforehand to enable him to accord a suitable welcome 
to his honourable visitor. On March 20, Nadir Shah entered Delhi 
in a magnificent procession headed by 100 elephants each of which 
had several Jazairchis . Nadir Shah himself was mounted on a horse. 
Near the fort, he was greeted with the booming of guns, and the 
emperor received him at the gate with great pomp and show and 
placed before his guest all the royal treasures and jewels. After 
this Nadir Shah took up his residence near the Divjan-i-khds in the 
palace built by Shah Jahan, while the emperor occupied a building 

3M 


M.S.—8 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


near Asad Burj or Lion Tower. Next day (March 21) the Khutba 
was read in all the mosques of Delhi in Nadir Shah’s name and coins 
were also struck in his name. 

Sa‘adat Khan, though high in favour with the Persian invader, 
was feeling distressed at his inability to collect the large amount 
which he had promised. Afraid of being slighted on that account, 
he committed suicide. But contemporary historians have given dif¬ 
ferent versions regarding his death. ‘Abdul Karim attributes it to 
excessive pain in his leg; Abul Qasim Lahori attributes it to some 
bodily ailment; but Har Charan Das definitely says that “as Nadir 
Shah demanded the sum he had promised, Sa‘adat Khan took dia¬ 
mond powder to save his name and honour and died the following 
morning.” Rustam ‘All in his Tarikh-i-Hind gives more details. 
According to him “Nadir Shah publicly abused Nizam-ul-Mulk and 
Sa‘adat Khan and threatened them with corporal punishment.” To 
save themselves from dishonour they made a suicide pact; but the 
Nizam did not abide by it, whereas Sa‘adat Khan ‘like a true soldier 
drank a cup of poison and departed to the next world’. 100 

When the exchange of courtesies between the two monarchs 
was over, towards the close of the day Nadir Shah retired to his 
own palace. But in the city wild rumours were spread that he had 
met with untimely death or had been seized or imprisoned by the 
orders of the emperor. None cared to verify the truth and great 
commotion arose. Mobs collected at various nooks and corners and, 
in the excitement, began to attack the Qizilbtish, troops in the town. 
The Persians were in a state of consternation because of the reports 
of their master’s death. Thus about 3,000 of them fell a prey to the 
wanton attacks on the part of the people of the capital. Add to 
this, the indiscretion of two Indian nobles, Sayyid Niyaz Khan and 
Shah Nawaz Khan, who collected 500 men, raided the royal ele¬ 
phant stables, killed the superintendent and removed the elephants. 

At first Nadir Shah refused to believe the reports of the dis¬ 
turbance and blamed his own men for stirring up the trouble. But 
when two of his Yaswals, sent one after the other to inquire and 
ascertain the true state of affairs had been mercilessly killed, he 
sent a body of his troops to quell the rioters; but owing to darkness 
and smallness of their members, they failed to restore order. The 
Persians passed the whole night under arms and next morning the 
Shah rode through the streets to the Golden Mosque in Chandni 
Chowk. On the way a bullet missed him, but killed one of his 
officers. Mounting the roof of the mosque, red with anger, he 
ordered a general massacre of the inhabitants of the capital. “The 


34 


SUCCESSORS OF AURANGZlB 


Persian troops began their dreadful carnage at 9.00 a.m. The 
soldiers forced their way into shops and houses killing the occupants 
and laying violent hands on anything of value. The money¬ 
changers’ bazar and the shops of jewellers and merchants were set 
on fire and destroyed, all the occupants perishing in the flames. No 
distinction was made between the innocent and the guilty, male and 
female, old and young.” I00a While the work of death and destruction 
was going on, Nadir Shah remained sitting in the mosque with his 
drawn sword beside him. The massacre continued for about six 
hours. It is difficult to give the exact number of lives lost. It 
varies from 8,000 to 40,000. Sir Jadunath Sarkar puts it at 20,000, 
besides several hundred women who committed suicide. This dark 
day has become proverbial in the history of India and Nadir Shah 
stands as a symbol of pitiless cruelty and wanton disregard for hu¬ 
man life. The streets of Delhi remained littered with corpses for 
several days; but at length Nadir Shah directed the kotwal to burn 
them. Timber from the wrecked houses provided fuel for funeral 
pyres, on which the bodies of Muhammadans and Hindus were burnt 
without distinction of creed and caste. Many thousands of corpses 
were collected and thrown into the Jamuna. 

At the fervent appeal of the emperor Muhammad Shah conveyed 
to Nadir Shah by Nizam-ul-Mulk and Qamar-ud-dm Khan, he ordered 
his soldiers to halt the carnage. But Sayyid Niyaz Khan and Shah 
Nawaz Khan were not allowed any respite. They were captured and 
put to death. The heavy bloodshed satisfied only the beastly in¬ 
stincts of the Persian invader and earned for him everlasting hatred. 
His lust for gold had not yet been satisfied. ‘His agents went from 
house to house to prepare inventories of the properties of the citizens 
of Delhi. Nizam-ul-Mulk Itimad-ud-Daulah and Sarbuland Khan 
were appointed to supervise the collection work. The capital was 
assessed at two crores.’ According to one author, Nadir Shah ob¬ 
tained from the emperor, his nobles and people about 70,00,000 
rupees. I00b Anand Ram has aptly remarked “the accumulated wealth 
of 348 years changed hands in a moment.” Next to the famous Pea¬ 
cock throne, there was the Koh-i-Nur diamond which Nadir Shah 
grabbed with avidity. 101 Besides these he also confiscated the pro¬ 
perties of Khan-I-Dauran and Muzaffar Khan. Then he sent a strong 
contingent of Persian troops to Awadh to bring the treasures of 
Burhan-ul-Mulk. 

Having thus gratified his lust for money, Nadir demanded the 
hand of a Mughul princess for his son Nasrullah. His demand could 
not be refused and a great grand-daughter of Aurangzlb was married 


35 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

to him. To celebrate the occasion, Nadir ordered illuminations, dis¬ 
play of fire-works and lavish entertainments. The people of Delhi 
were in a state of mourning, but the despoiler Nadir Shah was in a 
festive mood. His Indian adventure was not only most successful 
but was also the most glorious event of his life. 

Summer having advanced, any further stay in this country was 
inconvenient. So Nadir Shah held a darhar on May 12 to which he 
invited the emperor and the principal nobles and in their presence 
placed the crown on his head and conferred robes of honour on others. 
In this way, he vindicated the long-standing claim of the Persian 
rulers, of their superiority to the Mughul sovereigns whom they had 
regarded as their beneficiaries, because they had extended help to 
Babur and given asylum to Humayun and several other princes of 
the Chaghtai family. Finally, he gave some advice to Muhammad 
Shah on the art of government and exhorted the nobles to obey him 
promising all help in case of emergency. “He also warned the em¬ 
peror particularly against Nizam-ul-Mulk whom he had found to be 
cunning, self-seeking and more ambitious than became a subject”. 102 

He marched out of Delhi on 16 May, 1739. His homeward 
journey was not without mishap. His long and richly laden baggage 
train consisting of, besides costly jewels and cash, hundreds of 
camfels, mules and elephants, was subjected to plunder and loot by 
the hardy and daring peasants of the Punjab. He occasionally put 
some of them to sword; but they would not desist. Thus trudging 
his way, he returned home via Peshawar and Kabul. 

Nadir’s invasion was in the nature of a holocaust. It is a record 
of wholesale destruction, blood-curdling massacre, plunder and ra¬ 
pine. It gave a severe blow to the Mughul empire. Moreover, it 
proved to be the harbinger of future invasions of Ahmad Shah Abdali 
and led to the horrible tragedy of Panlpat. It shook the nerves of 
many Indian politicians and statesmen. The French, the English and 
the Dutch trading companies were also frightened. Raja Jay-Singh 
of Amber sent his family to Udaipur. Peshwa BajI Rao was so alarm¬ 
ed that he asked Chimnaji Appa to abandon his campaign against the 
Portuguese and to join him as speedily as possible. He made peace 
with his enemy in Central India exclaiming, “there is now but one 

enemy in Hindustan.” In fact, the entire sub-continent was terribly 
shaken. 

The imperial court, after the departure of Nadir Shah, presented 
a tragic picture of confusion and discord. Gone was its famous gla¬ 
mour and gone its wealth which had dazzled even the foreigners. 
Of the older nobles, Jay Singh had already retired to his own coun- 


36 


SUCCESSORS OF AURANGZiB 


try; Nizam-ul-Mulk was called away to the Deccan to meet the 
Maratha pressure on his possessions; and Sa‘adat Khan was dead. As 
to Itimad-ud-Daulah Qamar-ud-dln Khan, his indolence and licentious¬ 
ness had rendered him a broken reed. The younger men who stepped 
into the political void were a band of self-seekers, unfit to discharge 
their responsibilities in conditions of constant strife and struggle. 
The empire began to disintegrate more rapidly than ever before. 

The Rohillas: 

The Rohillas under the leadership of ‘All Muhammad Khan were 
steadily pushing on their conquests in all directions. They were be¬ 
ing secretly supported by Qaim Khan Bangash, the successor of Mu¬ 
hammad Khan and by the Vazlr Qamar-ud-din. 103 In this way they 
had become a veritable source of danger to Safdar Jang of Awadh 
who had now worked himself into the favour of Muhammad Shah. 
At the instance of the former, a campaign against the Rohillas was 
sanctioned. On this occasion was exposed the total bankruptcy of 
the military leadership of the emperor’s favourites. In the end, up¬ 
on the intervention of the Vazlr, ‘All Muhammad tendered his sub¬ 
mission. He was sent away to Sirhind. When Ahmad Shah Abdali 
entered Lahore, he opened negotiations with him and succeeded in 
recovering Rohilkhand in 1748. 104 

Bengal: 

In the distant provinces of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, conditions 
were no better. The governor owned only vague allegiance to Delhi. 
Shortly after the invasion of Nadir Shah, ‘Ali Vardi Khan killed his 
master Sarfaraz Khan, Governor of Bengal, and secured the recogni¬ 
tion of his title by bribing the emperor. 105 But his claim for the pos¬ 
session of Orissa was disputed by a relation of the .former subahdar 
of Bengal, who invited the intervention of the Marathas. Hencefor¬ 
ward, the three provinces in the east were subjected to a series of 
Maratha incursions, till in 1746 Orissa passed into the possession of 
RaghujI Bhonsle. From the Bengal revenue twelve lakhs of rupees 
a year had to be paid to RaghujI as chauth for that province accord¬ 
ing to the treaty concluded in May 1751. 

The Punjab: 

At the time of Nadir Shah’s invasion, the governor of the Punjab 
was Zakariyah Khan. At the invader's instance, Multan was added 
to his charge and he was created an eight -hazari. But when he died 
in 1745. a civil war broke out among his sons, one of whom invited 


37 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Ahmad Shah Abdali to come to his assistance. The invitation was 
responded to with alacrity. 106 

Ahmad Shah Abdali: 

Ahmad Shah was originally a general of Nadir Shah, who, after 
the latter’s assassination, proclaimed himself king. He occupied 
Kabul and Peshawar, crossed the Indus and seized Lahore. He then 
marched towards Delhi. When the emperor received the report of 
his. advance, he despatched a large army under the Vazir Qamar-ud- 
din Khan, the Mir Atish Safdar Jang, and Ishwari Singh. They were 
later on joined by Prince Ahmad. The imperial army marched to 
Karnal, and passing Sirhind crossed the Sutlej. But the invader had 
crossed the same river at a different place and occupied Sirhind. The 
Mughuls thereupon turned round and commenced their backward 
march. They contacted the enemy near Sirhind, and inflicting a 
crushing defeat on Ahmad Shah, pursued him up to Lahore. But 
just on the eve of the battle, the Vazir Qamar-ud-din was hit by a 
cannon-ball and killed. Shortly after, the emperor who had been 
ailing for some time, also breathed his last (25-6 April 1748). 107 

Between the death of Aurangzib in 1707 A.D. and that of Mu¬ 
hammad Shah in 1748, the imperial politics passed through a tortu¬ 
ous course of base intrigues, underhand dealings, treachery and 
blooshed. But strangely enough though the empire was falling to 
pieces, the name of the Mughul emperor and his titular supremacy 
had still some prestige left. He was recognised sovereign as much 
by the aggressive Marathas as by the succession States of Bengal, 
Awadh, Rohilkhand and Hyderabad. Even the Rajputs did not re¬ 
pudiate formal allegiance to him. The sikka was struck and the 
Khutba was recited everywhere in his name. The ruler of Hydera¬ 
bad styled himself Nizam-ul-Mulk and that of Awadh styled himself 
Nawab Vazir. Similarly, no other chief either cared or dared to 
assume the supreme title of king or emperor. 

Another feature of Muhammad Shah’s long reign of twenty- 
eight years is reflected in the growth of cliques and groups in the 
court i;o which some reference has already been made. They were 
neither based on religious affinity, nor on any healthy political prin¬ 
ciples. They came into existence and changed their complexion and 
composition in the context of the interest of an individual or a group 
of individuals. Similarly, loyalty to the emperor was conspicuous 
by its absence among them, though some of them enjoyed special 
favours of the sovereign and were called as “King’s favourites” 
Others came together to promote or pursue a policy which was of ad- 


38 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


vantage to them. And in this background certain queer combina¬ 
tions may be noted. Zu-’fikar Khan, an Irani, was supported by 
‘Abdus-Samad Khan, a Turani, Dau’d Khan Panni, an Afghan, and 
Rajputs like Rao Singh Hada and Rao Dalpat Bundela. The Sayyid 
brothers sought thd co-operation of the Turanis, although they were 
deemed to be pro-Haindustani. The Turani-Muhammad Amin Khan 
and Irani Sa‘adat Khan joined hands to bring about the downfall of 
the Sayyid brothers. Later on Vazir Qamar-ud-dln Khan, Sa‘adat 
Khan, Muhammad Khan Bangash and Raja Abhay Singh formed one 
group, while Khan-i-Dauran, Jay Singh and some other Afghan amirs 
formed the opposite party. Even Nizam-ul-Mulk came to terms with 
the Marathas, whom he bitterly hated. Besides these ever-shifting 
groups, there were the favourites of the emperor who also had a hand 
in shaping contemporary politics and in interfering with administra¬ 
tive details. 

A third feature of this reign was the growing licentiousness both 
among the royalty and the nobility. Muhammad Shah and his Vazir 
Qamar-ud-dln closely resembled each other in their habits and tem¬ 
perament and they were inseparables. Their example was eagerly 
imitated by other amirs. And soon the imperial court became a cen¬ 
tre of jest and frivolity much to the annoyance and disgust of conser¬ 
vatives and disciplinarians like the Nizam-ul-Mulk. 

In the colourful language of Macaulay the position is thus stated: 
“A succession of nominal sovereigns, sunk in indolence and debau¬ 
chery, sauntered away life in secluded palaces, chewing bhang, 
fondling concubines, and listening to buffoons. A succession of fero¬ 
cious invaders descended through the western passes, to prey on the 
defenceless wealth of Hindostan. The warlike tribes of Rajpootana 
threw off the Mussulman yoke. . . . The Jauts spread dismay along 
the Jumna. The highlands which border on the western sea-coast 
of India poured forth a yet more formidable race, a race which was 
long the terror of every native power.. Every corner of Aurangzeb’s 
empire learned to tremble at the mighty name of the Mahrattas. 
Their dominions stretched across the peninsula from sea to sea. 
Mahratta captains reigned at Poona, at Gwalior, in Guzerat, in Berar 
and in Tanjore.” 108 The expansion of their power and its nature 
will be traced in subsequent chapters. 

NOTES 

1 . William Irvine. Later Mughals, Vol. I, p. 6 and foot note. 

2. Jangndmah . f. 1(b); Ruznameha, ff. 16 and 16(b); Irvine, op. cit. Vol. I, p. 7. 
Hamid-ud-din has in his W aqai-Alamgiri given quite a different version of this 
will and he does not refer to partition at all. Irvine refers to 20 subahs only, 
whereas a MS copy in the India Office refers to 21 subahs. 

3 Akhbdrat : Kamraj, lbrat Ndmah f. 10(b); Bhimsen. Dilkusha, f. 162. 


39 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


4. Irvine, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 13 and note. 

5. Irvine, op. cit., Vol! I, pp. 14, 18. 

d. There is a difference of opinion among the contemporary historians with regard 
to the date when Prince Mu'azzam received the report of his father’s death. 
Khafi Khan, Vol. II, p. 573; Dilkusha, f. 164; but Irvine’s conclusion is correct; 
Vol. I, p. 18. 

7. Irvine L op. cit., Vol. I, p. 19. 

8. Jangrvamah, f. 1(b). 

9. Ibrat Namah by Muhammad Qasim Lahauri, f. 8; Kamraj, (f. 10) writes that 
Azim-us-Shah received the news at Kanauj. 

10. Nushka-i-Dilkusha, f, 164; Kamraj, f. 9. 

11. Irvine, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 33; Khafi Khan, Muntakhab-ul-Lubab, Vol. II, 
pp. 579-88; Jangnamah, f, 28. 

12. M. Hadi Kamwar Khan, Tazkirat-us-Salatin-i-Chughtai, f. 308; Kamraj, Ibrat 
Namah, f. 37; Dilkusha, f. 162; Khafi Khan, Vol. II, p. 569. 

13. Khafi.Khan, Vol. II, p. 569. 

14. Kamwar, op. cit., f. 309; Khafi Khan, Vol. II, p. 608. 

15. Vir Vinod, Pt. II, p. 930; Irvine, op cit., Vol. II, pp. 56-57. 

16. Akhbdrdt, 4 January 1709; Kamraj, f. 39. 

17. Khafi Khkn, Vol. II, p. 605; Mdsir-ul-Umard , Vol. I. p. 178; Adhunik Rajasthan, 
pp. 156-57. 

18. Akhbarat, 28 April, 1707 A-D.: Dilkusha, f. 166(b); Iradat Khan, Tazkirah , 
p. 37. 

19. According to V7r Vinod , Amar Singh did not take sides in the war of succes¬ 
sion. (Vol. II, p. 746). In the opinion of Udayaraj Singh, with the exception 
of the ruler of Jodhpur, other Rajput princes were friendly with the Mughuls. 
Unpublished thesis, p. 139. 

20. Akhbarat, 30 October, and 30 November, 1707; Dilkusha, f. 170. 

21. Perhaps the reason for this change of rulers was Jay Singh’s intrigue against 
Vijay Singh; Irvine, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 47. 

22. Dr. Satish Chandra, Parties and Politics at the Mughal Court, p. 32. 

23. Kamwar, Pt. II, f. 308 (b); Kamraj, f. 37 (b); Khafi Khan, Vol. II, p. 661. 

24. Vamsa'Bhaskar, pp. 3, 17-18; Vir Vinod, Vol. II, pp. 769-71; Jodhpur Ki Khyat, 
Pt. II, p. 83; Ojha G. H., Jodhpur, p. 536. 

25. Ojha, Udaipur, Pt. II, p. 605; Irvine, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 67: Jodhpur Ki Khyat, 
Vol. II, p. 83; Vir Vinod , Pt. II, p. 834. 

26. Akhbarat, September 26, 1708 A.D.; Arzdasht of Jaipur Vakil, June 30, 1708. 

27. Akhbarat, October 3, 1711; Kamwar . Pt. II, f. 329. 

28. Govind Singh fought on the side of Bahadur Shah at Jajau: Ganda Singh, p. 12. 

29. Govind Singh was placed in charge of the Godavari valley. Cunningham, 
History of the Sikhs, p. 72; Lahauri, f. 27(b)-28-(b). Ganda Singh, p. 22; Khafi 
Khan, Vol. II, p. 652. 

30. Ibid. 

31. Khafi Khan, Vol. II, pp. 662-63. 

32. Irvine, ibid. Vol. I, p. 98. 

33. Akhbarat, July 5, 1710 and August, 1710; Vomisa Bhaskar, p. 303. 

34. For further details see Irvine, op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 93-121. Akhbarat, Kamwar 
etc. 

35. According to Kamraj [f. 45(a)], the situation became so grave that the emperor 
did not dare going out on hunting excursions or boating trips; Khafi Khan, 
pp. 680-81; Akhbarat. 

36. For the details of intrigues and the internecine struggle, see Irvine, op. cit., 
Vol. I, pp. 158-85. 

37. He was a Kayastha and was promoted to the rank of 2000-j-1000. Dr. Satish 
Chandra, op. cit., p. 68, f.n. 26; Irvine,, op. cii„ Vol. I, p. 197 

38. At first Sayyid Husain ‘Ali was very reluctant to support Farrukh-siyar. 
Dr. Satish Chandra, “Early Relations of Farrukh-siyar and the Sayyid brothers”, 
Mediaeval India Quarterly, Vol. II. 

39. Irvine, op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 216-19. Khan-i-Dauran fled from Khajuha and 
Lutfullah Khan Sadiq, the Diwan, deserted Prince A‘zz-ud-din. Khafi Khan, 
p. 717; Tarikh-i-Muzaffari, p. 190. 


40 


SUCCESSORS OF AURANGZlB 


40. Ibrat Namah, f. 15(a), Khafi Khan, pp. 718-24, Irvine, op. cit., pp. 219-36. 

41. Waris, Mirat-i-Waridat, f. 145 and f. 275; Irvine, op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 236-40. 

42. Ajit Singh had given to the Emperor several causes of offence; his men had 

murdered Muhkam Singh and the Rathor Raja honoured them; he had esta¬ 
blished thanas at Rupnagar: he contemplated aggression against Malwa, etc., 
and established thanas at Todah and Malpura. He refused to comply with the 
imperial orders; Mundiyesh ki Khyat, p. 246; Ibrat Namah, f. 60(a); Irvine. 
op. cit., Vol. I, p. 290. 

43. Qasim Lahauri, Ibrat Namah, f. 174(a); Irvine, op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 307-19. 

44. Qanungo, K. R., History of the Jats , p. 60; Irvine, op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 321-27. 

45. Bhargava, V. S., Mewar and the Mughnl Emperors, holds that no such letters 
were written, p. 158. 

46. Khafi Khan, Vol. II, p. 741; Akhbarat. 

47. Mir Jumla entered Delhi secretly. He had returned from Patna in complete 

frustration. Ibrat Namah, ff. 48a-51(a>. Khafi Khan, Vol. II, p. 769. The em¬ 

peror was annoyed and deprived him of his titles, which were subsequently 
restored. Dr. Satish Chandra, op. ch., p. 119; Irvine, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 330 
and f.n. 3 and pp. 352-56. He was expelled twice from Delhi. 

48. Nizam-ul-Mulk arrived at Delhi on June 13, 1715, Hadiqat-ul-Aiam, p. 93. 

49. Khafi Khan, Vol. II, p. 774; Ibrat Namah 70 (a). Satish Chandra, op. cit., 

pp. 120-26. 

50. For details, see Chitnis, Thorle Shahu Charitra (1924), pp. 54-56. Grant Duff, 
Vol. I, (1921 ed.), pp. 337-8. 

51. For the role of Ajit Singh, see Satish Chandra, op. cit., pp. 139 and 141; Yusuf 
Husain, p. 98; Irvine, op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 348, 363, 374, 380, 382. 

52. Khafi Khan, Vol. n, pp. 819-20; Ajit Singh’s letter in Sobhavat Dayal, May 4, 
1719. 

53. Irvine, op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 406-07; Yusuf Husain, op. cit., pp. 101-02. Satish 
Chandra, op. cit., p. 149. 

54. Satish Chandra, op. cit., p. 145; Irvine, op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 408-20; Kamwar 
Khan, Khafi Khan, p. 827. 

55. Irvine, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 431; Yusuf Husain, pp. 104-05. 

56. Kamwar, p. 413; Tarikh-i-Muzaffari, p. 166. 

57. Sarkar Jadunath , Fall of the Mughal Empire, Vol. I, pp. 16-17. 

58. Khafi Khan, p. 838. 

59. Ibid, p. 851; Irvine, op. cit., Vol. II, pp. 5-6. 

60. Irvine, op. cit., Vol. II, pp. 6-16. 

61. Nizam-ul-Mulk accepted the governorship of Malwa on condition that he would 
not be transferred on flimsy grounds. Irvine, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 17; Yusuf 
Husain, op. cit., p. 101. 

62. Khafi Khan, Vol. II, pp. 852-97. Yusuf Husain, op. cit., pp. 107-41; Satish 
Chandra, op. cit., pp. 154-60. 

63. Yusuf Husain, op. cit., p. 136; Irvine, op. cjt, Vol. II, pp. 51-52; Khafi Khan, 
Vol. II, p. 897. 

64. Irvine, op. cit., Vol. II, pp. 56-67; Khafi Khan, pp. 902-05; Tarikh-i-Muzaffari , 
pp. 271-73. Despatches from the Court to Jay Singh; Yusuf Husain, op. cit., 
p. 136. 

65. Irvine, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 65. 

66. Satish Chandra, op. cit, pp. 161-62; Irvine, op. cit., pp. 75 96. 

67. Irvine, op. cit, Vol. II, p. 185. 

68. Irvine, op. cit, Vol. II, pp. 170-90. 

69. I.H.R.C. report, 13th Session, Jodhpur letters and Shahu Roznishi, No. 161. 

70. Jodhpur Raj Ka Itihas, Vol. II, p. 630. 

71. SPD. XIII, Nos. 16, 17, 23-28, 31-35. 

72. Dighe, V. G., Peshwa Bdji Rao, I, pp. 127-8. 

73. Ibid ; SPD. XV, pp. 83-90. 

74. Irvine, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 231. 

75. Irvine, op. cit, Vol. II, pp. 232-33 and 238-41; J.A.S.B. (1878) Fart IV, p. 301. 

41 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


76. Jagdish Singh Gahjot, Rdjputana ko.Itihas, Vol. II, p. 81. 

77. Tikkiwal, H.C., Jaipur and the Later Mughals, p. 79. 

78. Ibid, pp. 79-30. 

79. Ibid, pp. 79-80. 

80. Srivastava A. L., First Two Nawabs of Oudh (1933), p. 30. 

81. Ibid, pp. 33-43. 

82. Ibid, pp. 28-29. 

83. Yusuf Husain, op. cit., pp. 208-15; SPD. XV, p. 66, Brahmendra-Charitra, 
Appendix 35, 116. 

84. Ibid., p. 220; Irvine, op. cit., Vol. II, pp. 320. 

84a. Lockhart, L., Nadir Shah (1938), p. 123. 

85. For a discussion of this point, see Yusuf Husain, op. cit., pp. 221-22; Rustam 
Ah believed in Sa'adat’s complicity, Elliot and Dowson’s History, Vol. VIII, 
p. 60; Fraser, pp. 129-32, Hanway IV, 142. Lockhart, op. cit., p. 139. 

85a. Hanway, Vol. IV, p. 142. 

86 Yusuf Husain, op. cit., p. 223; Irvine, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 321. 

87i. Irvine, Vol. II, pp. 326-28; Yusuf Husain, op. cit., p. 224. 

88. Yusuf Husain, op. cit., p. 219. 

89. Ibid, p. 220. 

90. Tazkirat of Anand Ram Mukhlis (Elliot and Dowson, Vol. VIII, p. 78). 

91. Irvine, op. cit., Vol. II, pp. 330-31 

92. Lockhart, op. cit., p. 129. 

93. Ibid, pp. 130-31. 

94. Ibid, p. 133. 

95. Srivastava A. L., First Two Nawabs of Oudh, p. 62. 

96. Ibid, p. 62. 

97. For the battle of Karnal, see Srivastava A. L., op. cit., pp. 62-67; Yusuf Husain, 
op. cit., pp. 225-26 and Lockhart, op. cit., pp. 135-43. 

98. Yusuf Husain, Ibid., p. 228; Srivastava A. L., has given more details, op. cit., 
pp. 67-68. 

99. Srivastava A. L., op. cit., p. 69. Yusuf Husain says that the post had been pro¬ 
mised to Burhan-ul-Mulk, p. 229. 

100. Srivastava A. L., op. cit., pp. 74-75. 

100a- Lockhart, op. cit., p. 148. 

100b. Lockhart, op. cit., p. 152. 

101. For the controversy regarding the identity of Kohi-Nur, see Aziz Ahmad, 
Treasury of the Mughals. 

102. Cambridge History of India, Vol. IV, p. 362; for the details of Nadir Shah’s 
invasion, see Irvine, op. cit., Vol. II, pp. 335-59. Srivastava, A L , op. cit., 
pp. 61-75. Yusuf Husain, op. cit., pp. 217-36. Lockhart, op. cit., pp. 122-54. 

103. Srivastava A. L., op. cit., p. 107. 

104. Sarkar, Jadunath, Fall of the Mughal Empire, Vol. I, (1932), pp. 57-65. 

105. Ibid, pp. 71-72. 

106. Ibid, pp. 189-196. 

107. Ibid, pp. 200-33. 

108. Macaulay T. B., Critical and Historical essays (J. M. Dent & Sons, 1933), 
pp. 487-88. 


42 


CHAPTER III 


RISE OF THE PESHWAS—BALAJl V1SHWANATH 

The eighteenth century is rightly looked on as the age of Maratha 
supremacy. The Marathas dominate the Indian political scene right 
up to the end of the century to the exclusion of any other power. 
Their predecessors, the Mughuls, suffered a decline as dramatic as 
it was unexpected. The Deccan campaign of Aurangzlb drained the 
moral and material resources of the empire and brought it to the 
brink of disaster. As the shrewd Italian traveller Manucci noted, 
“King Aurangzlb repents of having entangled himself in the war 
with the Marathas. In this war over a hundred thousand souls have 
died yearly, and of animals, horses, pack oxen, camels, over three 
hundred thousand. The great nobles are in distress, their families 
are begging.” 1 

The three succession wars during less than a decade took a heavy 
toll of their nobility and of their armies from which the successors 
of Aurangzlb never recovered. It is a misfortune of hereditary suc¬ 
cession that it does not ensure capable descendants; nay, on the con¬ 
trary, being brought up in leisure and luxury of the royal house¬ 
hold and shielded from the hard life of the field and practical world, 
these scions of royalty lack the hardihood of their forefathers and 
the will to rule, are encouraged in vicious ways and licentious habits 
at a very early age by fawning servants, and easily become tools in 
the hands of ambitious men. This was the fate that befell the Mu- 
ghul empire after the death of Aurangzlb. With the burial of the 
dead emperor at Khuldabad in 1707, vanished the glory and prestige 
of the empire. The governors of distant provinces, while professing 
loyalty to the throne, refused to take orders from the royal court 
and assumed independence for all practical purposes. The Afghans 
who swept down to Delhi more than once, esteemed the throne not 
worth the keeping! Near at home there was fierce rivalry for the 
control of the emperor and the royal household and direction of 
imperial affairs. Among the Hindu populace of the empire, there 
were revolts against foreign rule and resurgence. The Rajputs, the 
Sikhs, the Jats, the Bundelas and the Marathas started thinking in 
terms of independence and challenged the might of the empire. The 
Marathas on account of their simple habits, hardihood and national 
fervour, proved the most successful of the lot, liberated their home¬ 
land and carried the war in the enemy’s country. Khafi Khan wrote, 


43 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


“for all the struggles and schemes, the campaigns and sieges of this 
prince .... the power of the Mahrattas increased day by day.... 
They divided all districts among themselves and in the imperial 
fashion they appointed their Subahdars , Kamaishdars and Rahdars. 
They attack and destroy the country as far as the borders of Ahma- 
dabad and the districts of Malwa and spread their devastation through 
the provinces of the Deccan to the environs of Ujjain.” 2 

Shahu Raja’s new Peshud, BalajI Vishwanath, perceived the shift 
in the political atmosphere and reoriented the foreign policy of the 
Maratha State. Instead of following the traditional policy of direct¬ 
ing expansion of the Maratha State in the eastern and southern parts 
of the Deccan, he set on the bold adventure of participating in the 
imperial affairs by the treaty of 1718 with Sayyid Husain ‘Ali, Subah- 
dar of the Deccan. Under his son and grandson participation made 
way for direction and control. The Marathas succeeded to a large 
extent in conquering Malwa, Gujarat and a part of Bundelkhand and 
levied tribute from Bengal to the Punjab and from Agra 
to Arcot. Unfortunately they were not able to develop satisfactory 
administrative and political and cultural institutions to evoke the co¬ 
operation of the local people and win their loyalties. After the set¬ 
back received at Panipat (1761) and the first Anglo-Maratha war 
(1774-82) MahadajI Sindia became the king-maker at Delhi and direct¬ 
ed imperial affairs till his death in 1794. So, when Lord Wellesley 
came out to India to settle the Indian problem, his opponents were 
the Marathas and not the Mughuls. During the last decade after 
MahadajI Sindia’s death, all the great and wise leaders of the Marathas 
had departed from the scene and the great proconsul found himself 
dealing with small men who could not understand that their interest 
lay in cohesion and unity. British diplomacy created disarray 
among Maratha chiefs and fought them separately. The Patwar- 
dhans and other southern jagirdars were seduced by Arthur Wellesley 
in 1800. Sindia and Bhonsle were defeated in 1803; Holkar in 180 1- 
05 and the Peshiva was finished in 1817-18. Maratha supremacy 
was gone and new forces began to shape Indian destinies. 

Aurangzib himself was not unaware of the drift of events, and 
during the last years of his life had tried to come to an understand¬ 
ing with the Marathas, to obtain peace with honour. He had an idea 
of making use of the captive Shahu to gain his ends, but his suspi¬ 
cious nature defeated the move. On his death, therefore, his son 
A 4 zam began his march northward without concluding any formal 
agreement with the Marathas. The Marathas in his rear were soon 
active and renewed their attacks on the imperial territory. The cap¬ 
tive Shahu, unwilling to be dragged to far off Delhi, began efforts 


44 


RISE OF THE PESHWAS—BALAJI VISHWANATH 


to remain his liberty. The party in his favour at the emperor’s court 
consisting of Zu’lfiqar Khan and the Rajput nobility, advised A‘zam to 
allow Shahu to return to the Deccan, reclaim his patrimony and rule 
it as a feudatory of the empire. That would, they contended, ensure 
the safety of Mughul dominions in the south by having a friendly 
prince as their neighbour, or should Shahu fail to obtain general re¬ 
cognition, embroil the Marathas in civil war and remove this source 
of danger for some time. 

Shahu’s Release and Home-coming: 

A‘zam, therefore, gave a willing ear to Shahu’s proposals. Be¬ 
tween March and May, 1707, there were two or three audiences be¬ 
tween the two princes, and robes and titles conveying royal favour 
were conferred on Shahu. The talks, however, appeared to have a 
tendency to protract over a long period as the Mughul prince, busy 
planning the campaign for the throne, had little time for delicate 
negotiations. Uneasy at the prospects of further detention, 
Shahu left his Mughul friends one night at Duraha near Sironj about 
8th May with a very slender escort consisting of his immediate at¬ 
tendants. To elude pursuit he plunged in the Vindhya forests and 
made his way to Bijagarh, south of the Narmada. The Rawal of 
that place, Mohan Singh, gave him a cordial welcome and helped 
him to get on to Sultanpur in Khandesh. Near Sultanpur Amrut Rao 
Kadam Bande joined the prince’s cause and they advanced to Lamb- 
kani in Khandesh. Word went round that the exile prince was re¬ 
turning and now veteran soldiers, loyal servants, and adventurers 
began to flock round his standard. In his imprisonment Shahu had 
contacted several Maratha chieftains; to them and to others he wrote 
tactful and conciliatory letters inviting them to come and help him 
in the task of rebuilding the shattered Maratha State and reviving 
its faded glory. One of the first influential chiefs to respond to the 
prince’s call was Parsoji Bhonsle of Berar. His example proved in¬ 
fectious; Nemaji Sindia, Chimnaji Damodar Moghe, Haibat Rao Nim- 
balkar and a host of Maratha captains in Khandesh hurried to join 
his standard and swear allegiance to their new, yet rightful master. 
His army thus swelled, Shahu advanced to Ahmadnagar; this old 
town was the seat of Muhammadan authority for over two centuries 
and occupied a central position and to it Aurangzlb had repaired in 
the last year of his life. From here Shahu paid his respects to the 
remains of the old emperor buried at Khuldabad and communicated 
his arrival to his aunt Tara Bai who was ruling as regent at Satara 
on behalf of her infant son, Shivaji, eleven years of age. 


45 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Shahu’s Struggle with Tara Bdi: 

Shahu, having informed the ruling party at Satara of his return, 
invited from them proposals for the future government of the Mara¬ 
tha State. The regent Tara Bai was a woman of imperious tempera¬ 
ment and the prospect of resigning the reins of administration to her 
nephew and accepting a subordinate position was distasteful to that 
masterful lady. She refused to believe the reports of Shahu’s re¬ 
lease, discredited his letters and declaring the new claimant for 
the Gadi to be an impostor, ordered her generals to destroy him 
wherever they should find him. This ruse could not stand for long; 
Shahu was personally known to the leading Maratha chieftains and 
officers who had come in contact with him. As a proof of greater con¬ 
viction Parsoji Bhonsle publicly dined with him. Tara Bai then put 
forth another and a stronger reason why she was not prepared to ad¬ 
mit Shahu to government. She argued ‘that the Maratha kingdom 
had been reared up with painful toil by the great Shivaji. This was 
lost by Shambhuji, Shahu’s father, and her husband Rajaram raised 
the edifice anew out of ashes. He defended it against the Mughuls’ 
onslaught and hurled them back. The present Maratha State, she 
contended, was her husband’s creation. She also argued that the 
great Shivaji had expressed a wish on his death-bed that the succes¬ 
sion should go to his second son Rajaram, the elder, Shambhuji, 
being unfit to rule. Shlahu thus in no way could lay any claim to the 
Gadi .’ 3 

Tara Bai’s specious arguments could make little impression on 
the Marathas, always zealous of the right of the elder or the senior 
branch to which Shahu belonged. They had fought all these years 
to liberate their homeland and obtain the release of their legitimate 
Prince Shahu to whose freedom and reinstatement they had looked 
forward as the natural culmination of that struggle. The sacrifice 
the nation had made was not to uphold the cause of Rajaram or his 
son, but to save the honour of the house of Shivaji of which Shahu of 
the senior branch was the living symbol, and whose return had great 
significance to them. Even Rajaram at the time of ascending the 
Gadi in 1689, had declared that he was holding the office of Chhatra- 
pati (the King) only in trust for his nephew then absent in the Mughul 
camp and that he would be only too happy to step down for the right¬ 
ful owner. The issue had always been presented to the masses as 
the restoration of the senior branch tt> its rightful authority; and the 
widow’s quibbles regarding the superior claims of her son deceived 
nobody. Herein lay Shahu’s advantage. The common people and 
soldiers were solidly on his side. It was ultimately this support of 


46 


RISE OF THE PESHWAS-BALAJI VISHWANATH 


the common people that sustained his cause and helped him triumph 
over odds. Though commanded by the Queen to swear fidelity to 
her son on milk and boiled rice, Tara Bai’s officers did so with a re¬ 
servation that their first loyalty would be to support the cause of 
legitimacy and uphold the dignity of the house of Shivajl. 33 

Shahu advanced to Khed on the Bhima; his further prospects de¬ 
pended on the attitude of the great Maratha captains and especially 
of the Senaputi (DhanajI Jadhav) who commanded the largest Mara¬ 
tha army in the field. DhanajI knew young Shahu personally and 
was convinced of his superior claims to Maratha leadership by his 
Diwan Balaji Vishwanath and Khando Ballal, the Chhatrapati’s hered¬ 
itary Secretary. The old soldier refused to take arms against his 
legitimate sovereign and carried with him the major part of the army. 
The remnant was too small to make a stand against the combined 
forces and fled to Satara. (Battle of Khed, 12 October 1707). 

Important consequences flowed from the battle of Khed. It 
opened to Shahu the gates of Swaraj, the heart of the hilly country 
of Poona and Satara, where the great Shivajl had begun his wonder¬ 
ful career and which he took care to fence round with formidable 
fortresses. The powerful forces led by Sendpati DhanajI had de¬ 
clared in his favour; Shahu decided to press home his advantage. He 
marched on to the capital occupying on his way Jejuri, Shirwal and 
Chandan Wandan. The Sachiv of Bhor, ShankarajI Narayan, held 
some of the important hill forts in the tract; he was summoned by the 
young prince and assured of royal favour. Torn between his per¬ 
sonal loyalty to the Queen and his higher duty to his nation and the 
cause of legitimacy, the old veteran decided the issue by putting an 
end to his life. 4 (27 October 1707). Shahu sent messages of sym¬ 
pathy to the bereaved family. By his conciliatory conduct he made 
an excellent impression on his compatriots and obtained the hill forts 
of Rajgarh, Torna, Rohida, and Yichitragarh without striking a blow. 
These forts were the sites of ShivajI’s first exploit's. His rear thus 
secured, Shahu was free to commence the siege of the capital. Tara 
Bai in the meanwhile had fled to Panhala with her son and her Ama- 
tya, Ramachandra, leaving the defence of Satara to Parashuram Pant 
Pratinidhi. The garrison and the commandant had no heart to fight 
their own brethren. By seizing the Commandant’s family at Wai, 
Shahu forced him to open the gates of the fort and city. It was on 
a Saturday in January 1708, that the victorious entry was made; and 
the memory of the happy event was kept green by the custom of 
beating of drums on Saturdays at the fort. 

47 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


After a week’s time Shahu ascended the Gadi in ceremony 43 and 
appointed his new ministers. Anxious to conciliate old families he 
made few changes and made them where absolutely necessary. The 
post of Peshmd went to a son of Moropant Pingle; Dhanaji Jadhav 
was confirmed as Senapatl and the right of making collections in 
several districts was delegated to him. At this period of confusion 
(as remarked by Duff) “the revenue was realized on no fixed prin¬ 
ciples but levied as opportunity presented itself in the manner of 
contribution.” The infant son of ShankarajI Narayan was likewise 
confirmed as Sachiv; Gadadhar Pralhad Niraji at Jinjee, was elevated 
to the post of Pratinidhi as Parashuram Pant Proatinidhi refused to 
abjure his oath to Tara Bai. The Chitnis family was continued in its 
office. Dhanaji’s Diwdn, Balajl Vishwanath, who had materially 
helped the Prince’s cause, was taken in direct service of the king, 
appointed Mutaliq or Deputy to the Amdtya, and was honoured with 
the dignity of ‘Send Karte\ probably in appreciation of his skill in 
obtaining loans, raising new contingents and furnishing them pro¬ 
perly. The great Maratha captains NemajI Sindia, Parsoji Bhonsle, 
Haibat Rao Nimbalkar and a host of others received high-sounding 
titles and robes and confirmed in their conquests as the sovereign 
had yet little to confer on the powerful chieftains. 

But Shahu was not yet out of the wood. His aunt had fled be¬ 
fore him to Rangna and from there was busy fomenting discord 
among Maratha ranks and sowing disunity among Maratha chiefs. 
Many Maratha leaders like Ghorpades, Chavans, Dabhades, and 
Thorats had risen to greatness in her husband’s service; the great 
house of Santaji Ghorpade was the rival of Dhanaji Jadhav and com¬ 
peted with the Jadhav family for the honour of the generalship. 
Ramachandra Amdtya and the queen who had directed the defence 
of Maharashtra for over a long period, from Panhala, claimed per¬ 
sonal devotion from not a few commandants of forts in the Ghat 
region. Shahu, therefore, had to follow Tara Bai to the hills. He 
offered to cede to his cousin, territory south of the Warna to put an 
end to the internecine strife. Tara Bai refused the concession. How 
could she accept this small consolation when, she wanted the sove¬ 
reignty of the entire Maratha State for her son? The offer was 
spurned and the struggle went on for quite a while; Shahu’s forces 
occupied Kolhapur and invested Panhala; Tara B§l abandoned it 
for Rangna, and feeling insecure there moved to Malwan. Panhala 
was-occupied by Shahu’s forces; he attempted to storm Rangna but 
failed and returned to the capital to spend the monsoon (1708 June). 


4 $ 


RISE OF THE PESHWASr—BALAJI VISHWANATH 


Failure of Negotiations with Bahadur Shah: 

It was not possible for Shahu to resume the offensive against 
Tara Bai after the close of the monsoon. The new Mughul emperor 
Bahadur Shah had been called to the south by the assumption of au¬ 
thority by his brother Kam Bakhsh. Bahadur Shah arrived in the 
Deccan in January, 1709, called upon Shahu to aid him and sent a 
general call to the Deccan chiefs to lend him support in suppressing 
the revolt. Shahu’s relations with the Mughul authorities were of 
a nebulous kind; vague promises had been held out to him, but no 
definite agreement concluded, no farman granted. Shahu despatch¬ 
ed an envoy to the emperor’s presence to obtain the farmans of 
Swaraj, Chauth and Sardeshmuhhi, while a strong force under Chan- 
drasen Jadhav hovered in Khandesh to back up his request. By 
Zu’lfiqar Khan’s representations Bahadur Shah was inclined to 
favour Shahu’s cause; but Tara Bai (about this time) sent counter pro¬ 
posals saying that her son was the lawful sovereign of the Maratha 
State and offering to accept much lower terms. The enemy’s game 
of throwing an apple of discord amongst the Marathas succeeded. 
Bahadur Shah refused recognition to either party asking them first 
to settle between themselves as to whom he should deliver the goods, 
lie retired to Hindustan in the summer of 1709; Mughul goodwill was 
one of Shahu’s assets; its hollow nature was now exposed publicly. 
The Maratha prince, if he was to rule his kingdom in the plenitude 
of his grand-father’s power, must do it on his own. The failure of 
his mission to the emperor thus revived the embers of the civil war 
which, before this, were flickering out. 

The suspense in which things were left by the retiring emperor 
stiffened the attitude of some of the local Officials. Lodi Khan of 
Chakan had become quite an eye-sore to the Marathas by his depre¬ 
dations in the Poona district as far south as Purandar. He now show¬ 
ed the audacity of blocking up the path of the Maratha force retiring 
from Khandesh through the Junnar pass; he was defeated and kill¬ 
ed and his assistant, Karim Beg of Junnar, was taken prisoner. 5 At 
the same time Tanaji Jagtap, Yasin Khan, the Sidi of Janjira and 
several others became restive and started trouble in the Maratha 
territory. However, so long as Dau’d Khan, a nominee of the friend¬ 
ly Zu’lfiqar Khan, continued as Deputy Governor, Shahu had no 
fear of general opposition to the establishment of his authority. But 
it was obvious that the most he could expect from this quarter was 
neutrality and not active help ih his cause. 53 

The second prop that gave way about this time was Shahu’s 
Senapati, DhanajI Jadhav, who died in August 1708. His army had 

49 

MS — V 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


materially contributed to the early successes of Shahu. The great 
Maratha soldier died at Vadgaon on the Warna from the effects of 
one of his old wounds. His son Chandrasen inherited the father’s 
army, but not the old tradition in which his father had been reared. 

Shahu’s third prop disappeared when Parsoji Bhonsle died in 
1709. Parsoji was one of the few great chiefs who had declared them¬ 
selves early in Shahu’s favour. He was of the same house as the 
Prince and had been able to carry with him a number of chieftains 
in Khandesh. 

The situation demanded of Shahu a quick decision, high organis¬ 
ing capacity and daring, and swift action of a skilful general, which, 
by rapid successes, would overwhelm his opponents, and rally to his 
standard not only the common peasantry who believed in the righte¬ 
ousness of his cause, but also the waverers and trimmers who were 
but too anxious to throw in their lot with the winning party. Un¬ 
fortunately, young Shahu, though full of personal courage, lacked 
qualities of military leadership. He had passed his youth as a pri¬ 
soner in the Mughul seraglio and had no opportunity to cultivate ha¬ 
bits of active life and no chance to obtain administrative experience 
or to learn military tactics and planning. Nor had he that iron dis¬ 
cipline so essential for a successful soldier in those rough times when 
the king was primarily a military leader before anything else. A 
great landslide began round Shahu. 

Renewal of the Civil War — Chandrasen's Revolt: 

Tara Bai’s partisans who had kept themselves aloof during the 
first rush of Shahu’s victory, now came out in the open. Hindu Rao 
Ghorpade joined Hamid Khan and opposed collection by Shahu’s 
officers near Bijapur (14 November, 1709). In March 1710, Hamid 
Khan surrounded Jadhav near Burhianpur. Before the end of the 
year 1710, Tara Bai’s intrigues had begun to bear fruit. Rambhaji 
Nimbalkar walked over to the Mughul camp and accepted service 
as Faujddr of Ahmadnagar. The air was thick with whisperings of 
a wide-spread conspiracy. 6 The blow descended in the form of the 
revolt of the King’s Sendpati, Chandrasen Jadhav. 

Chandrasen was in a peculiar position about 1710. At the head 
of one of the largest forces in Maharashtra he was being courted by 
Tara Bai on the one hand, and by the Mughul Subdhdar on the'other. 
Young Chandrasen’s head was swollen with his importance; he had 
little regard for the monarch whose resources were of a very meagre 
kind, who looked to his chieftains to do for him the hard work of 


50 


RISE OF THE PESHWAS—BALAJI VISHWANATH 


fighting and yet could hold out no hopes of rich rewards, and who 
refused to share his confidence with the youthful commander. Chan- 
drasen lent a willing ear to Tara Bai’s overtures, and a conspiracy 
was formed under his leadership; prominent Maratha chieftains, the 
Thorats, Shahaji Nimbalkar and Dabhade were to join under Chan- 
drasen, march against Satara, and oust Shahu in favour of Tara Bai’s 
son. These secret negotiations perhaps did not pass quite unnoticed. 
Shahu had invited these chiefs to Satara in October 17,10, and when 
Chandrasen moved out in the next campaigning season, Balaji Vishwa¬ 
nath was sent after him to watch his steps. Chandrasen was already 
jealous of the great influence Balaji Vishwanath had obtained over 
his father as his Diwan; the latter’s elevation in the King’s council 
had done nothing to abate the jealousy. Early in 1711 Chandrasen’s 
force was foraging round Baramati with Balaji trailing behind him 
as a revenue official of the king. There was no love lost between the 
two and a petty dispute between the followers of Chandrasen and 
Balaji was taken up by the principals. Chandrasen attacked Balaji, 
dispersed his force and sent the latter flying to the Kang. To the 
King’s protest against the outrage, the SendpaU sent an insolent re¬ 
ply that Balaji should surrender to him, or he would no longer con¬ 
sider himself bound by his oath of fealty. Such an open defiance 
of authority Shahu would not- tolerate. He ordered his Sarlashkar, 
Haibat Rao, to hold up the rebel’s advancing columns and sent him 
reinforcements. Chandrasen was defeated in two battles near the 
Adarki pass and Salpa pass (old Phaltan State) and turned back to 
join Dau’d Khan near Bahadur Garh. His later movements, till he 
was befriended by Nizam-ul-Mulk in 1713, are uncertain. If he join¬ 
ed Tara Bai, he seems to have achieved precious little. 7 

Chandrasen’s revolt was a signal for a general rising all round. 
Tara Bai’s followers—Ghatge, Ghorpade and Chavan, took up arms, 
occupied Vadgaon, Kumtha, Shirala, Karhad and other places and 
threatened to advance on Satara. Chandrasen, with the aid of the 
Mughul officers, began raising fresh troops to renew the contest. 
Even in closer quarters, Shahu’s authority came to count for no¬ 
thing. The petty Inamdar of Khatav, Krishna Rao, proclaimed his 
independence. Damaji Thorat, another dependent of Tara Bai at 
Hingangaon, (Patas pargand, Poona district), turned out the King’s 
officers. Parashuram Pant, who some time back had made a show 
of being reconciled to the new regime, had been granted the dignity 
of Pratinidhi and rewarded with the Vishalgarh jdglr. His son in 
possession of the jagir, now declared for Tara Bai. Shlahu suspected 
the father to have instigated the treachery and, losing his usual equa¬ 
nimity of temper, ordered the jdgtr to be confiscated and the old 


51 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Pratinidhi to be blinded. The execution of the extreme penalty was 
stayed by the intercession of Khando Ballal Chitnis, but Parashu- 
ram was thrown into jail once more . 8 

The most serious danger to Shahu, however, came from Konkan. 
Here the powerful Angria, on Tara Bai's orders, drove Shahu’s gar¬ 
risons out of the Konkan forts of Rajmachi, Tung Tikona and 
Ghangarh, occupied Lohgarh, seized his Peshu’u Bahiro Pant Pingle 
and threatened to march on Poona. 

Shahu’s position was a precarious one. Though he had tried 
hard to conciliate the leading members of the old nobility, they, 
with a few exceptions, refused to respond to his call and work with 
him whole-heartedly. On slight pretences they were changing sides 
and thwarting his plans for the settlement of the country. The 
Sendpati was up in arms against him; his Peshwd had shown him¬ 
self altogether devoid of initiative or capacity; the Pratinidhi was 
wavering in his loyalty, and the Sarkhel, after capturing the 
Peshwd, threatened to march on the capital; Dabhade, Ghatge and 
Thorat were all either sitting on the fence or actively taking part 
in fanning the civil war. The only party that stood to gain by this 
internecine struggle was the Mughul Subahdar of the Deccan. The 
Deccan governorship had in the meanwhile changed hands, and in 
place of the friendly Zu’lfiqar and his nominee Dau’d Khan, 
brought on the scene Nizam-ul-Mulk, a man of different metal, who 
meant to follow a different line of action towards the Marathas. 

Rise of Balaji Vishwandth — Change of Policy: 

Shahu’s intimate friends and counsellors, foremost among 
whom were Khando Ballal Chitnis and Balaji Vishwanath Bhat, 
advised him to make an immediate change of policy. The lesser no¬ 
bility and the common masses believed in the righteousness of the 
cause of Shahu, as being the senior member of Shivaji’s house and 
therefore, the lawful and hereditary heir to the Maratha throne; they 
had been greatly impressed by his loving, God-fearing, saintly dis¬ 
position, and w T ere therefore solidly behind the new king. What 
was necessary was to organise this general goodwill in the King’s 
behalf and to assure the warring nobility that the new position they 
had acquired in the changed circumstances would be duly recognised 
and maintained. For the time being, at least, there was no going 
back to Shivajl’s days and Shivaji’s constitution of centralised 
monarchy. 

Shahu, being at his wits’ end, called upon Balaji Vishwanath 
to shoulder the responsibility and carry out the policy he advocated. 


52 


RISE OF THE PESHWAS—BALAJI VISHWANATH 


Balaji was not an altogether unknown figure in politics. His fore¬ 
fathers were hereditary Deshmukhs or revenue collectors of Mahal 
Danda Rajpuri and Shriwardhan in Konkan, about fifty miles south 
of Bombay. The family had left Konkan and migrated to Desh 
country owing to troubles with the Sidi rulers of Janjira. BalajTs 
native cleverness, his experience as revenue officer and pleasant 
manners brought him employment immediately and secured his ad¬ 
vancement in the Maratha country. He worked as Subdhdar (Admi¬ 
nistrator and revenue collector) in Poona and Aurangabad districts 
in Rajaram’s time, and thus became familiar with the currents and 
cross-currents of Mughul-Maratha politics and the leading personali¬ 
ties in both the camps. Since Shahu’s return to Deccan he had faith¬ 
fully followed his fortunes and had shown great organising capacity 
and skill as a mediator. It was his advocacy that had brought to 
Shahu’s cause the veteran leader DhanajI Jadhav in 1707 and secured 
him his ancestral throne. Again, in 1711, by his activity, watch¬ 
fulness and tact, he had foiled Chandrasen’s conspiracy and defeated 
Shahu’s rivals. By defeating Krishna Rao Khatavkar, he had taught 
a stern lesson to the rebels. Shahu felt that Balaji was the only 
man who could save his affairs and bring order out of chaos. On 
17 November, 1713, he appointed him his Peshwa or Prime Minister, 
gave him a fresh jagir of six Mahals and two forts to meet the ex-, 
penses of his troops, and asked him to proceed against Kanhoji 
Angria. 9 

Kdnhoji Angria Conciliated: 

The Angrian threat was quite a formidable one. Kanhoji 
Angria was brave and active and had risen to the admiralty (1698) 
by personal prowess. He had attracted to his service some of the 
most daring men of all nationalities. His ships scoured the western 
waters and brought him a treasure that was reported to be fabulous. 
His name had become a veritable terror to the Sidi, the English, 
the Dutch, and the Portuguese. To contend with the Sarkhel looked 
quite a perilous task, but Shahu’s new Peshwa showed himself 
quite the master of the situation. In dealing with Kanhoji Angria 
he decided to rely more on his powers of persuasion and diplomatic 
skill than on force. His personal friendship with that great chief in 
his former days proved a great asset to him. Marching towards 
Konkan at the head of about 4,000 troops he invited the great Angria 
to a personal meeting, and told him that a great future awaited their 
country provided they closed their ranks, and exposed the folly of 
the course he was pursuing; it was sin, he told him, to oppose the 
lawful heir to the Gadi. “Your father Tukoji*’, he told Angria, 


53 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

“was raised to his high position by the great Shivajl. Is it right 
that you, his son, should so far forget your loyalty to the senior 
branch of ShivajI’s house that you should overrun Shahu’s kingdom 
and seize his minister? This is outright treachery. If you feel you 
have given your word of honour to the Queen, go and stay with 
her in peace. Why disturb our provinces? The best course for you, 
when the junior branch was defeated, was to acknowledge your 
mistake, reaffirm your allegiance and win Shahu’s favour. There is 
no third alternative for a subordinate chieftain. I have been ask¬ 
ed to fight you and recover the territories you have seized. Re¬ 
member you are surrounded by enemies who would be too glad to 
attack you at the first opportunity. Once hostilities start, it may 
be difficult to obtain Royal pardon.’’ 10 The great Angria was a 
shrewd man and knew the strength as well as the weakness of his 
position. He understood full well that when a sea-power acquired 
territory on land with a frontier open to the attack of a military 
State, it incurred great danger. Kanhoji felt he was no longer 
bound by his oath to the Queen, and ShambhujI (the successor to 
T§ra Bai’s son) had neither a programme nor showed promise of 
repeating the glories of his father or grandfather. Kanhoji enter¬ 
ed into Balaji’s proposals and accepted his offer. ‘On being con¬ 
firmed in command of the fleet, his territory in Konkan and his title 
of Sarkhel, he agreed to renounce ShambhujI, to release the Peshvfia, 
to restore all his conquests except Rajmachi and maintain the cause 
of Shahu.’ 11 

This agreement which was soon ratified at Satara was a great 
triumph for B&lajI Viswanath’s diplomacy. It won over to Shahu’s 
cause, without bloodshed, the most powerful chieftain from Tara 
Bai’s party and established his power on firm foundations. The new 
policy enunciated by the Peshwa in dealing with the Angrian chief, 
carried assurance of security to other chieftains who willingly came 
with declarations of loyalty. 

About this time Tara Bai, the source of all this trouble, lost her 
power in Kolhapur and was thrown in confinement. GirjojI Yadav 
and Tulaji Sitole were the arch conspirators who effected the re¬ 
volution. 12 It is not known what part Balaji had in the revolution 
in the Kolhapur camp. 

The Nizam in the Deccan: 

It was none too early that Shahu secured peace on the home 
front. The several revolutions at Delhi had removed from the scene 
his old friends and brought in new personalities and developed a 


54 


RISE OF THE PESHWAS-BALAJI VISHWANATH 


new situation. Imperial authority was on the decline and the em¬ 
pire was showing signs of dissolution. The friendly Zu’lfiqar 
Khan was no more, his place at Delhi having been taken by the 
Sayyid brothers, ‘Abdullah and Husain ‘Ali. They appointed to the 
Deccan governorship Nizam-ul-Mulk who had different ideas about 
the policy to be pursued towards the Marathas. 

The Deccan had peculiar fascination for the Nizam. Having 
spent his early career in the south in the emperor’s campaigns, the 
Nizam had obtained an intimate knowledge of the province, its 
people and its problems. Separated by a long distance from the 
heart of the empire, the southern province offered great possibili¬ 
ties to an ambitious man in the declining days of the empire, and the 
Niz5m was not one who would not perceive them. The only effec¬ 
tive opposition to the establishment of his independent authority 
in the Deccan might come from the Marathas who were his rivals 
in the field. To check their rising power and keep it within proper 
limits became the watchword of his policy. 

This advocate of a strong policy arrived in the Deccan in June, 
1713. He found his charge in a strange condition. The local re¬ 
presentative of his predecessor, Da’ud Khan Pani, had conceded to 
the Marathas the rights of collecting chauth which Bahadur Shah 
had refused to grant in 1709; the Maratha agents had established a 
kind of parallel government and were everywhere active, collecting 
their dues direct from the ryots. No merchandise could pass with¬ 
out paying their toll. A Maratha chief, Nemaji Sindia, had been 
taken in MugJiul service and held charge of Aurangabad division 
which enabled him to extend his influence right up to Malwa and 
Central India. The very existence of Mughul authority in the 
south was at stake. 

The Nizam immediately set himself to put the house in order. 
He repudiated the convention entered into by his predecessors and 
turned out the Maratha officers from their military posts in his ter¬ 
ritory. The Bhima-Godavari basin became the battle-ground where 
the two powers faced each other. Here the Nizam sent a strong 
force to seize the advance posts of the enemy. At the same time 
he decided to take advantage of the dissensions in the Maratha 
court, invited to his service the traitor Chandrasen Jadhav from 
Kolhapur and through him, opened negotiations with the Kolhapur 
party. 

To counteract the Nizam’s activities the new Peshwd took the 
field immediately on his return from the Konkan. A number of 


55 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


indecisive engagements took place; in one such battle Haibat Rao 
Nimbalkar was killed at Chanda; in another the Nizam claimed to 
have defeated the Peshwa near Purandar; in yet another the Mughul 
Fauzdar of Baglan, Muhammad Ibrahim Tabrizi, was lured into an 
ambuscade and killed by Khande Rao Dabhade while convoying a 
caravan from Surat to Aurangabad. The Peshwa also instigated 
several risings within the Subahdav's territory with the help of the 
Maratha officials who had entrenched themselves in Mughul dis¬ 
tricts. 13 

While the Nizam was trying to grapple with the Marathas in 
the Deccan, his enemies at Delhi gave him no rest. They appointed 
as his Diwan Haidar Quli Khan who affected to act independent of 
the Subcihdar. The task of contending with enemies outside and 
within proved beyond the strength of the Nizam. He came to an 
understanding with the Peshwa, withdrawing his troops and re¬ 
tiring from the Poona district. A few months later he was recalled 
to Delhi, his place being taken by Sayyid Husain ‘Ali (1715 May). 

Agreement with Husain ‘Ali: 

The Nizam’s transfer from the southern scene did not bring on 
an immediate improvement in the situation. His successor, Husain 
‘Ali Sayyid, for a time tried to follow the Nizam’s strong policy to¬ 
wards the Marathas. One of their chiefs, Khande Rao Dabhade, had 
established himself in Khandesh and levied fee on all merchandise 
passing from Surat to Burhanpur and Aurangabad. The Mughul 
Viceroy despatched a strong force of ten thousand under a dashing 
soldier Zu’lfiqar Beg to bring Dabhade to book and clear up the 
road. The Beg’s column pursuing the enemy dispersed into the 
hills, when it was surrounded and cut up to a man. ‘Not one bul¬ 
lock, camel or horse belonging to that army was saved.’ 14 

Husain ‘Ali retaliated by sending yet another and a stronger 
expedition under his Diiudn, Muhkam Singh, accompanied by his 
brother Saif-ud-din Khan and Chandrasen Jadhav. Dabhade skil¬ 
fully retired before the enemy, fighting rear-guard actions. A major 
engagement took place near Ahmadnagar. The Maratha troops suc¬ 
ceeded in breaking out and crossing the Bbima. Sweeping aside 
the enemy’s light cavalry that was harassing his flanks and rear, 
Muhkam Singh pressed towards Satara in the hope of coming against 
the rriain army. Dabhade bided his time and went to Raja Shahu 
who had moved to Satara fort. The Maratha garrisons, which were 
posted in various places, held their ground. Whenever the Mughul 
army approached, the Maratha force dispersed, and as soon as it 


56 


RISE OF THE PESHWAS—BALAJI VISHWANATH 


departed they returned and occupied their positions. Against such 
a wary enemy the Mughul force could make little progress. Muh- 
kam Singh and Jadhav retired the way they had advanced. 15 
(December 1716-January 1717). 

Husain ‘Ali’s discomfiture against Khan<Je Rao Dabhade was 
learnt by Emperor Farrukh-siyar with evident satisfaction. Far- 
rukh-siyar was a strange admixture of bravado and cowardice; he 
owed his elevation to the two Sayyid brothers, yet he did not like 
to surrender himself completely to their advice. He was jealous 
of the great powers wielded by them, plotted against them practi¬ 
cally from the first day of his accession, and wrote to his distant 
governors and feudatories to make war on them to bring about their 
ruin. Among others, Shahu and several Maratha chieftains received 
these royal far mans with which they complied most readily. Bands 
of horsemen overran imperial' districts in the Deccan reducing every¬ 
thing to utter chaos. 

Distracted by the Maratha attacks on one side and court intri¬ 
gues on the other, Husain ‘Ali had recourse to negotiations with 
Shahu. To this course he was advised by ShankarajI Malhar, a 
former minister of Rajaram now in the confidence of the Sayyid. 
The Subahdar deputed ShankarajI Malhar to Shahu’s court to find 
out a basis for peace. The Maratha viewpoint in the discussions was 
set forth by Peshwd Balaji Vishwanath. 

Some kind of a formal agreement between the two powers was 
long overdue. Aurangzlb had not been able to make up his mind on 
what terms to purchase peace. A‘zam held out vague promises 
which both parties were interpreting differently. Bahadur Shah 
evaded the issue asking Shahu to settle first the question of succes¬ 
sion, with his rival of the Kolhapur party. 16 Though the highest 
authorities were thus burking the issues on some pretext or other, 
the ground was slipping under the feet of their local representatives. 
No longer able to hold their own against growing Maratha pressure, 
they very conveniently sought accommodation with Maratha chief¬ 
tains as best as they could. This indefinite state of affairs only 
served to increase the general anarchy and profited none of the 
principals. The Marathas were extending their depredations to 
Gujarat and Malwa. Bold and intrepid spirits raised levies and 
began to make collections on their own. Partisans of ShambhujI 
were overrunning the Karnatak subdh of Bijapur. No wonder both 
parties were keen on a settlement. 

Balaji Vishwanath, in the name of his master, asked the right of 
levying chauth throughout the six provinces of the Deccan (Auran- 


57 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


gabad, Berar, Khandesh, Bidar Golconda and Bijapur which in¬ 
cluded the whole of Karnatak, including the tributary states of 
Mysore, Trichinopoly and Tanjore). He argued that the Marathas 
over two decades were raising contributions from the Deccan pro¬ 
vinces of the Mughul and this fact should now be formally recog¬ 
nised by an imperial grant. He also demanded chauth of Malwa 
and Gujarat which Maratha horse had invaded. He demanded like¬ 
wise the right of raising an additional impost of ten per cent for 
the Raja as Sardeshmukh or head of the landed gentry. The old 
conquests of Shivaji in Maharashtra— Swaraj —was to be completely 
restored, and Subahdar would issue orders for the release of 
such forts and districts as still continued under Mughul occupation. 
Shivner, ShivajTs birth-place, was required to be given up, as also 
the fort of Trimbak in Nasik district. Conquests lately made by 
Parsoji Bhonsle in Berar and Gondwana were to be confirmed. The 
old districts in Karnatak were demanded in the name of Fateh 
Singh Bhonsle. The mother and the family of Shahu detained at 
Delhi were likewise to be set free and restored to the Raja. 

On his side, for the grant of Chauth s the Peshwd, on behalf of 
his master, promised to maintain 15,000 troops with the Subahdar 
to aid the emperor; for the hereditary right of Sardeshmukhi he 
agreed to pay the fee of ten per cent of the annual income from that 
source and bound himself to keep law and order in the country and 
suppress banditti; for the Swaraj or old territory the Raja agreed 
to pay a tribute of ten lakhs of rupees every year. It was a condi¬ 
tion of all these grants that the Rdjd would be faithful to the im¬ 
perial throne and serve it loyally. 17 

The choice of the envoy had evinced the Subahdar’s anxiety to 
come to an understanding with the Marathas. The proposals work¬ 
ed out by his envoy were immediately accepted with the exception 
of claims on Gujarat and Malwa. Husain ‘Ali delivered a sanad , 
containing the articles of peace, under his seal to the Vakils of 
Raja Shahu and made no delay in writing for a royal jarman con¬ 
firming the agreement. He introduced the agents of Raja Shahu 
everywhere and orders went round for restoring Swaraj territory to 
the Raja's officials. 18 

The importance of the treaty was not lost upon the emperor. It 
practically meant complete abdication of imperial authority in. the 
Deccan, and strengthening the hands of his tormentors. He could 
not tolerate this and refused to ratify the agreement. He prepared 
for war, and called to his aid Sarbuland Khan from Patna, Nizam- 
ul-Mulk from Moradabad and A jit Singh from Gujarat. 


58 


RISE OF THE PESHWAS—BALAJI VISHWANATH 


They arrived in the capital but found that they had neither the 
emperor’s confidence nor authority to act, and wisely made their 
peace with the Sayyids. The Sayyid brothers, informed of the 
monarch’s intrigues, prepared to strike. Husain ‘Ali marched to the 
capital with his Maratha allies and arrived in Delhi in February, 
1719. The brothers surrounded the palace with their troops, enter¬ 
ed the palace, and seized the emperor’s person after some alterca¬ 
tion. The hapless monarch was thrown in confinement and subse¬ 
quently put to death. A puppet was set up in his place, all power 
passing into the hands of the Sayyids. The treaty entered into be¬ 
tween Raja Shahu and Husain ‘Ali Khan was ratified and farmans 
confirming the arrangements of Chauth, Sardeshmukhi and Swaraj 
were issued on 13 and 24 March, respectively. 19 Balaji Vishwanath, 
who had accompanied Husain ‘Ali, the Amir-ul-Umara } to the capital, 
returned to the Deccan in May 1719, with the deeds and the Raja’s 
family. 20 

A right royal welcome awaited the minister at Satara. He had 
at last obtained recognition of the claims for which the Mughul- 
Maratha struggle had continued over two decades. The treaty 
marked a triumph for Raja Shahu. His recognition by the Mughul 
authority gave him a distinct advantage over his rival Shambhuji 
and made other Maratha chieftains look up to him as the fountain 
of authority. The Mughul rulers accepted the fait accompli and re¬ 
cognised the supremacy of the Marathas in the south by granting 
them the right of collecting revenue from the six provinces of the 
Deccan. 

Criticism of the (Delhi) Treaty of 1719: 

The treaty has been criticised variously by different writers. 
While some have hailed it as a great diplomatic triumph, others 
have questioned its moral basis; yet a third school of historians con¬ 
demn the minister for accepting Mughul suzerainty and perpetuat¬ 
ing Muslim rule. They contend that while ShivajI fought for an 
independent Maratha State, his grandson, acting on the advice of his 
Peshwd, threw away the jewel of liberty accepting in exchange the 
badge of Mughul slavery. This is an extreme view and loses sight 
of the fact that in politics satisfactory solution^ of vexed problems 
are often found in face-saving devices or fictions. To accept the 
fictions literally, to analyse them in a legalistic way without taking 
into account how they worked in actual practice, is mere casuistry 
and evinces a frame of mind ill becoming a dispassionate historian. 
A tributary state has no independent authority to make war or 


5U 


THE MAHATHA SUPREMACY 


peace, has no claims on the sovereign. Chauth and Sardeshmukhi 
over the six Subahs of the Deccan were granted to the Marathas 
who went on exploiting their advantage till they demanded tribute 
from the whole of the imperial domain. No man of commonsense 
would look on this relation as one of subordination to the Mughul 
Crown. The Marathas were realists and were satisfied with the 
direction of policy leaving ostentatious display to the effete suc¬ 
cessors of Aurangzib. 

Criticism may rather be levelled against the scheme for realis¬ 
ing the claims through a number of agents instead of obtaining the 
revenues direct for the royal treasury and thereby putting central 
authority on firm foundations. For, according to this scheme, the 
collections in Gujarat were assigned to the Senapati , those in Berar 
and Gondwana to the Bhonsle of Nagpur, of the Satara region to 
the Pratinidhi, of the Mawals (Poona district) to the Sachiv; to the 
Peshwa was granted Khandesh and Baglan and Central India for 
his activities; the Sarlashkar obtained the basin of the Godavari, 
and Fateh Singh Bhonsle was expected to make the annual levy from 
the Karnatak. Konkan was left in the possession of Kanhoji 
Angria. It was of the essence of the scheme that the chieftains 
whose authority had been established in a particular area should be 
recognised as the immediate rulers or law-givers of the region, should 
administer it and appropriate its revenues towards the maintenance 
of their troops, while they contributed only a small share to the Royal 
Exchequer. Darrackdars or revenue officers for each Saranjam 
were sent from the centre, but they seem to have been unable to 
curb the powers of the feudatory chiefs. 

Balaji perceived that the revival of Maratha power in its old 
monarchical form was no longer possible, that it would be difficult 
to harness the nation’s military resources to the common cause un¬ 
less concessions were made to the great war-lords who had won an 
important place for themselves. He made them subordinate allies 
or confederates of the sovereign, granting them a free hand in ad¬ 
ministering their conquests, called from them no greater sacrifice 
than uniting on matters of common policy. The arrangement, how¬ 
ever, left too much authority in the hands of these chiefs without 
providing for checks to call them to account. This was the begin¬ 
ning of the jagir system or feudalization of the Maratha State which 
was responsible for the speedy expansion of the Maratha power and 
its rapid dissolution. Historians point out that ‘this granting of 
authority over territory instead of salaries to the officers by Balaji 
Vishwanath was a departure from the wise rule of Shivaji 1 , but 


60 


RISE OF THE PESHWAS—BALAjf VISHWANATH 

throw the blame on the master and not on the minister. They sug¬ 
gest that BalajI substituted for the autocracy of the sovereign the 
Maratha. confederacy, because he saw that Shahu had not the com¬ 
manding talents and energy which had made possible the great 
King’s concentrated dominion. But it has been made plain in these 
pages that it was the support of the common people, of the Maratha 
peasants and the Maratha Shiledars, that enabled BalajI to beat down 
the opposition of the great war-lords and wrest victory for his 
master. In his desire to conciliate the great barons, BalajI Vishwa¬ 
nath appears to have gone too far and compromised royal authority. 
In leaving large powers in their hands BalajI undoubtedly surrender¬ 
ed the gains of the battle after winning the victory. 

But it would be wrong to hold the Peshwd solely responsible 
for the defects which the system developed later. He accepted the 
situation and found in the jagir system the best solution possible to 
bring peace to the distracted country. He had seen the Maratha 
State wilting under the fierce onslaughts of the Mughul and had also 
witnessed the tide slowly turning against the enemy. He grasped, 
as few men of his generation did, the significance of the changes in 
the political atmosphere and was determined that his country should 
profit by them. His conciliatory approach enabled the great Mara¬ 
tha soldiers to come under the common flag and unite their skill and 
resources for common purposes. Playing cleverly on the rivalries 
and factions of the Mughul court, he wrested from the emperor terms 
which secured for his State the gains of the bitter fighting of a 
quarter of a century and established the political supremacy of the 
Marathas in the Deccan. 

BalajI Vishwanath did not live long to work out his scheme in 
detail. After the monsoon he marched south and dispersed the 
Kolhapur force at Ashta and laid siege to Kolhapur. After some 
desultory fighting he retired to Saswad near Poona and died there 
on 2 April, 1720. He left behind his widow, Radha Bai, two sons, 
and three daughters. The eldest son, Baji Rao, who had been his 
companion in most of his campaigns in his later years succeeded him 
to the Peshufaship. 

BalajI Vishwanath has been truly called ‘the second founder of 
the Maratha State’. He piloted the ship of the State through 
dangerous waters and brought it to a safe haven. His greatness has 
been dimmed by the brilliant victories of his son and successor to 
the Peshwtiship. But it need not blind us to the fact that it was 
the father’s statesmanship that brought order out of chaos, upheld 
national interests and preserved the unity of the State when it look- 

Gl 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

ed as if the Maratha State would once more be split up into a num¬ 
ber of petty principalities, making war upon each other and ending 
in submission to a foreign aggressor. The treaty with Husain ‘Ali 
Sayyid was a great diplomatic triumph which secured to the Mara¬ 
tha people the gains of their suffering for a quarter of a century and 
created a wide field for their restless ambition. 

The term of Balaji’s Peshwaship marks the transition from the 
royal period to the age of the Peshuxis. It ushers a new era in the 
history of the Marathas. The feeble successors of the House of 
Shivaji fade into insignificance and become mere figure-heads with 
the passage of time. The reins of government pass into the hands 
of the able Prime Ministers, who direct the course of Maratha polity 
for the next century. 


NOTES 

1. Niccolao Manucci, Storia Do Mogor , Vol. IV, pp. 96-97. 

2. Khafi Khan, Muntakhab-uVLubab as translated in History of India, Vol. VII 
by Elliot and Dowson, p. 374. 

3. Original paper published in Vividh Dnydn Vistdr, Feb. 1924. Cited by Sardesai 
in Marathi Riyasat V. Shahu (1942), pp. 35-6. 

3a. Chitnls, Shahu Charitra, pp. 14-15. 

4. Itihas Sangraha, Vol. VI, Peshwa Daftarantll MahitI, pp. 188-89. 

4a. The dates given by Sardesai of the capture of Satara by Shahu and of his 
coronation and followed by later writers lack in authority. Sardesai takes these 
from Shedgaonkar Bakhar and in looking up the calendar makes a slight mis¬ 
take. If Satara was captured on a Saturday, that day cannot be 1st January 
of 1708 as given by Sardesai, which according to the calendar was a Thursday. 
Then the SarvadhAri Hindu year given in Shedgaonkar Bakhar accords with 
1709 and not with 1708. 

5. Bharat Itihas Samshodhak MandaVs Quarterly , Vol. VII, p. 86. 

5a. Grant Duff, History of the Mahrattas, Vol. I (1921 Ed.), p. 319. Duff depends 
on Khafi Khan. 

6. Jaipur Akbhars (Unpublished). 

7. Chitnls, Thorle Shahu Mahar&j Yanche Charitra, (1924 ed.), pp. 25-31. Selec¬ 
tions from Peshwa Daftar, Vol. VII, pp. 8-91. 

8. Shahu Roznishi, p. 55; Chitnls, Shahu Charitra, pp. 31-33. 

9. Shahu Roznishi, pp. 45-46; V. K. Rajwade, Marathyanchye Itihasachi Sadhanen , 
Vol. IV, pp. 32-37; Itihas Sangraha, Peshwa Daftarantll MahitI, pp. 13, 122-24. 
S.P.D. Vol. VII, Nos. 1, 2 and 40. Tritiya Sammelan Vritta, pp. 84-9i and 
149-52. 

10- Chitnls, op. cit., (1924 Ed.), pp. 38-39. Bharat Itihas Samshodhak MandaVs 
Quarterly, Vol. . XXVIII, p. 76. 

11. Chitnls, op, cit., Thorle Shahu Maharaj Yanche Charitra, p. 40. V. K. Rajwade, 
Vol. II, pp. 23-25; Treaties, Engagements and Sanads, Ed. by Mawji and 
Parasnis, pp. 197-199. 

12. A. G. Pawar, Tara Bai Papers (Persian-1971), Nos. 12, 111, 112 and 201. 

13. Khafi Khan in Elliot & Dowson, Vol. VII, pp. 450-51. 

14. Elliot & Dowson, op. cit., Vol. VII, p. 463. 

15. Ibid, pp. 463-64; S.P.D. XXX, pp. 235-40. 

16. Khafi Khan in Elliot & Dowson, Vol. VII, p. 409. 

17. Thorle Shdhu Mahara) Yanche Charitra, pp. 50-55; Treaties, Engagements and 
Sanads, ed. by Mawji and Parasnis, pp. 1-9; also Khafi Khan, p. 467. 

18. Khafi Khan in Elliot & Dowson, Vol. VII, p. 468. 

19. Dr. A. G. Pawar, Indian Historical Records Commission, Proceedings, Vol. XVII, 
pp. 209-13. 

20. S.P.D., Vol. XXX, pp. 255-65. 


62 


CHAPTER IV 


PESHWA BAJI RAO I (1720-40) 

I. The Peshwa’s Problems: 

Baji Rao, the eldest son of Balaji Vishwanath, who was about 
twenty years old, succeeded him in the Peshwdship x>n 17 April, 
1720. His extreme youthfulness, his bluff manner and his passion 
for military adventure, were held against him as disqualifying him 
for the highest ministerial post in the realm. But the Raja, grate¬ 
ful to his late Peshwd for securing his throne against heavy odds, 
waived aside the objections of his counsellors and conferred the 
robes of the Peshwdship on Baji Rao at Masur. His argument was 
that the father had not survived long enough to enjoy the fruits of 
his achievements and he owed it to the son to appoint him to the 
father’s post. If the new Peshwd proved unworthy of his respon¬ 
sibilities, he would think of replacing him in proper time. 1 

The fact of the matter was that the late Peshwd had on his own 
responsibility raised large loans and put armies in the field to secure 
the ChhatrapaWs position. The Chhatrapati was not very keen to 
involve himself in the military and administrative problems of his 
kingdom, but was content with a nominal supervision of the same. 
Raja Shahu was now in the prime of his life, being thirty-eight 
years old. If he had the will to rule and not only reign, he could 
have easily taken over the reins of government in his hands and 
conducted the administration in the manner his grand-father, the 
Great ShivajI, did. But Raja Shahu, by the circumstances of his up¬ 
bringing and his inclinations, lacked the will to exert himself and 
refused to be bothered with the details of administration or lead 
armies in the field. The result was the gradual transfer of the chief 
executive powers to the Peshwd’s hands from those of the Chhatra -. 
petti. The transfer of power, which was. legalised by the rescripts 
of, Shahu written on his death-bed and later strengthened by the 
agreement of Sangola in 1750, was thus a gradual process which 
started much earlier. It will be discussed in a later section. 

The several problems that confronted the young Peshwd were 
a legacy of his father’s policy. The great feudatories of the State 
who were acting independently posed a problem. It was necessary 
that the royal authority, if it was tc* be effective, should be strong 


63 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

enough to override that of the feudatories and bend them to its will. 

The security of the homeland had been guaranteed by the 
grants of Swaraj, and chauth and sardeshmukhi of the six subahs 
of the Deccan by the treaty concluded by Sayyid Husain ‘Ali Khan 
in 1718 and ratified by the emperor in Delhi in March, 1719. That 
treaty, however, had been concluded by the Sayyid brothers who 
v/ere out of favour with the new emperor and whose party was over¬ 
thrown within a year of the conclusion of the agreement. Their 
rivals—the Turani party, came into power and were not likely to 
abide by the commitments of their predecessors. The Deccan was 
seized by the Nizam, the most capable among the Mughul or Turani 
chiefs. He had no respect for the agreement concluded by his op¬ 
ponents which made mockery. of his authority. In collusion with 
Raja Shahu’s rival, ShambhujI of Kolhapur, he threatened to des¬ 
troy the Maratha State. The Nizam thus posed a serious challenge 
to the very existence of the Maratha State, and required to be watch¬ 
ed. A part of the Swaraj territory was yet in the hands of Mughul 
officers like the Sidi of Janjira and had to be wrested from them. 
The civil war with the Kolhapur party was only in abeyance, the 
faction of ShambhujI refusing to accept a subordinate position. 

To these problems awaiting solution must be added the Mara¬ 
tha claims on Gujarat and Malwa which had not been admitted by 
the Mughul Court. As a reply to the Mughul offensive against their 
homeland, the Marathas had crossed into these provinces to cut off 
the rear of the enemy and had made inroads as far as Ratanpur in 
Gujarat and Sironj in Malwa in the days of Aurangzlb. These had 
been repeated with greater boldness in the second decade of the 
eighteenth century. But these attempts, not being backed by orga¬ 
nised authority, could not produce the necessary impact to make the 
adversary yield. The Peshwd was determined not to lose the ad¬ 
vantage of the ground thus prepared, but to consolidate the gains 
and make a further advance. While on a visit to Delhi with his 
father in 1719 he had seen enough of the Mughul Court to convince 
him of its weakness. The parties anxious to dominate at the Court 
were bidding against each other for Maratha co-operation, and the 
young Peshwd was too shrewd not to perceive the advantage such 
a situation gave him. He realized early, as few of his contempora¬ 
ries appeared to have done, that the Mughul empire was rushing to 
its doom and that it was time for his people to march into Hindustan 
and seize supreme power instead of remaining confined within the 
narrow limits of their Deccan homeland. His early movements and 
his great victory at Palkhed over the Nizam secured his position at 
home and increased his confidence and resources, and in 1728 his 


64 


PESHWA BAJI RAO I 


armies burst into Central India. With Rajput help he secured a 
safe base for his further advance. In 1731 he overawed the lesser 
chiefs by destroying the Sendpati at Dabhoi and later recovered 
Maratha territory from the Sidi and the Portuguese. His rapid gains 
thus facilitated his plan of Maratha domination at the Delhi Court 
which became the watchword of Maratha policy and animated all 
Maratha activities in the years to come. 

II. The Nizam humbled: 

« 

The first problem that confronted the young Peshwa was the 
security of the homeland. The Sayyids’ party which had conceded 
Raja Shahu’s claim to rule over Swaraj and had granted him rights 
to collect the chauth and sardeshmukhi from the six subdhs of the 
Deccan, was in disgrace. The emperor, who had ratified the treaty 
rather unwillingly, plotted against his benefactors, had Sayyid 
Husain ‘Ali murdered in September, 1720 and his brother ‘Abdullah 
in 1722. The grants of Swaraj, chauth and sardeshmukhi had to 
be reconfirmed by the Mughul or Turani party, which was opposed 
to any concessions to the Marathas. Shrinivas Rao Pratinidhi, th$ 
Sarlashkar, and Fatesingh Bhosle who had been granted the six 
subdhs as their spheres of activity were stay-at-home politicians, un¬ 
able to raise resources and force issues. 2 The early years of the 
Peshwa were therefore spent in watching events in the Deccan and 
at the Mughul Court at Delhi and the movements of the Turani 
leader, Nizam-ul-Mulk. 

Born in 1671, Mir Qamar-ud-din as he was first known, saw 
much service in the Deccan. In 1683 he accompanied his father in 
the expedition of Poona and Supa; in 1688 he was active in the 
siege of Adoni and in 1693 in that of Panhala. In 1698 he led in¬ 
dependently in the expedition against the rebels of Nagori near 
Bijapur. In 1699 he was given a high rank as Chin Qilich Khan. 
The next year he was busy in the investment of the fort of Parli 
and was rewarded with the jj aujddri of Bijapur. Two years later 
he was raised to the governorship of Bijapur, and Azamnagar, Bel- 
gaum and Sampgaon were added to his charge. He took a promi¬ 
nent part in reducing Wakinkhera and acquired great influence over 
the emperor. While the emperor was at Ahmadnagar in 1707, he 
made Chin Qilich Khan responsible for the administration of Fifoz- 
nagar and Talikota. As his end was nearing, Aurangzib called Chin 
Qilich Khan for consultation. The emperor desired that the Turani 
party of which Chin Qilich was now the leader, should lend its sup¬ 
port to his favourite son Kam Bakhsh. 

65 

M.S.—6 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Chin Qllich refused to take part in the fratricidal war that fol¬ 
lowed the death of Aurangztb and was rewarded by Bahadur Shah 
with the Subdhdari of Awadh and a high-sounding title in 1707. 
The Subdhdari he refused as he did not like to work under Zu’l- 
liqar Khan who had assumed supreme command at the Court, and 
went into voluntary retirement. In 1713 Zu’lfiqar Khan’s nomi¬ 
nee, Jahandar Shah, was defeated and the royal sceptre was wrested 
by Farrukh-siyar. Zu’lfiqar Khan’s star waned and he met with 
an ignominious end for his part in the death of Farrukh-siyar’s 
brothers. Chin Qllich Khan who had stood aloof and prevented the 
Turani party from joining Jahandar Shah, was rewarded with the 
title Nizam-ul-Mulk Bahadur Fateh Jang and was appointed Viceroy 
of the six subahs of the Deccan. 3 

The Nizam sensed the coming dissolution of the empire and 
nursed dynastic ambitions. His first governorship was very brief 
lasting over only two years. But during the short period the 
policy he was to pursue later, was developed. The Maratha claims 
of chauth and sardeshmukhi brought in a foreign element in his 
administration and reduced it to impotence. He therefore deter¬ 
mined to repudiate their claims at all costs. But he knew he could 
not succeed in opposing the Marathas where the full might of the 
empire had failed. He would therefore foment disputes among the 
Maratha chiefs and then reject their claims. During the brief spell 
of two years (1713-15) he incited ShambhujI of Kolhapur, Chan- 
drasen Jadhav and other disgruntled Maratha chiefs to create dis¬ 
turbances in Shahu’s territory. 4 

But the Nizam’s Subdhdari of the Deccan did not last long. In 
1715 he was removed from the Subdh, which was taken over by 
Amir-ul-Umara Sayyid Husain ‘All Khan. The Sayyid brothers were 
at loggerheads with the emperor, and to secure Maratha aid they 
made an agreement with Raja Shahu recognizing his succession to 
Shivajl’s Swaraj (old Kingdom) in lieu of which Shahu promised a 
tribute of ten lakhs of rupees; Maratha claims of chauth and sardesh¬ 
mukhi over the six subahs were also conceded; for the first the Mara¬ 
thas agreed to serve the emperor with a contingent of fifteen thou¬ 
sand horse; for the sardeshmukhi the Marathas agreed to put down 
disturbances and pay ten per cent peshkush, qf which a fourth only 
was to be paid immediately and the rest later. Sayyid Husain ‘Ali 
marched to Delhi accompanied by a Maratha contingent, deposed the 
fickle-minded Farrukh-siyar, put another scion of the Mughul house 
on the throne and had the agreement made with the Marathas rati¬ 
fied by the new emperor. 5 


66 


PESHWA BAJ! RAO I 


But the Sayyids’ power was short-lived. The new emperor con¬ 
spired against the brothers and had Husain ‘Ali murdered in Septem¬ 
ber 1720. The eldest brother ‘Abdullah was defeated, thrown into 
prison and was despatched in 1722. The Turani party came in power. 
Muhammad Amin Khan became the Vazir and Nizam-ul-Mulk seized 
the subdh of the Deccan. 

The Marat ha Court and the Peshwd were bewildered spectators 
of these political changes at the Mughul capital. When the Nizam 
came south to fight Husain ‘Ali’s deputy, ‘Alam ‘Ali Khan, the 
Peshwd fought by his side, but withdrew with his troops to Khandesh 
on the latter’s defeat on 31 July, 1720. In the cold weather of 
1720-2T the Peshwd invaded Khandesh, perhaps to realize Maratha 
claims of chauth and had his first meeting with the Nizam on 4 
January, 1721, near Chikhalthan. Khandesh and Balaghat were in¬ 
cluded in the Peshwa’s sphere of activity and he wanted to keep 
Maratha claims of chauth over the region alive and was moving in 
the region in 1722 as well. 

In the meanwhile, the Nizam went back to Delhi lured by the 
prime ministership of the empire. But he did not hold the post long. 
The emperor and his boon companions did not like the austere man¬ 
ners of the new Vazir, nor his administrative measures, nor his sug¬ 
gestion of redistributing imperial jagirs to worthy persons. When 
the Nizam added the subdh of Gujarat to his charge of the Deccan 
and Malwa, there were loud rumours in the Court suggesting that 
the Vazir was very grasping and perhaps intended to reduce the 
emperor to a cipher. In the circumstances, the Vazir thought it wise 
to retire to his Deccan principality. On the pretext of ill-health he 
left the capital and reached Ujjain in 1724. In the meanwhile the 
emperor had relieved the Nizam of the governorship of the Deccan 
and Malwa and sent orders to his officers and feudatories in the 
Deccan to treat the Nizam as a rebel. Mubariz Khan, Subahdar of 
Hyderabad was asked to oppose the Nizam with the help of Raja 
Shahu. 6 The Nizam in searoh of allies, met the Peshwd at Nalcha 
on 18 May and won him over to his cause with all kinds of pro¬ 
mises. 7 In the struggle that ensued, the Nizam defeated his rival 
Mubariz Khan at Shakarkharda (1 October, 1724) with the help 
of his Maratha allies. By way of reward the Peshwd was awarded 
the rank of 7,000 Zat and 7,000 horse, an elephant and jewellery. 8 

Trusting to the friendship of his new ally, Raja Shahu suggested 
joint expeditions into Karnatak for establishing Maratha claims of 
chauth . 9 Twice Maratha forces under the command of the Prati - 


67 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

nidhi and the Peshwa marched into Karnatak (1725-26, 1726-27) only 
to be met by opposition from the Nizam’s officers. 10 

The Nizam, as soon as he had triumphed over his Mughul rivals, 
began his efforts to free himself from the shackles of Maratha de¬ 
mand. As a first step he removed his capital from Aurangabad to 
Hyderabad, and negotiated through the Pratinidhi exemption of the 
district of Hyderabad from the claims of chauth and sardeshmukhi 
in lieu of a jdgir granted to the Minister in the Balaghat-Gangathadi 
region. 

Shahu’s activities in the Karnatak region roused the enmity of 
Shambhuji of Kolhapur who began to concert measures to prevent 
further encroachments on what he regarded as his own sphere of in¬ 
fluence. Through the renegade, Chandrasen Jadhav, he made over¬ 
tures to the Nizam to secure his own recognition as head of the Mara¬ 
tha State and oppose Shahu’s all-pervading claims of chauth. Wa 

Shambhuji’s proposals were most acceptable to the Nizam. The 
emperor had confirmed his appointment as Subahdar and had ac¬ 
quiesced in his usurpation. Relieved from the pressure from the 
north, the Nizam no longer had any use for his alliance with Raja 
Shahu and was anxious to shake off the hated claims of chauth and 
sardeshmukhi over his subah. Shambhuji’s force effected a junction 
with the Nizam’s force and the joint army began to move ominously 
towards Maratha country. The Nizam declared himself unwilling to 
observe the terms of the pact entered recently with Raja Shahu, till 
the rival claims of the cousins were settled. In pursuance of this 
policy, he dismissed Shahu’s officers and asked him to submit his 
claims to his arbitration. 11 In one of his letters to Sawai Jay Singh 
he boasted of his plan: “With a view to carry out the emperor’s 
order, I have with God’s help, called to my side Raja Shambhuji (of 
Kolhapur) who is Shahu’s rival, conciliated him and engaged in 
punishing and exterminating Shahu. Sultanji Rao (Nimbalkar, Sar - 
lashkar ) who was the general of the enemy’s army came and saw me 
and was appointed to command Raja Shambhuji’s army. I am hope¬ 
ful that other partisans of Shahu would desert him soon and his 
party would cease to exist. I have challenged the Marathas to battle 
out of reliance on the grace of God and the Emperor’s favour and 
aid” 12 

Shahu was dumbfounded. Under the advice of the Prcvtinidhi 
he had pursued a conciliatory policy towards the Subahdar. And 
here was the Subahdar, denying him his right to the throne. He 
hastily recalled his army from the south and asked his Killadars to 


68 


PESHWA BAJi RAO I 


hold on to their posts. The Peshwd on his arrival in May, 1727, ask¬ 
ed the Raja to break off negotiations with the Nizam. On 1 August 
orders for a general mobilisation were given and as soon as the mon¬ 
soon was over, a large army consisting mainly of light cavalry and 
led by the Peshwd, invaded the Nizam’s territory and marched to¬ 
wards Aurangabad. There was a skirmish near Jalna with the 
Nizam’s force led by Iwaz Khan; but the Peshwd avoiding a general 
engagement, pushed northward towards Burhanpur. Then taking a 
westerly route the Maratha army moved into northern Khandesh and 
then into Gujarat, with the Nizam’s force in pursuit. 1 * The Nizam 
abandoned the pursuit in the hilly tract and marched in the direc¬ 
tion of Poona. Quite a few outposts like Udapur, Avasari, Pabal, 
Khed and Narayangarh surrendered. While returning^ the Nizam 
occupied Poona and advanced against Supa, Patas and'Baramati. When 
he was in Baramati he heard the news that the Peshwd had burst 
eastward through the Kasarbari pass and was marching towards 
Aurangabad, the heart of his kingdom. 14 The Nizam started in pur¬ 
suit of the Maratha army, asking his Maratha allies to show the same 
vigour and mobility as the Peshwd’s army which was closing on the 
Nizam’s and harassing his rear and wings. Both ShambhujI and 
Chandrasen pleaded inability to counteract the Peshwd's tactics. 15 
The Nizam found himself challenged for action in a waterless tract 
near Palkhed on 25 February. 16 Starved of food and water, the 
Nizam’s army would not fight. Through the intercession of Iwaz 
Khan, the Nizam sent the Peshwd a word of his miserable plight and 
his willingness to come to terms. 

The Mughul army was then allowed to move to the vicinity of 
the river and a treaty was concluded at Mungi-Paithan in pargana 
Shevgaon on 6 March, 1728. The main articles were the recognition 
of Raja Shahu as Chhatrapati and of the grant of chauth and sarde- 
shmukhi of the six subahs to him which had been withheld. All t^lk 
about ShambhujI’s succession to the Maratha throne was stopped. 
Baji Rao had demanded the surrender of the person of ShambhujI to 
which the Nizam as a point of honour, would not agree. ShambhujI 
was sent away to Panhala. Whatever outposts like Poona, Khed, 
Baramati, Narayangarh, Akkalkot and the districts surrounding 
them had been seized by the Mughuls, were restored. 

Field Marshal Montgomery who took a leading part in the de¬ 
feat of Hitler and the destruction of his war machine, has recently 
published a book, A History of Warfare (1968), in which he discusses 
some of the important battles fought since ancient times to this day. 
He has selected the battle of Palkhed as an action which was fought 


69 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

in the style of Mongols and the original Turkish invaders of India. 
He writes:— 

“The Paikhed campaign of 1727-28 in which Baji Rao I 
outgeneralled Nizam-ul-Mulk is a masterpiece of strategic mobi¬ 
lity. Baji Rao’s army was a purely mounted force, armed only 
with sabre, lance and a bow in some units, and a round shield. 
There was a spare horse for every two men. The Marathas 
moved unencumbered by artillery, baggage or even handguns 
and defensive armour. They supplied themselves by looting. 

“In October 1727 with the end of the rains Baji Rao burst 
into the territory of the Nizam. The lightly equipped Marathas 
moved with great rapidity, avoiding the main towns and fort¬ 
resses, living off the country, burning and plundering. They 
met one reverse at Jalna at the hands of Iwaz Khan in the be¬ 
ginning of November but within a month they had fully re¬ 
couped, and were off again, dashing east, north, west, with 
sudden changes of direction. The Nizam for a time pursued 
them but was bewildered by the swift and unpredictable move¬ 
ments of the enemy, and his men became exhausted. 

“At the end of January the Nizam changed his strategy; 
he gave up the pursuit of the elusive Maratha forces and in¬ 
stead made direct for their heartland round Poona, which he 
ravaged and captured. Baji Rao received urgent calls to come 
back. But with good strategic sense he resisted the call and 
instead countered the Nizam’s move by in turn threatening his 
capital Aurangabad. Baji Rao had not actually captured the 
capital but he had pillaged the neighbouring area. As the 
Nizam once again endeavoured to catch Baji Rao, the Marathas 
harried and circled round his forces. The Nizam preserved his 
army intact, but in March 1728 he gave up. By the peace terms 
some of their territorial claims were conceded.” 17 

The Nizam’s attempt to challenge Maratha supremacy in the 
Deccan failed in a decisive manner. Maratha expansion to the east 
and south became a matter of time and will, to press the advantage 
home by the Raja’s ministers who had been assigned these spheres 
for their activity. Its legality was never called into question. The 
Nizam had invaded Maratha territory not to recover this province 
or that district, but he aimed a deadly blow at Shahu’s authority. 
By this defeat of the great Mughul chief the Peshwfa won for him¬ 
self a place of confidence in the Raja’s counsels which nothing could 
shake. 

The Kolhapur prince, having lost the support of the Nizam, could 


70 


PESHWA BAJI RAO I 


no longer resist the superior claims of Shahu. He was defeated in 
1730. But Shahu was anxious to conciliate his cousin. Instead of 
laying down harsh terms he met him near Karhad and invited him 
to visit Satara. The visit lasted over two months at the end of 
which the treaty of Wama was concluded on 13 April, 1731. The 
territory held by ShambhujT was recognised as his State, and his 
right to expand southward right up to Rameshwar was also recognis¬ 
ed. Both States were to act with one accord and not to harbour 
each other’s enemies. There was an exchange of some enclaves so 
as to straighten up the frontiers of the two states. 18 But the Raja 
of Kolhapur showed little interest in the expansion of Maratha power 
in Kamatak region and could not claim any part of the conquests 
made by the Peshwd. Kolhapur now came to occupy the position 
of a prince who was given full internal autonomy. 

The Nizam continued to be a thorn in the side of the Maratha 
State. He continued to foment discord among the Maratha chiefs, 
but when pressed hard, would yield ground. In 1732 he came to 
an understanding with the Peshwd to give the latter a free hand in 
the north. As the Iqbal Nama puts it, “the tempo of Maratha at¬ 
tacks and invasions continued to increase and those who were at 
the imperial court represented that all this was due to Nizam-ul- 
Mulk. 19 

III. Peshwd-Senapati Strife: 

The defeat of the Nizam besides securing the safety of the 
Maratha homeland, had other repercussions as well. It immensely 
increased the Peshwd’s prestige both at home and abroad. This was 
reflected in the increased activities of his armies in Malwa and 
Gujarat. In Malwa his army secured a decisive victory over the 
subahdar Girdhar Bahadur at Amjhera and overran the whole pro¬ 
vince. These developments will be described later on. We may now 
turn to the developments in Gujarat where the Peshwd, started stak¬ 
ing his claims for chauth from 1725. 

The Maratha State was fast developing into a feudal state with 
the powerful chiefs administering their jdgirs nominally with the 
authority of the Raja but practically independent of him. Accord¬ 
ing to Grant Duff, “The Peshwd and Senaputtee, charged with the 
command of a great proportion of the Raja’s personal troops, were 
ordered to direct their attention to the general protection and defence 
ot the territory.” 20 But in their race for power, the Peshwd had by 
now far outstripped Sendpati Dabhade. 


71 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Dabhade family had seen service in the days of the Great 
ShivajI and Rajaram. Khanderao Dabhade had built a number of 
fortlets on the Khandesh-Gujarat route and had defeated a Mughul 
general who tried to oust him from the Baglan region. He had accom¬ 
panied the Peshwd to Delhi in 1719 and his son had taken part in 
the Kamatak expedition. But during the last five or six years he 
was an ailing man and had not been able to keep pace with the rising 
fortunes of the Peshwd. Khandesh, Balaghat and Malwa formed 
the sphere of activity of the Peshwd. The Sendpati was vested, with 
similar authority in Baglan and Gujarat. Pilaji Gaikwar and Bande 
were working on behalf of the Sendpati and had penetrated as far 
as Surat by 1723. This, according to Mirat, was the first year in 
which the Marathas levied a regular tribute on Gujarat. In June 
1724 Trimbak Rao Dabhade, the son of the Sendpati, was reported 
to be active in Surat Athavisi. 21 

Gujarat was then in the throes of political turmoil. The pro¬ 
vince which had been put under the governorship of Nizam-ul-Mulk 
only a year back, had been transferred from him to Sarbuland Khan. 
But the Nizam was in no mood to surrender his authority to his 
successor and had asked his deputy, Hamid Khan, to defy the new 
governor’s orders. Sarbuland Khan was slow in taking over charge 
of his new office. He had asked a local chief Shuja‘at Khan to de¬ 
putise for him till his arrival at Ahmadabad. Hamid Khan, the 
deputy of the rebel Nizam, called in the help of Kanthaji Kadam 
Bande and Pilaji Gaikwar, and with their aid, defeated and slew 
Shuja‘at Khan within sight of the walls of the capital. His brother 
Rustam ‘Ali met with the same fate at Basu, 25 miles away from 
Ahmadabad on 11 February, 1725. He was surrounded by the 
force of Hamid Khan and of his Maratha allies, which was further 
strengthened by a contingent of the Peshwd led by Udaji Pawar. 
The chauth of Gujarat was shared between Bande and Gaikwar as 
the representatives of the Senapati, and Udaji Pawar acting on be¬ 
half of the Peshwd. 22 

In the meanwhile Sarbuland Khan arrived in Gujarat with feel¬ 
ings of great trepidation about dealing with the Marathas. He in¬ 
flicted a defeat on the Senapati’s chiefs, Gaikwar and Bande near 
Sojitra (January, 1726) and chased them out of the province. But 
another force led by the Peshwa’s Diwan, Ambaji Purandare, and 
Baji Bhivrao entered Gujarat from the north-west. They exacted 
four lakhs of rupees from the merchant princes of Vadnagar. Kan¬ 
thaji and Pilaji again threatened to attack the province. Sarbuland 
Khan felt himself unequal to deal effectively with the menace. He 


72 


PESHWA BAJi RAO I 


agreed to grant the chauth of Gujarat to the Peshwd in April 1726. 23 

Shahu issued orders to PilajI Gaikwar and Kadam Bande that 
half the chauth of Gujarat had been granted to the Peshwd and the 
ether half to Trimbak Rao Dabhade on behalf of the Senapati and 
that they should not disturb the arrangement. 24 Next year also 
(February 20, 1727) Sarbuland Khan repeated the agreement grant¬ 
ing chauth to the Peshwd on behalf of the Chhatrcvpati. For this 
he was to serve the Suhdhdar with a contingent of 2,500 horse and 
chase away marauders and disturbers of peace—a clause directed 
against PilajI Gaikwar and Kadam Bande. The Raja was happy 
to receive the amount of rupees four lakhs and thirteen thousand 
as sardeshmukhi. 25 Sarbuland Khan felt almost helpless; his pro¬ 
vincial force was unable to meet the waves after waves of Maratha 
horsemen entering his province, and the central government was 
too lethargic to send him aid. When such a powerful chief as the 
Nizam invited the Peshw\a to personal meetings and conceded him 
the chauth and sardeshmukhi of the six subdhs of the Deccan, how 
could he deny the Peshwd’s demands on Gujarat? It was not neces¬ 
sary for him to consider the legality or otherwise of the Peshwd’s 
claims. The Peshwd appeared the most powerful Maratha chief¬ 
tain and promised to punish the disturbers of peace. 

But Senapati Dabhade objected to the Peshw\a’s aggression in 
Gujarat. In Dabhade Hakikat it is reported that while the Chhatra- 
pati had assigned the mulkgiri of Gujarat to the Senapati and that of 
Malwa to the Peshwd, the latter suggested that the Senapati should 
yield half the Mahals of Gujarat to the Peshwd and he in his turn 
would give over half his conquests in Malwa to the Senapati. The 
Senapati did not favour this kind of arrangement. But the Peshwd 
v/as powerful and would not abandon his designs on Gujarat. He con¬ 
tinued his aggressive activities in Gujarat. Oh 30 July, 1727, 
Shahu issued orders that “the Mokasa in pranth Gujarat previously 
granted to Chimnaji Ballal is now,given to Khanderao Dabhade to¬ 
wards the maintenance of his troops.” 26 The Raja gave the clear 
verdict that the Peshwd should keep his hands off Gujarat. He dis¬ 
approved of the Peshwd’s aggression in Gujarat. Besides, as the 
Nizam was threatening to advance in the Maratha country, Shahu 
did not like his Peshwd and Senapati to be contending and disunit¬ 
ed. If the Peshwd had loyally obeyed the orders of his master, the 
future dispute between the two leading Maratha chiefs could have 
been avoided. But the Peshwd would not readily abandon the Guja¬ 
rat enterprise. He had raised vast forces and during the last two 
years he had-triumphed over the Subahdars of Malwa* and Bundel- 


73 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


khand. Elated by his victories he was in no mood to give up his 
grip over northern Gujarat. In December 1729 he sent another 
army under the command of his brother Chimnaji Appa to Gujarat. 
Pawagarh occupied by Kadam Bangle fell on 6 January 1730 and 
then the army marched northwards reaching Petlad and Nadiad in 
the first week of March. 27 

The situation became most alarming. Sarbuland Khan being de¬ 
tested at Delhi, could not count on drawing support from the Court 
and the enemy began knocking at the door. The desperate situation 
required a desperate remedy and the Khan sought it in coming to an 
agreement with Chimnaji by renewing the treaty concluded in Feb¬ 
ruary, 1727. The new agreement was concluded on 23 March, 1730. 
Sardeshmukhi or ten per cent of the whole revenue, both of the land 
and customs with the exception of Surat and chauth of the province 
were granted to the Peshwd. The Peshwd was to keep 2,500 horse 
for keeping peace in the province and agreed to punish disturbers of 
peace—a clause aimed at preventing the entry of the Senapati’s 
troops into Gujarat. 273 

The agreement concluded by Chimnaji Appa was clearly an in¬ 
fringement of the Senapati's claims over Gujarat. The Peshwa ap¬ 
peared to be claiming a superior authority over other chiefs and sub¬ 
ordinate them to his dictation. This was resented by the Senapati 
and by all those whose interests the new agreement affected. The 
Senapati became the leader of opposition to the Peshwa and round 
him- rallied the disaffected elements—PilajI Gaikwar, KanthajI 
Kadam Bande, Kanhoji Bhonsle, UdajI Pa war and others. The party 
counted on being supported at Court by the Pratinidhi. 

At this stage of dispute young Dabhade (the father died in 
September, 1729) committed a tactical blunder which cost him the 
sympathies of the Court and placed him in the position of a renegade 
against constituted authority. Apprehending he might not get justice 
from the monarch he entered into secret negotiations with the Nizam 
to invoke his aid. The Nizam readily seized the opportunity of 
weakening his opponents, sent encouraging replies to the Senapati 
and assumed threatening posture towards the Peshwa's agents. 28 

The report of these intrigues reached the Peshwd. Before the 
disaffected elements could formulate their plan of action and effect 
a junction with the Nizam, the Peshwd entered Gujarat at the head 
of a picked force, renewed the engagements with the Subahdar con¬ 
cluded last year and then advanced upon Baroda held by PilajI Gaik- 
war. Trimbak Rao Dabhade hastened to meet the challenge, was 


74 


PESHWA BAJi RAO I 


joined by Bhil and Koli levies and by a detachment of the Nizam. The 
two armies met at Dabhoi on 1 April, 1731. The battle was sangui¬ 
nary and lasted over six hours. The superior leadership of the 
Peshwa won the day. Trimbak Rao Dabha<Je Sendpati fell on the 
battlefield and his force was dispersed. 29 The Nizam’s attempt to 
exploit differences in the Maratha Court had once more been baffled 
and his intrigues defeated. Gujarat was restored to the Senctpati on 
whose behalf the Gaikwar worked and brought the province under 
Maratha control by 1737. 

The battle of Dabhoi and Baji Rao’s victory form a landmark in 
the history of the Peshicds. It left the Peshwa without a rival at 
home and “with all but nominal control of the Maratha sovereignty.” ' 0 
The Peshwa on his return to Satara met the mother of the dead 
Dabhade in a contrite mood, gave up his claims to the districts of 
Gujarat and took over the charitable practice of honouring Shdstrls 
and Vaidiks from the Sendpati. The ShravaV Dakshand became one 
of the cultural institutions of the Maratha State at which learned 
Brahmins were shown regard according to the state of their learning, 
and continued to the end of the Peshwds’ rule. 

Nizam-ul-Mulk whose intrigues had been exposed, thought it con¬ 
venient to come to terms with the Peshwa. He concluded an agree¬ 
ment with the Peshwa in December, 1732 by which “the former was 
to be at liberty to gratify his ambitions in the south, while the 
Peshwa obtained a free hand in the north.” 31 

IV. Campaign against the Sidi of Janjira: 

The coastal strip of Maharashtra or Konkan from Jawhar in the 
north to Karwar in the south formed a part of Shivaji’s Swaraj . Two 
powers—the Sidis of Janjira and the Portuguese of Goa held out 
against him clinging to their small maritime possessions. But during 
the interregnum of his death in 1680 and Shahu’s home-coming in 
1707 during which the Marathas were fighting the Mughuls for their 
very existence, these two powers had seized outlying Maratha terri¬ 
tory in Konkan and refused to surrender it after the withdrawal 
of the Mughuls. The draft treaty which was sent with Balaji Vishwa-. 
nath to Husain ‘Ali Sayyid in 1718 contained as its first article resto¬ 
ration of the forts like Raigarh, Miraj, Junnar, Chaul, Kalyan and 
Bhivandi with their surrounding districts. The Sidis had been put 
in possession of the important fortresses of Raigarh and Mahad, 
Dabhoi and Ratnagiri by Aurangzib, and had on their own, grabbed 
several coastal points like Revas, Thai and Anjanwel from which 
the}' harassed Maratha shipping and sent raiding parties inside 


75 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Maratha territory. 32 The Sidis had become a thorn in the Maratha 
side and had to be taught a stern lesson. 

Konkan had been assigned to KanhojI Angria as his sphere of 
activity. His resources in men and money were not adequate to 
deal with the two deadly enemies of the Marathas—the Sidis and the 
Portuguese—and yet he did not like to see the intrusion of the King’s 
forces in his territory. So nothing much could be done while he 
remained at the helm of the admiralty. His death in 1729 cleared 
the way for reoccupation of the lost parts of the Maratha homeland. 

These political considerations for expelling the Sidis were 
aggravated by the atrocities one of the Sidi chiefs committed on 
temple near Chiplun. Brahmendra Swami, a religious person, was 
much respected in the Peshwa’s family and shown very high regard 
by the entire' Maratha Court. He had built lovely temples dedi* 
cated to Shiva, Ganapati, Maruti, Renuka, a dharmasala, deepamala 
at Parashuram near Chiplun. Sidi Sa‘at, the commandant of the near¬ 
by fort of Anjanwel, taking offence with the Swami, made a sudden 
raid on the place on Mahdsivardtri day (February 8, 1727) and razed 
to the ground the lovely temples and the rest houses and ill-treated 
the Brahmin priests. The Swami’s rage knew no bounds; he rain¬ 
ed curses on the Sidi, left Konkan and settled at Dhavadshi near 
Satara preaching a crusade against the despoiler of his temples. 33 

In 1733 a political revolution occurred at Janjira. The Sidi 
chief, Sidi Rasul Khan, died in February, 1733, and his eldest son and 
successor was murdered by other claimants to the command. The 
son of the murdered ‘Abdullah fled to the Marathas for protection 
and asked their help to get him the Nawabship. 34 A powerful Sidi 
chief, Yakub Shaikhji, who was in command of the Sidi fleet and was 
a partisan of Abdullah, agreed to transfer his allegiance and come 
over to the Maratha side for a substantial reward. Yashwant Rao 
Potnis had carried out these secret talks. Though it was the height 
of summer and end of the campaigning season, two forces—one under 
the Peshwa and Fateh Singh Bhosle and the other under the Prati - 
nidhi, were immediately ordered to march into Konkan and seize 
Janjira and Raigarh. The Peshwa descended into Konkan and 
arrived before the island castle of Janjira on May 2, 1733. 35 The 
suddenness of the approach of the Maratha force took the enemy by 
surprise. Rajpuri and Khokri on the coast were seized 36 as well as 
places inland like Tala, Ghosale, Birwadi etc. Part of the Sidi’s 
fleet lying in the creek came over to the Peshwa with its command¬ 
ing officer Shaikhji, and Abdur Rahman, the contender for the 
Nawabship. The rebels, after a feeble resistance, fled to the castle 


76 


PESHWA BAJ! RAO I 


and closed its gates before the pursuing Maratha force could get in. 

Janjira is a fortified island girdled by the sea all round. It lies 
within the entrance of the Rajpuri creek about half a mile distant 
from the mainland. In shape it is irregularly oval and is girt by 
walls which at high tide rise to a height of about fifty feet. The 
walls are battlemented and loopholed. The passage from Rajpuri 
to the castle was then covered'by artillery, making the approach of 
any outsider well nigh impossible. An attacking force without ade¬ 
quate support of a fleet and long-range artillery and mortars, was 
helpless before it. The Peshwa invited Sekhoji Angria, son of the 
famous KanhojI in command of Maratha navy, to meet him and pre¬ 
pare a-concerted plan to attack the castle. He looked to the ad¬ 
miral to provide naval support for his enterprise. But owing part¬ 
ly to the lateness of the season and partly to the jealousy Angria 
felt at the intrusion of the King’s forces in his field, Angria was slow 
in supporting the Peshwa. 31 Shaikhji, the Sidi commander from 
whom much was expected, proved of little help after the first sur¬ 
prise. 38 Help began to pour in at Janjira from outside. 

The Janjira campaign was being directed by the Raja in per¬ 
son. The gains and conquests were to be his and therefore, his feu¬ 
datories were loath to risk their money and men in the enterprise. 
The Peshwa after the first surprise, realized the difficulties of-re¬ 
ducing the castle. The few vessels that had fallen in his hands were 
taken away by Sekhoji Angria. While the Peshw\a sat helplessly 
before Rajpuri asking for reinforcements from Satara, the Admiral 
occupied himself with the capture of Revas, Thai and such other 
coastal places. He planned an assault on the castle after the 
rains. In the meanwhile the Sidi chief had appealed successfully to 
the English at Bombay, and obtained their succour for their belea¬ 
guered garrisons at Underi and Janjira. 39 Capt. McNeil arrived 
on the scene with a powerful squadron and the attack on Janjira 
had to be abandoned. 40 

Shrlnivas Rao Pratinidhi, who had been sent into South Konkan, 
bribed the Killadar of Raigarh and occupied the fort on 8 June 
while the Peshwa was already negotiating for its surrender. 41 
Vijaygarh and Mandangarh were seized by Sekhoji Angria in July, 
1733.^ The occupation of Raigarh by the Pratinidhi kindled the 
Peshwa s ire. The two chiefs began to work at cross purposes mak¬ 
ing further progress in the expedition impossible. In the mean¬ 
while, Sekhoji Angria died on 28 August. 43 The Peshwa , tired of 
sitting before the island castle without hope of reducing the place, 


77 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

advised the Raja to accept the terms offered through the English. 
Truce was declared and on December 1, Abdur Rahman, the 
Peshwa’s nominee, was seated on the Janjira masnad. The preli¬ 
minaries were settled, the Peshwd agreeing not to claim beyond 
what territory was then in actual possession of the invading force. 
BajI Rao abandoned the siege of the island castle and marched away 
from Rajpuri (December, 1733). 44 

The results of the campaign were not altogether unsubstantial. 
The Sidi was driven back to the sea, his territory dwindled to the 
rock islands of Janjira, Underi, Anjanwel and Govalkot in the south. 
The Marathas became masters of much of his land possessions. Rai- 
garh, the capital of the Great ShivajI, was recovered as also Chaul, 
Thai and Revas. Sidi Sa‘at of Anjanwel continued to give trouble 
for some time; there was much fighting about Bankot, Govalkot and 
Anjanwel. 45 But Sidi Sa‘at was overcome in 1736, when taking his 
fleet to Bombay waters, he pounced upon Revas and marched to 
Kolaba. His small force was overwhelmed by a numerous army led 
by the Peshw’s brother Chimnaji Appa near Revas. 46 A final treaty 
was concluded on 25 September, 1736, establishing dual government 
in the eleven mahals formerly owned by the Sidi. The Sidi continued 
to administer the five and half mahals near the coast while the rest 
were taken over by the Peshwa’s officers. The Sidi’s power de¬ 
clined and the Sidi became in all but name, a tributary of the Mara¬ 
tha State. 47 

V. Conquest of Mdlwa: (1700-1730) 

The eighteenth century witnessed a change of the first magni¬ 
tude in the political aspect of India—the rise of Maratha power to 
eminence in Indian politics. Aurangzlb’s Deccan war (1681-1707), 
proved a colossal failure. His enemies, the Marathas, ill-equipped 
to fight the Mughuls in their manner, resorted to guerrilla tactics 
which demoralised the splendid armies of the emperor, broke their 
spell of invincibility and wore them out. In the process, the magni¬ 
ficent fabric of order and civil administration built up by the great 
Akbar and his successors was dissolved and Mughul authority lost 
popular respect. The aged emperor Aurangzib during his last days 
tried to come to some sort of understanding with the Marathas, but 
died before a settlement could be effected. His son, A‘zam, on the 
advice of his noble Zu’lfiqar Khan, released Shahu, recognising 
him as the head of the Maratha state and promising him chcmth and 
sardeshrrmkhi of the Deccan. 48 Though A‘zam was defeated at 
Jajau (June, 1707) the pact made with Raja Shahu continued in 


78 


PESHWA BAJi RAO I 


operation. 49 The Mughul Government was no longer in a position 
to refuse the victorious Marathas the chauth and sardeshmukhi of 
the six snbdhs of the Deccan. After much procrastination the claims 
were given legal recognition by the treaty concluded in 1719. 50 
Though put in the form of concessions made to Raja Shahu by the 
Mughul overlord, the grants signified a vital change in Mughul- 
Maratha relations. The Marathas had broken the power of the 
Mughul enemy and demanded tribute, which it suited their genius 
to take in the form of the inflated chauth or one-fourth of the stan¬ 
dard revenue of the six subdhs of the Deccan. 

The Marathas entered the northern provinces of the empire in 
the first decade of the 18th century; a measure adopted in the early 
stages of the struggle as a counterpoise against Mughul attacks on 
their bases, the northward drive gained momentum as the century 
advanced. 

According to Sir Jadunath Sarkar, the first invasion of Malwa 
by the Marathas occurred in 1699 when Krishna Sawant (?) crossed 
the Narmada with 15,000 cavalry and ravaged places near Dhamuni 
and retired. “The path thus opened was never again closed till at 
last in the middle of the 18th century Malwa passed into the regular 
Maratha possession.” 51 In 1703 after the rains NemajI Sindia burst 
into Malwa near Handia and marched down to Sironj, plundering 
and burning villages on the way. By February, 1704 he had ad¬ 
vanced as far as Kalabag. To stop his activities and open up com¬ 
munications the emperor had to despatch a special force under 
Firuz Jang. These raids were repeated with greater boldness in 
the decade that followed and NemajI Sindia, KanhojI Bhosle, Santaji 
Bhosle, Gangaram, Khanderao Dabha^e and other Maratha chief¬ 
tains fought Mughul subahdars with varying fortunes. 

In Peshwa Baji Rao the policy of northward expansion found 
its most fearless champion. He realized full well the weakness of 
the empire, the levity of its rulers, the incompetence and corruption 
of its officers, and made a bid for a dominant position in the Mughul 
empire. To the energy of his people that was being wasted in fra¬ 
tricidal war and internal disputes the best remedy and outlet was 
expansion of Maratha power beyond the Narmada. Combining- 
qualities of military leadership and diplomatic skill, the Peshwa 
adopted the policy of northward drive and steadily pursued it dur¬ 
ing his life-time, bringing Malwa, Bundelkhand and Gujarat under 
Maratha control. This achievement of the Peshwfi, of controlling 
Hindustan from the Deccan must be regarded as a radical, revolu¬ 
tionary change from the traditional trend; it guided Maratha policy 

79 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

till about the end of the 18th century and gave the Marathas ascen¬ 
dancy in the politics of north India. If ShivajI secured the freedom 
of his people, Peshwa Baji Rao gave them a wider field of activity, 
brought renown to his state and made the Marathas an all-India 
power. 52 

Though the draft treaty, concluded with Sayyid Husain ‘All 
Khan in 1718, contained the clause relating to the chauth of Malwa 
and Gujarat, this claim had been rejected by the Mughul Court. 
The Peshwa would wrest by arms what his father could not achieve 
by diplomacy. 

The old province of Malwa which is now merged in Madhya 
Pradesh, was the connecting link between the Deccan and Hindustan 
proper. On account of its central position the province was looked 
on as an important charge of great strategic significance. The high¬ 
ways of commerce and military routes to the Deccan and Gujarat 
passed through it and armies based in Malwa could strike at Raj- 
putana or Bundelkhand with the greatest ease. First conquered by 
Humayun and then reduced by Akbar, the subdh of Malwa enjoyed 
peace for over a century. This peace was disturbed when Aurangzib 
began to exhibit bigotry against the Hindu subjects by levying 
Jizya, destroying their temples and draining away the provincial 
revenues for his Deccan war. Provincial administration lost its effi¬ 
ciency and minds of men were disturbed when they found them¬ 
selves discriminated on grounds of religion and ill-governed. The 
discontented Rajput chiefs, zamindars and their Hindu subjects re¬ 
fused to co-operate with the Mughul subahdatr; on the contrary, they 
welcomed the Maratha invaders, gave them secret information about 
rivers, fords and mountain passes and facilitated their early aggres¬ 
sions; 53 

In the apportioning of spheres of influence following the im¬ 
perial grants of chauth and sardeshmukhi in 1719, Khandesh and 
the province of Malwa bordering on it were assigned to the Peshwa 
for making collection, as a stroke of deliberate policy. The Peshuxi 
and the Court looked on the possession of Malwa as the best gua¬ 
rantee for the security of the Maratha homeland and the Deccan. 
Maratha influence had penetrated the province for some time and 
for this they were anxious to obtain legal recognition. The Peshwa 
invaded Malwa in February, 1723 and again in May, 1724, collected 
chauth and met the Nizam on both the occasions. Home affairs kept 
him away for the next four years, but his subordinates kept the pres¬ 
sure on and laid southern Malwa under contribution. 


80 


PESHWA BAJI RAO I 


The appointment of Girdhar Bahadur as Subahdar in June, 1725 
prevented for a time the disorder in Malwa. Girdhar Bahadur was 
an officer of strong character and refused to compromise with the 
enemies of the empire. He turned out Maratha Kamavisdars and 
chased Maratha troops beyond the Narmada. It was only after the 
defeat of Nizam-ul-Mulk at Palkhed in February, 1728 that the 
Peshwfi, could respond in a fitting manner to this challenge to his 
authority. About the end of 1728 two big armies invaded Central 
India. The first under the Peshivfa’s brother Chimnaji Appa entered 
Malwa by the Mandu Ghat and surprised the Snibahdar Girdhar 
Bahadur in his camp at the border town of Amjhera (November 29, 
1728). Girdhar Bahadur’s troops fought with the courage of des¬ 
pair, but they were outnumbered and outmanoeuvered. After six 
hours of fierce fighting the Mughul force was annihilated, its com¬ 
manders Girdhar and his cousin Daya Bahadur with a number of 
chiefs were slain; its colours and all camp equipage were captured 
by the Marathas. It was a complete victory for Chimnaji and con¬ 
gratulations were showered on him from all quarters. 54 

Resting his troops for a couple of days Chimnaji pressed on to¬ 
wards the capital Ujjain. The brave defence put up by the Subah- 
dar’s son, Bhavani Ram, held up the Maratha advance for some time. 
But Chimnaji moved in the open country and made collection from 
Sarangpur, Rajgarh, Bhanpura, Rampura and Jawad, and then by 
way of Jhalod, retired to the Deccan. 

There was utter confusion in the imperial ranks in Malwa. No 
money or reinforcements could be obtained from the emperor. The 
troops clamoured for their arrears. Sayyid Najmuddin ‘Ali Khan 
who had been ordered to support Bhavani Ram, preferred to look 
on himself as the Subahdar and called on Bhavani Ram to account 
for the revenues of the province. The defeat of the Subahdar’s 
troops and the subsequent squabbles of the generals encouraged the 
peasantry and local zamindars to withhold revenue. All the efforts 
of Bhavani Ram who succeeded his father in the governorship, fail¬ 
ed to hold up the avalanche. The mountain passes into Malwa 
were lost to the Marathas; the flood-gates were thrown open and the 
tidal waters now rushed in, and within a decade Malwa passed into 
the hands of the Marathas. 

About the end of 1729 Sawai Jay Singh was appointed governor 
of the province. His tenure witnessed the beginning of a new 
policy—the policy of appeasement—towards the Marathas. The 
growing power of the Marathas and the convulsions in Malwa made 
a deep impression on Jay Singh’s mind. He perceived that the only 

81 

M.S.—6 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


practicable policy that might succeed in the circumstances, was the 
policy of appeasement which was in consonance with his sympathies 
for Maratha aspirations. 55 The immunity of Malwa was to be secur¬ 
ed by the grant of a jagir to Raja Shahu worth ten lakhs of rupees. 
It was expected that the grant of this jagir would induce the Raja to 
keep his generals in check and prevent their inroads in the province. 

To this end a Maratha general was to serve under the imperial 

\ 

banner. 56 Written undertakings were exchanged with Dado Bhim- 
sen, Shahu Raja’s envoy, and Deep Singh, an eminent Rajput, was 
deputed (September, 1730) to the Maratha country to bring about a 
lasting settlement and an enduring peace. 57 The fort of Mandu cap¬ 
tured by Holkar and Pawar was restored to the Subahdar in March, 
1730 and Maratha chieftains in Malwa were asked to cease opera¬ 
tions. 58 


None of the parties were sincere in their professions of friend¬ 
ship and none believed that the arrangement would fulfil its pur¬ 
pose. Sawai Jay Singh wanted to seize the Subah of Malwa for him¬ 
self and to set up practically as an independent ruler; for the Peshwa, 
Malwa was the sphere of his activities and he was not likely to 
abandon it lightly in lieu of a small jagir to his sovereign. The 
Mughul Darbar was suspicious of the activities of Sawai Jay Singh 
in Malwa, and when it found him negotiating a settlement with the 
Marathas, it replaced him by an anti-Maratha Subahdar , Muhammad 
Khan Bangash, in September, 1730. The Mughul policy was now to 
alternate between peace negotiations through Rajput and Hindus¬ 
tani chiefs at the Court and war and resistance as advocated by the 
Turani chiefs. The Marathas made their demands look tempting and 
acceptable by professing loyalty to the Mughul throne and offering 
their services to protect the imperial territory over which their 
claims were to be, recognized. 

VI. Progress in Bundelkhand: 

While Chimnaji was reducing Malwa, the Peshwa entered 
Bundelkhand at the head of another large army. His help was in¬ 
voked by Raja Chhatrasal when he was hard-pressed by Muhammad 
Khan Bangash, governor of Allahabad. 59 The Bundela chief in great 
distress requested the Peshwa to come to his aid. He sent him a 
poetic letter of which the following lines are famous: 

“I am in distress like the famous Gajendra 
Unless you rush to my aid, I am lost.” 

Muhammad Khan Bangash had been appointed to the Subah of 


82 


PESHWA BAJI RAO I 


Allahabad in 1720. From 1727 he had opened the campaign against 
the rebellious Bundelas and captured their strongholds one by one. 
The last to surrender was Jaitpur which surrendered in December, 
1728. Thus all Bundela forts had passed into Bangash’s hands; their 
forces had been beaten in the field, and were scattered. Bangash 
sent back the major part of his army and lay encamped at Jaitpur 
with hardly 10,000, men. 60 He allowed the Bundela chiefs to remove 
to a distance on the pretext of celebrating the Holi. The Peshwd in 
the meanwhile had pushed on into Bundelkhand from Deogarh. 
Near Mahoba he was joined by the Bundela chiefs with their men. 
With his army, now swollen to near 70,000 men, the Peshxva invested 
the Subdhdar in his encampment. Reduced to great straits, Bangash 
invited reinforcements from Allahabad and from Delhi. His son 
Qaim Khan tried to send relief but was defeated. 61 The imperial 
Court, immersed in its rounds of pleasures, had no time and no in¬ 
clination to attend to the demands of its Governors. Bangash re¬ 
tired from Bundelkhand leaving the Bundelas masters in their 
home. The grateful Chhatrasal came to look on the Peshwd as his 
son, and promised him a part of his kingdom. The actual grant of 
jagir was made after the old man’s death by his sons Jagat Raj and 
Hirdesa, who gave the Peshwd districts worth two and a quarter 
lakhs of rupees and promised to assist him in all his enterprises in 
Hindustan. The grant was later on increased to rupees five lakhs. 62 
The Marathas thus obtained another foothold from which to mount 
their offensive against the Mughul empire. 

Raja Jay Singh of Amber (1729-30, 1732-37) and Muhammad 
Khan Bangash (1730-32) who held between them the governorship 
of Malwa from 1729 to 1737 tried, as indicated earlier, appeasement 
and war in turn, but neither policy proved successful. Bangash 
governed the province from September, 1730 to October, 1732, chas¬ 
ing the Marathas from place to place, but found his resources al¬ 
together inadequate to throw them out. Raja Jay Singh who suc¬ 
ceeded Bangash in the governorship, was the ruler of the import- 
tant principality of Jaipur, a friend of Khan-i-Dauran, Mir Bakhshi f 
and wielded considerable influence at the Mughul Court. Jay Singh 
was a man of culture and refinement; he advocated the policy of 
winning the Marathas over to the imperial cause by malting large 
concessions and satisfying their demands. Aware of the decay 
creeping over the Mughul empire, the Rajput prince entertained 
secret ambitions of enlarging his kingdom of Amber so as to include 
in it the rich province of Malwa. For this it was necessary to per¬ 
suade the Rajput nobility to accept his leadership and conciliate 
the Marathas. 63 But diplomacy rarely succeeds unless backed by 


83 


THE MAEATHA SUPREMACY 

force and the Rajput was too sensual and pleasure-loving to exert 
himself in the field. The Rajput princes refused to unite under the 
Kachhwa banner and nothing short of the subahdari of Malwa would 
satisfy the Peshwa. Jay Singh purchased peace by sharing with the 
Marathas the large sums sent to him from Delhi for the defence of 
the province. 

In October, 1730, Malhar Rao Holkar was granted the entire 
assignment on the province of Malwa. Next year in October, 1731, 
Ranoji Sindia was associated with him. The Pawars likewise were 
given a share in the collection the same time. From 1732 the col¬ 
lections made from Malwa came to be shared regularly among the 
Peshwa’s chief Sardars, Holkar, Sindia and the Pawars. Udaji 
Pawar, who had taken a prominent part in leading Maratha armies 
in Malwa claimed half the share, was refused and joined the party 
of the disgruntled Senapati. This was the end of his career. His 
brother Anand Rao and his cousins TukojI and JivajI were favoured 
along with Holkar and Sindia. Holkar and Sindia made Indore and 
Ujjain their headquarters and the Pawars settled at Dhar and 
Dewas. The revenues were shared equally between the Sindia and 
Holkar and the Pawar brothers, 64 after the usual deduction of 45 
per cent, as the dues of the Peshwa. 

From 1732 the Maratha offensive took the form of a two-prong¬ 
ed drive. One army under Sindia and Holkar would pour into wes¬ 
tern Malwa by way of Gujarat while another taking a north-easterly 
route would enter Bundelkhand and with the aid of their Bundela 
allies, ravage the country as far north as Gwalior and Gohad. In 
February, 1733, Sawai Jay Singh was surrounded near Mandasor 
and extricated himself by paying six lakhs in cash in addition to 
the revenue of 28 pcurgands already collected. In April, 1734, 
Bundi was attacked and Jay Singh’s nominee Dalel Singh was driven 
out; a force that advanced to Sironj under Muzaffar Khan was in¬ 
vested and escaped with difficulty. 

Two large armies marched against the Marathas in the cold 
season of 1734-35. Vazir Qamar-ud-dln Khan came up against 
Pilaji Jadhav in February, 1735, near Narwar, but found himself in 
great distress by the constant attacks of the light Maratha horse. 
He sought refuge in the fort of Orchha and had to bribe the Marathas 
with five lakhs of rupees before they retired. Jadhav made collec¬ 
tions in the pargands of Sivpuri, Kolaras, Pohari and Narwar before 
retiring to the Deccan. 65 

The second army under Mir Bakhshi, Khan-i-Dauran, left the 


84 


PESHWA BAJ! RAO I 


capital in November. It was joined on the march by Sawai Jay Singh, 
Abhay Singh of Marwar and Durjan Sal of Kota till it swelled to 
near two lakhs. The imperial forces were unwieldy and difficult to 
manage. While encamped at Rampura, Sindia and Holkar surround¬ 
ed them and cut off their supplies. Then abandoning the blockade 
they passed the* rear of the Mughul army, crossed the Mukundra 
pass and by way of Bundi, entered the territory of Sawai Jay Singh. 
On February 28, the rich city of Sambhar was plundered yielding a 
rich harvest. This sudden eruption of the enemy in their rear caiised 
dismay in Mughul ranks and the Rajput allies insisted on going 
back to save their homes. Khan-i-Dauran’s army retired and while 
he was at Kota, a meeting was arranged with the Maratha chief¬ 
tains on March 24, 1735, at which they agreed to accept twenty-two 
lakhs as chauth for Malwa. 66 

“The Marathas”, says the author of Siyar-ul Mutakherin, “con¬ 
tinued to extend their ravages and incursions to which they had 
been encouraged by receiving contributions in order to purchase 
their forbearance wherever they appeared. When they saw no mea¬ 
sures were taken to oppose their movements, they recommenced 
their operations in the next year. At length they assumed absolute 
dominion of the districts which formerly only paid tribute. By these 
encroachments the frontier of the empire receded while that of the 
Marathas advanced. By the supineness of the emperor they now 
occupied territories as far as Gwalior and approached the vicinity 
of Akbarabad” (Agra). 67 

The policy of appeasement pursued by Sawai Jay Singh had not 
been very successful. Fresh concessions had called forth fresh 
aggressions. Having succeeded in levying chauth and sardeshmukhi 
in Malwa, the Peshwd now applied through Jay Singh for the formal 
grant of Malwa and Gujarat in jdgir. The growing encroachments 
of the Marathas had given rise to serious misgivings at the Imperial 
Court. Was Raja Jay Singh, his enemies openly asked, in league with 
his co-religionists and encouraging their aggressions, or was he in¬ 
competent to deal with them? The Court blamed Jay Singh and 
Khan-i-Dauran for the continued aggression. Sa‘adat Khan told the 
Emperor: “Jay Singh has ruined the empire by his secret support 
to the Marathas. Give me only the Subahdari of Agra and Malwa. 
I dp not ask for treasure. I want to save the empire. Jay Singh 
and party ask for crores of rupees to meet the expenditure. The 
Nizam is my friend. We will hold up the Marathas south of the Nar¬ 
mada.” To this a reply was made by Khan-i-Dauran, “The Marathas 
cannot be effectively subdued by fighting. By friendly negotiations 


85 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


I shall induce either the Peshwa or his brother to meet your Majesty. 
If his demands are accepted there will be no disturbances in the im¬ 
perial domain in future. If, on the other .hand, Sa‘adat Khan and the 
Nizam combine, they would set up another emperor.” The Padshah 
felt that there was some truth in this. Khan-i-Dauran further submit¬ 
ted: “I only promised the Maratha generals that they would be given 
as jaglrs those parganas of Malwa which are in the hands of the re¬ 
fractory Rohillas and other brigands. Then they will not disturb any 
other district under the emperor’s rule. Baji Rao desires the em¬ 
peror’s patronage and will serve him. He has brought his family 
from the Deccan on the plea of bathing in the Ganga.” 68 However, 
Jay Singh felt that his position was seriously assailed and invited the 
Peshwa to a personal meeting at which he hoped to evolve a formula 
satisfactory to both parties and yet keep the subahdari of Malwa to 
himself. 

There were reports also of the emperor having effected a recon¬ 
ciliation between the Vazlr Qamar-ud-dln and Abhay Singh of Mar- 
war and of his having appointed the former to the charge of Agra, 
Malwa and Gujarat. If Jay Singh joined the Vazlr, his territory was 
not to be molested. Otherwise no consideration was to be shown to 
him. The emperor was dissatisfied with Jay Singh’s handling of the 
Maratha problem and wanted to put it in abler hands. It was com¬ 
mon talk that two armies would take the field against the Marathas— 
one led by Jay Singh and Khan-i-Dauran by way of Jaipur and the 
other by way of Gwalior under the command of Vazlr Qamar-ud-din 
Khan, Sa‘adat Khan and Abhay Singh. 69 

The Peshwa felt he could no longer remain away from the scene. 
He left Poona in October, 1735, at the head of a large force. His 
march to the north created quite a stir at the Courts of foreign rulers. 
There were wild rumours about his real intentions; and the Peshwa 
added not a little to the confusion by making an appeal to all Hindu 
rulers to gather under his banner. 70 About the beginning of February 
he arrived at Udaipur and met the Rana in a formal Darbar. On 4 
February, 1736, he visited the Maharana’s famous w r ater-palace known 
as Jal Mandir in the Pichola lake. 71 The Peshwa wanted the par- 
gana of Banera to be conferred on him as jdglr. The Maharana 
politely declined to give away the pargana as jdglr, but agreed to 
allot its revenues to the Peshwa 72 

Agents began to arrive from Sawai Jay Singh and from the Im¬ 
perial Court carrying drafts of agreements which would prove ac¬ 
ceptable. Jay Singh’s proposal amounted to the grant of a subsidy 
of twenty lakhs of rupees, a jaglr of forty lakhs in Malwa and tan- 


86 


PESHWA BAJI RAO I 


khah on the territory of Dost Muhammad Rohilla. 73 The meeting 
with Sawai Jay Singh took place on March 4, at Bhambholao near 
Kishangarh. 

The emperor was prepared to concede to the Peshwa chauth 
and sardeshmukhi of the subdh of Malwa, an assignment of thirteen 
lakhs of rupees on the revenues of districts south of the Chambal 
and authority to levy 'tribute from the Rajput States from Bund! in 
the west to Bhadawar to the east. 74 The concessions excited the 
Peshwa’s cupidity and called forth fresh demands; he went on rais¬ 
ing his claims till at last he demanded: 

(i) The subdh of Malwa inclusive of the tributary States to 
be granted in jdglr to the Peshwa ; 

(ii) the Rohilla chiefs of Bhopal and Bhilsa to be ejected 
from the province and their jdglrs to be made over to 
the Peshwa ; 

(iii) the forts of Mandu, Dhar and Raisin (commanding passes 
into Malwa from the south) to be ceded to the Peshwa; 

'(iv) the territory up to the Chambal to be granted to the 
Peshwa in jdglr; 

(v) an assignment of fifty lakhs of rupees or the revenue of 
Bengal to relieve the Peshwa’s debts; 

(vi) the cession of the holy places of Allahabad, Banaras, 
Mathura and Gaya; 

(vii) the cession of Sardeshpandeship of the Deccan, and lastly 

(viii) demand for another jdglr of fifty lakhs of rupees in 
the subdh of the Deccan, while the subdh is held by a 
son of the emperor. 75 

From the modest demands for cession of chauth and sardesh¬ 
mukhi of Malwa and war indemnity to meet his debts, the Peshwa 
had gone on to ask for the virtual control of Malwa, Bundelkhand, 
Bengal and the six subahs of the Deccan. This was really stagger¬ 
ing and the Mughul Court decided to fight. As long as the Peshwa 
remained in Malwa with his troops, it procrastinated merely to gain 
time. 

The Peshwa went back to the Deccan leaving behind his gene¬ 
rals, Sindia and Holkar, to press his demands. 76 All that Jay Singh 
could persuade the emperor to grant to the Peshwa was the deputy 


87 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

governorship of the province, which fell far short of the latter s ex¬ 
pectations; and the renewal of hostilities was inevitable. 77 
VII. Peshwd Marches to Delhi: 

When the next campaigning season opened, the Peshwd marched 
into Hindustan at the head of an army, fifty thousand strong. Bhopal 
and Bhilsa, the only islands of opposition held by Rohilla chieftains, 
were reduced 78 and the Peshwd then struck in the north-eastern 
direction and attacked the Jat Raja of Bhadawar. The Raja made his 
submission agreeing to pay twenty lakhs of rupees in tribute and pre¬ 
sented ten elephants. 79 

The Peshwa’s arrival on the northern ^borders of Bundelkhand, 
hardly 70 miles distant from Agra, constituted a threat of the first 
magnitude to the empire and roused the Court to feverish activity. 
Large armies were equipped and put into the field under the com¬ 
mand of Vazir Qamar-ud-din Khan and Mir Bakhshi Khan-i-Dauran. 
Royal letters were despatched to provincial governors, and Mughul 
and Rajput chiefs to rush to the defence of the capital. The move¬ 
ment of troops and their concentration in the Delhi-Agra area were 
reported from all sides. 80 It was necessary to counter this conver¬ 
gence of Mughul troops and create a diversion. A strong detachment 
under Malhar Rao Holkar therefore crossed the Yamuna and entered 
the Doab. Moving swiftly, Holkar plundered Itimadpur and Firo- 
zabad opposite Agra. At Jalesar, however, he was surprised by 
Sa‘adat Khan, Governor of Awadh, and repulsed with losses. 81 The 
Peshwd was foiled in one more attempt to dissolve the concentration 
of enemy forces and had to think of other plans. Retiring to a little 
distance from Agra he sent away his baggage and camp-followers 
under heavy escort of his Rundela allies. The temporary withdrawal 
of the Peshwa’s troops created the impression that the Marathas, un¬ 
able to face the imperialists, were making for the South. Sa‘adat 
Khan wrote to the emperor glowing accounts of his victory, boasted 
of his soon being able to drive the Marathas beyond the Chambal 
and advised the emperor to break off negotiations with the PeshwdP- 

The Peshwd's Vakil, Dhondo Govind, who was in the camp of 
the Mir Bakhshi communicated Sa‘adat Khan’s accounts of his suc¬ 
cess and the violent reaction it had produced at the Court. The 
Peshwd was resolved to tell the emperor the truth, “to prove that he 
was still in Hindoostan, and to show him flames and Mahrattas at 
the gates of his capital.” 83 While the Mughul chiefs were celebrat¬ 
ing Sa‘adat Khan’s recent victory, the Peshwd making a wide detour 
through the Jat and Mewat country on the west, passed the enemy’s 


88 


PESHWA BAJ! RAO I 


rear and arrived in the vicinity of the capital on 29 March, 1737. 
Leaving Barapula and the Kallka temple (near Okhla) to his right 
the Peshwa arrived in the plain near the capital. On reaching the 
walled city, the Peshwa changed his mind of sacking the city; he 
knew that the emperor and Khan-i-Dauran were inclined towards 
peace, but the Mughul party was opposed to such a move. In case 
of an attack on the capital, the Mughul Court would be driven to 
take extreme measures and negotiations would break down. There¬ 
fore, forbidding any destruction of the city, he sent friendly messages 
to the emperor inviting fresh proposals. As the presence of the army 
was likely to lead to disturbances, the Peshwa moved in the direc¬ 
tion of the Jhil tank. As the Peshwd’s army was changing grounds 
the next day, the move was misunderstood as retreat and the defen¬ 
ders sallied out to attack the Peshwd’s troops. The Peshwa’s com¬ 
mander, Satvoji Jadhav, lured the Mughul force beyond the protection 
of its artillery and then enveloping it, completely routed it. On 
31 March, learning of the approach of the enemy troops, the Peshwa 
disappeared as suddenly as he had appeared before the capital. He 
hoped to draw the Mughul armies in the arid hills of the Mewat coun¬ 
try, but the enemy refused to take the bait. 84 Wearied by marching 
and counter-marching, the Mughul Vazir and Mir Bakhshi retired to 
their mansions. The emperor felt nothing but disgust and contempt 
for Sa‘adat Khan for making wild claims and refused to grant him 
an interview or appoint him to the Subahdari of Malwa and Gujarat. 85 
By his clever strategy the Peshwa outmanoeuvred his opponents and 
completely immobilised them. The Turani party which opposed 
Maratha ambitions was discredited in the councils of the empire and 
the influence of the Hindustani leaders, Jay Singh and Khan-i-Dauran, 
once more became supreme. 

The Peshwa retired through Jaipur territory to Bundelkhand 
and picked up his baggage. The Marathas were lightly armed, and the 
privations they had suffered during the last fifteen days had rendered 
them unfit to face the respectable force of Jay Singh. But so great 
was the awe inspired by the Peshwd’s army that Jay Singh begged 
of him to spare his country. 86 

VIII. Battle of Bhopal: 

Now a new combination of forces threatened the realization of 
the Peshwd’s schemes and challenged his supremacy in the imperial 
council. Nizam-ul-Mulk, though he had agreed in 1732 to give the 
Peshwa a free hand in Hindustan, watched his extraordinary pro¬ 
gress beyond the Narmada with the greatest anxiety. He thought 


89 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


that the Peshwd’s new entanglements would reduce the latter s re¬ 
sources and allow himself greater freedom in the south. Events, 
however, belied the Nizam’s expectations. The weakness of the em¬ 
pire revealed itself more and more glaringly as the Maratha-Mughul 
struggle developed and Mughul armies suffered reverses after re¬ 
verses. Instead of being checked and driven back, the Peshwd reach¬ 
ed the very gates of Delhi and threatened to subvert the empire 
itself. The Nizam could no longer remain an idle spectator while 
the bulwarks of the empire were crumbling round him. The news of 
the Peshwd trying to obtain greater control over his subah of the 
Deccan and rivet further chains on his authority was most disquiet¬ 
ing. The Nizam decided to make common cause with the imperial 
government to save it and save himself thereby. 87 

So deeply upset was the Nizam over the Peshwd’s negotiations 
with the Mughul Court that he could not wait till the latter’s return 
to the south. He left Deccan and on his march to the capital en¬ 
countered the Peshwd’s army near Sironj, met the Peshwd’s deputy 
PilajI Jadhav, made friendly professions to the Peshwd and slipped 
away to the north. 88 

The Mughul Court having realized its weakness in opposing 
Maratha encroachments invited Nizam-ul-Mulk to its aid and suspend¬ 
ed peace talks. On his arrival in Delhi in June old jealousies and 
suspicions were set aside. Muhammad Shah showered favours on 
the Nizam, gave him the best residence in the capital, and restored 
to him the government of Malwa and Agra on condition that he would 
drive the Marathas beyond the Narmada. 89 At the head of an army 
of thirty-five thousand men and a fine park of artillery the Nizam left 
the capital to seek and, if possible, destroy the enemy. He marched 
southward through Bundelkhand where he was joined by Sa'adat 
Khan’s troops and also those of the Rajput and Bundela chiefs, till 
his force increased into a vast army of nearly seventy thousand. 
About the middle of December he arrived at Bhopal. His strategy 
was to catch the Maratha army between two pincers—to crush it be¬ 
tween the imperial army under his personal command and another 
force striking from the south under his son, Nasir Jang. 90 

But before the Maratha outposts on the Narmada could be seized 
and their garrisons thrown out, the Peshwd invaded lyialwa at the 
head of eighty thousand troops and came up with the Nizam at 
Bhopal. 91 He posted a strong detachment under his brother on the 
Tapi to prevent relief going to the Nizam from the Deccan. Raghuji 
Bhosle at the same time defeated Shuja‘at Khan in Khandesh; and 


90 


PESHWA BAJi RAO I 


no troops could march to Bhopal to succour the Nizam from the 
Deccan. The Mughul Court had given him sixty lakhs of rupees to 
equip his army, while the chief nobles at the Court and Rajput 
princes had been asked to join him. Delhi was in no position to 
send further ^reinforcements. The Nizam thus found himself com¬ 
pletely isolated and invested in the town of Bhopal. The grain supply 
in his camp soon ceased and men and animals famished for want of 
food. Two detachments that tried to carry relief to the beleaguered 
army—one from Shahjahanpur and the other from Burhanpur—were 
cut off. The Nizam’s attempt to break through the enemy’s cordon 
and escape to Delhi under cover of his artillery was foiled by the 
Maratha horse hovering round and galling the Mughul army with 
showers of rockets and matchlock fire. Unable to hold out any 
longer the Nizam begged for terms on 7 January, 1738, at Duraha 
Sarai, 92 and signed a convention 93 promising the Peshwd : 

(i) the subdhdari of the province of Malwa; 

(ii) levy of tributes from the Rajas in the region between the 
Narmada and the Chambal, 

(iii) imperial grants confirming the same, and 

(iv) promise of 50 lakhs of rupees to meet his war expenses. 94 

The victory of Bhopal marks the zenith of the Peshwa’s trium¬ 
phant career. Nizam-ul-Mulk who was opposing the grant of chauth 
and sardeshmukhi of Malwa had been forced to concede the entire 
province in jagtr and recognize the Peshwd’s claims up to the Cham¬ 
bal. The Peshwd accomplished the conquests he had set before him¬ 
self since he came to the Peshwaship. Creating powerful armies out 
of divergent elements of Maratha Shiledars, he invaded Hindustan, 
brought to grief one imperial army after another sent against him, 
and acquired immense territory till the Maratha outposts reached the 
southern banks of the Chambal and the Yamuna. The disaster of 
Amjhera (1728) first opened the eyes of the imperial government 
to this menace from the south. But the measures it adopted to fight 
it were feeble and half-hearted, and lacked in consistency. The 
friendship of Raja Jay Singh enabled the Marathas to plant their 
power firmly in Malwa. The later attempts of the Mughul govern¬ 
ment to oust the Marathas failed on account of the pusillanimity of 
its leaders and want of energy in its administration. The defeat of 
the confederate armies at Bhopal by the Peshwd established the 
supremacy of Maratha arms in Hindustan and announced the birth of 
a new power. 


91 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


The Nizam failed to keep his promise of getting the convention 
ratified within his lifetime. Serious doubts assailed the mind about 
effectiveness of the Peshwa’s military strategy which allowed the 
Nizam to escape unscathed at Palkhed in 1728 and again at Bhopal 
in 1738. Unless the enemy’s military strength is destroyed and he 
makes suitable amends, his acknowledgement of defeat is meaningless. 
In the first World War “over the whole period of the Allied offensive 
campaign from July 18th to November 11th, 1918, the captures were 
about four hundred thousand men and 5,618 guns.” The German 
military machine was crippled, the generals had to resign and the 
Kaiser had to flee the country. 95 As against this the Peshwa inform¬ 
ed his brother how difficult it was to close with the Nizam’s army 
bristling with artillery and why he readily accepted peace terms. 96 

No new Subahdar however was sent from Delhi and the pro¬ 
vince remained in Maratha hands. Sindia and Holkar who had al¬ 
ready set up their headquarters at Ujjain and Indore, shared the 
revenues with the Peshwa. 

IX. Nadir Shah’s Invasion: 

The invasion of Nadir Shah next year convulsed the Mughul 
empire and hastened its decay. The emperor became a shadow figure 
exercising little direct authority beyond the provinces of Agra and 
Delhi. The Irani’s irruption however seriously challenged Maratha 
scheme of expansion in Hindustan and of controlling the Mughul 
empire. 

Nadir Shah had liberated his country of Iran from Afghan do¬ 
mination and had followed his Afghan enemies to their stronghold 
of Qandahar. When the Afghans escaped towards Kabul, Nadir Shah 
sent a strong protest to Delhi and asked the Delhi Court not to har¬ 
bour his enemies. But the Mughul Court disregarded his protests, 
kept his envoys waiting and murdered a courier carrying a message 
from the Shah. Enraged at this treacherous conduct, but tempted 
more by the defenceless condition of the empire, Nadir Shah at the 
end of 1738 invaded India. On 26 November the Khyber pass was 
occupied and Nadir Shah was in Peshawar on 29th. After a feeble 
resistance Lahore surrendered on 25 January, 1739. Laying waste 
the surrounding country he advanced to Karnal', defeated the im¬ 
perial army with great slaughter on 13 February, and demanded a 
huge indemnity. The sum of rupees fifty lakhs was first suggested 
by the Nizam which Sa‘adat Khan raised to twenty crores. When 
Muhammad Shah went to the Persian camp to plead with the con¬ 
queror, he was made a captive (24 February). The Maratha envoy 

I 


92 


PESHWA BAJ! RAO I 


in the imperial camp who slipped away on 25 February, wrote on 
reaching Jaipur (6 March); “The Chaghtai empire is gone. The 
Irani rule has commenced.” 97 

The day after he had seized the Mughul emperor, Nadir Shah 
despatched to Delhi Sa‘adat Khan as the emperor’s representative and 
Tahmasp Khan Jalair as his own plenipotentiary to take possession 
of the city and palaces therein. On 20 March, 1739 Nadir Shah enter¬ 
ed the city with his army and on the next day was proclaimed sover¬ 
eign from the pulpits of Jama Masj id and other places of prayers. 
The same afternoon he made the Mughul emperor disgorge all the 
accumulated wealth of the empire. Then arose a great tumult in 
the capital; there were wild rumours of the death of Nadir Shah, and 
the harassed citizens of Delhi started attacking the Persian soldiers 
wherever they found them. 

Nadir Shah’s anger knew no bounds. From the Golden Mosque 
in Chandni Chowk he ordered, without regard to sex or creed, a 
general massacre of the populace; and for six hours from nine in the 
morning till three in the afternoon the luckless citizens of the capital 
suffered unimaginable horrors. Their property was looted, their 
houses burnt and levelled, their womenfolk dragged and dishonoured 
and the men put to the sword. How many perished that day and 
subsequently, nobody could say with certainty. If the reports in 
Marathi letters are to be believed, three to four lakhs of the populace 
v/ere killed, thousands of women were carried away in captivity and 
treasure and jewellery worth fifty crores of rupees seized. 98 

The upheaval at Delhi bewildered the Peshwd. Nadir Shah 
was giving out that Maratha aggression was the main cause of his 
coming to India and that he would save the Mughul empire from their 
encroachments. The Peshwd was convinced that the days of the 
Chaghtai empire were numbered and a great calamity had arisen for 
the Hindus." 

The Peshwd had been informed that the Nizam had behaved in 
an atrocious manner in the whole affair and had suggested the 
seizure of the emperor to the Persian adventurer. 100 This infamous 
act, the Peshwd thought, had completely discredited the Nizam in 
public estimation and disqualified him to rule over the Deccan. The 
Peshwd would put an end to the Nizam’s rule and occupy the Deccan 
provinces. Earlier reports that the Persians intended to punish the 
Maratha aggressors had already reached the Peshwd. The Peshwd 
wrote from Khandesh to his brother to finish the Bassefn siege and 
join him to hold the enemy beyond the Chambal. If the Chaghtai 


93 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


rule had ended, he felt it was good opportunity to establish Hindu 
sovereignty. 101 But this confrontation with the Persian adventurer 
never came. Nadir Shah left Delhi on May 16, enjoining on the 
princes of India to obey and please the emperor. The wealth accu¬ 
mulated during two centuries of Mughul rule, amounting to nearly 
one hundred crores in coins and jewels, disappeared in less than 
a months’ time. India’s north-western gates had been thrown open 
and the situation offered a serious challenge to Maratha designs of 
controlling the empire. 

X. Bassein Campaign: 

While the Peshwa was overrunning Hindustan, another Maratha 
army under the command of his brother Chimnaji Appa succeeded in 
wresting Salsette-Bassein tract from the grip of the Portuguese and 
thus liberating a part of the Maratha homeland. The Portuguese 
had seized these districts of the Maratha country two hundred years 
ago and made Bassein the capital of their Province of the North and 
raised mighty fortifications round it. Bassein lay within a fertile 
tract; its equable climate, administrative importance and commer¬ 
cial prosperity drew to it many rich Portuguese families from Goa 
and the entire territory came to be looked on as a valued possession 
of the Portuguese empire in the east. 

In the 18th century, however, the Portuguese power was on the 
decline. The command of the sea had passed to the Dutch and the 
English, and the Portuguese clung to their outposts with difficulty. 
But they had not the wisdom to understand their unstable position; 
they had few friends among country powers and they made their 
subject people their worst enemies by their harsh and intolerant 
treatment. The inquisition was active in Goa and Bassein from 1550 
persecuting all those who did not conform to the Christian doctrine. 102 
As soon as Maratha rule was established in the neighbouring Kalyan 
district (1719), the popular discontent found expression. The Hindu 
leaders of Bassein secretly invited the Peshwa to deliver them from 
foreign yoke and restore their religious liberties. The Portuguese, 
aroused by the danger threatening them, began to put Salsette and 
Bassein in a proper state of defence and ordered the local population 
to contribute money and labour. A cry went up among the local 
people and in desperation they invoked the Peshwa to take possession 
of the country, offering him their whole-hearted co-operation in the 
enterprise. 

Portuguese activities in Konkan were also running counter to 
the interests of the Peshwa .. In the domestic dispute of the Angria 


94 


PESHWA BAJI RAO I 


family, the Portuguese supported Sambhaji Angria who was flouting 
the Peshivd and became particularly obnoxious to him. Probing at¬ 
tacks on Portuguese territory had started since 1723. Their safety 
against these and the intrigues of the Hindu subjects lay in the new 
fortifications that were being built and these the Portuguese pressed 
on with vigour. The attack on the Portuguese territory could no 
longer be delayed, and, in March, 1737, a strong force under the 
Peshwa’s brother, Chimnaji Appa, prepared to strike at the Portu¬ 
guese possessions and gathered in secrecy at Kalyan. 

The terrain of Salsette and Bassein is peculiar; the narrow coastal 
strip is cut up in many places by inland channels made by the sea 
and the rivers flowing into it. This is not a country for large-scale 
movements of cavalry. Knowledge of fords and their control, there¬ 
fore becomes an important factor of military strategy in this area. 
The Peshwa’s contacts with the leaders of the local population—the 
Anjurkars and the Kavles 03 and others—and secret information 
obtained from them of the geography of the country and the strength 
of the defence works proved very useful in this respect. On the 
night of 26 March, at low tide, an advance detachment of Maratha 
horse surprised the patrol at Thana ford, attacked the St. Jeronimo 
tower and secured the passage into the island of Salsette. The next 
day the entire force poured in with its equipment and stores. The 
surprise was complete. The commanding officer made no effort to 
give battle, and left the island on 27 March; and the main fort of 
Thana surrendered without much fighting. Detachments were imme¬ 
diately sent out to reduce the remaining fortified places within the 
island and to dislodge the enemy from the ports of Bandra and 
Verso va. 104 

While the main army under the command of Chimnaji Appa was 
operating against Salsette and had forced its way into the island, 
another force, 2,200 strong, moved against Bassein and attempted to 
gain admittance inside the walls by the same stratagem. But the 
plan miscarried; the Portuguese commander of Bassein had been 
warned of enemy movements and had, in consequence, posted strong 
patrols at all fords and outposts, and had taken every precaution 
against surprise. The Maratha force negotiated numerous river chan¬ 
nels and arrived within the enemy country but was stopped at the 
wall. 105 Means had to be devised to besiege and assault the formid¬ 
able fortress of Bassein. Outlying posts like Jivdhan, Takmak, 
Kamandurg, Tandulwadi, Mandvi, Manori were seized, but the em¬ 
battled walls of the fortress guarded by the sea on three sides and 
open only on the north stood frowning on the besiegers. 106 The 


95 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Maratha commander, Shankaraji Phadke, called for reinforcements, 
suggested blockade of the fortress and made three vain attempts to 
carry the place by escalade. 07 As the fair season opened, the Portu* 
guese received reinforcements and issuing from the walls of theii 
fortifications, they counterattacked Maratha forces in the open coun¬ 
try, cutting up their detachments at Mahlm, and Dharavi. In Novem¬ 
ber, 1738 they even tried to recover Thana and sent a large expedi¬ 
tion up the creek. The attempt, however, failed miserably, the Por¬ 
tuguese commander Pedro De Mello was killed by a cannon shot and 
his ships sailed away. 108 

The Marathas now took the offensive and collected a formidable 
force for the final assault. Another force under Vyankat Rao Ghor- 
pade invaded Goa and cut off supplies going to Bassein. 109 The de¬ 
fenders of Bassein were reduced to great straits; they even melted 
the Church plate to purchase ammunition from the English at Bom¬ 
bay, but would not talk of surrender. Maratha artillery roared day 
and night pounding the walls and leaving the enemy no time to re¬ 
cover his breath. Both Xavier Pinto, commandant of the fort and 
Martinho De Sylveira, General Commanding, were hit by Maratha 
fire and killed. Mines under protection of raised platforms, were 
run to the walls and exploded on 2 May. A general assault follow¬ 
ed and, after two days of heavy fighting, Bassein capitulated on 5 
May, 1739; the garrison marched out a week later. The Marathas 
suffered over five thousand casualties in dead and wounded, while on 
the other side the losses were equally heavy. 110 

The fall of Bassein marked the end of Portuguese rule in north 
Konkan. The treaty of September, 1740, set the seal on the end, 
the Portuguese ceding their entire province of the North with the 
exception of the port of Daman and a few villages surrounding it. 
The Marathas acquired besides Bassein, eight cities, twenty fortresses 
and the island of Salsette. The conquest of Bassein was long cherish¬ 
ed by the Marathas as a matter of national pride and glory. 

XI. Enduring Achievements: 

The last few years of the Peshwas life were clouded by domestic 
discord. His fondness for his mistress MastanI exceeded all bounds. 
In her company the Peshwd indulged in drinking and eating meat. 
This transgression roused the ire of the family and the orthodox 
society of the day. It was not unusual in those days to keep mis¬ 
tresses; that was permissible. But that the Peshwd should drink 
and eat prohibited food in the company of his favourite Kanchani 
(dancing girl) was anathema. The Raja was asked to interfere in the 


96 


PESHWA BAJI RAO I 


affair, and offered sage advice; vows were exchanged on the holy 
Canga waters and for some time MastanI was kept confined in the 
Shaniwar Wada out of sight of the Peshwa . m 

From these distractions the Peshwa sought escape in the field. 
Nizam-ul-Mulk had not fulfilled the conditions of the convention of 
Duraha Sarai (1738). No new Sanad had come from Delhi appoint¬ 
ing the Peshwa as Subahdar of Malwa; and the Nizam had been de¬ 
tained in Hindustan by the violent events in the capital. The Peshwa 
now demanded from the Nizam’s deputy, jagir of the districts through 
which lay his route to Hindustan. When this was turned down, 
hostilities were renewed. Nasir Jang, the Nizam’s deputy, could not 
succeed where the experienced old man had failed. On account of 
scarcity of foodgrains in the city of Aurangabad he was forced to 
leave the protection of the walls and move out in the open. Here 
he was surrounded by Maratha horse and harassed day and night. 
After two months of fighting Nasir Jang agreed to surrender the dis¬ 
tricts of Handia and Khargon, and peace was restored. After frater¬ 
nization the Peshwa marched in the direction of Hindustan. 112 

While encamped at Raverkhedi 36 miles from Khargon he con¬ 
tracted fever on 23 April; after a short illness he passed away on 
Monday, 28 April, 1740, lamented by his family, by his King and by 
his people. “He died as he had lived,” says Sir Richard Temple, 
“in camp under canvas among his men and he is remembered to this 
day among the Marathas as the fighting Peshwa and the incarnation 
of Hindu energy.” 113 

Peshwa Baji Rao was incessantly fighting from the time of his 
assumption of the Peshwdship in 1720 right up to the moment of 
his death in 1740. At the time of his appointment, Shahu’s place 
as Chhatrapati of the Maratha State was in jeopardy; it was being 
challenged by his cousin ShambhujI, who was being abetted by the 
Subahdar of the Deccan. The Raja’s chiefs like Sendpati Dabhade, 
Angria, Bande, Gaikwar, Pawar, Bhosle were in a refractory mood. 
The Peshwd won his first big success at Palkhed over the Nizam 
(1728). By his swift movements he brought the Nizam to bay, made 
him agree to uphold the grants of Swaraj, chauth and sardeshmukhi 
of the six subahs of the Deccan in Raja Shahu’s name and not to 
harbour the Raja’s rival. By defeating Sendpati Dabhade in a deci¬ 
sive manner he put an end to the rebellious activities of the feuda¬ 
tory chiefs and within a few years came to overshadow the monarch 
himself. 

After thus securing the Deccan parts of the Maratha State, he 


97 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

4 >.'*•> ' 

turned his attention to expansion in Hindustan. He perceived, as 
few of his contemporaries did, that the far-flung empire of the Mughul 
had lost its vitality and was tottering to its fall, and he hastened 
to take the controlling hand in its administration. For this purpose 
he cleverly utilised the mutual jealousies and hatreds prevailing 
among the court factions at Delhi. Leading his armies beyond the 
Narmada he overran the Mughul provinces of Gujarat, Malwa and 
Bundelkhand, and to make an impression of his might on the emperor, 
made a dash to the imperial capital in the face of two hostile armies 
(1737). At Bhopal (1738) he again frustrated the enemy’s designs 
and established Maratha superiority at the Mughul Court. It was 
his policy of northward drive that brought the provinces from 
Punjab to Bengal under Maratha influence by 1760, and gave the 
Marathas an eminent position at the Mughul Court. If his successors 
had understood his policies well and carried them out fruitfully, the 
Marathas might have succeeded the Mughuls in the overlordship of 
the Indian continent. Peshw\a BajI Rao made a beginning and plant¬ 
ed Maratha power in Malwa and Bundelkhand. 

Some historians are critical about the Peshwa’s policy of north¬ 
ward expansion before the Nizam’s rule was crushed in the Deccan. 
The Peshwd had forced the Nizam to recognize Maratha claims of 
chauth and sardeshmukhi over his domains by the treaty of Mungi- 
Paithan (1728). He could not go beyond this. The Nizam’s terri¬ 
tory of Neerthadi, Gangathadi and Karnatak had been assigned by 
the Raja as spheres of their activity to the Pratinidhi f the Sarlash - 
kar and Fatesingh Bhosle. These three chiefs talked of raising 
forces and invading the Nizam’s territory. But their intentions re¬ 
mained on paper; they never ventured out on their own and challeng¬ 
ed the Nizam’s authority in their spheres. 114 It was only after Shahu’s 
death that the Peshwd, setting aside these carpet knights, could turn 
his attention to the Nizam’s provinces in the east and to Karnatak. 
But by that time the situation had become complicated by the ad¬ 
vent of the French and the English in Indian politics. 

If the security of the homeland was his objective in all the 
Peshwd’s Deccan campaigns, what made him go over to the offen¬ 
sive in Hindustan? Raj wade, Savarkar and other writers credit him 
with founding a Hindu empire supplanting the empire of the Cha- 
ghtai. This facile explanation is accepted by recent writers. For 
example, Panikkar, the scholar-diplomat, remarks, “if Shivaji was 
the founder of the Maratha state, BajI Rao could claim that he trans¬ 
formed what was a national state into an empire. He was the first man 
to see the possibilities of succeeding to the Grand Mughul’s estate 


98 


PESHWA BAJ! RAO I 


and building up a Maratha empire.” 115 After 1728 the Peshwa, no 
doubt, led his armies into Hindustan, occupied Malwa, exacted tri¬ 
bute from Rajput and Bundela chiefs and rode up to Delhi. With 
his success his demands went on rising. But contemporary evidence 
does not warrant the conclusion that the Peshwa aimed at supplant¬ 
ing Mughul rule. “The Raja,” wrote the Peshwa to his brother in 
May, 1739, “has no desire to become the emperor. He only wants 
to see that the Mughul empire is well administered. It is better far 
to renovate an old temple than to raise a new one.” 116 If the master 
(Chhatrapati ) did not entertain imperial designs, how can we expect 
them in his servant? 

In a letter written to Sawai Jay Singh after the Peshwa’s de¬ 
mise, his brother Chimnaji explains the Peshwa’s objectives as under: 
“The Peshwa wished nothing more than to administer well the im¬ 
perial government, earn the goodwill of the subject people, bring 
prosperity to the land, fill up the imperial treasury and earning re¬ 
nown by good administration of the empire, win favour of the em¬ 
peror. With this intent the Peshwa had established contacts with 
Khan Dauran through Sawai Jay Singh.” 117 Just as Clive laid the 
foundations of the British empire in India, the Peshwa may be re¬ 
garded as having made possible the raising of such a superstructure 
by his successors. But unlike Clive, there were no Hastings and 
Wellesleys among the Peshwa s successors; they lacked his vision and 
his military talents, and organizing capacity, and the Peshwa’s dream 
of a Hindu sovereignty, if there was any, remained unfulfilled. 

Peshwa BajI Rao had established very cordial relations with 
Sawai Jay Singh and the Bundela chiefs. But contemporary re¬ 
cords offer little evidence of a grand design of establishing Hindu-pad- 
pddshdhi or Hindu sovereignty. Powerful chiefs seizing provinces of 
the empire began to administer them independently while making 
profuse professions of loyalty to the throne. Such of them as were 
more ambitious also took part in the rivalry for leadership at the 
Court between the Turani and Hindustani factions. The Peshwa 
followed the example of these chiefs and managed to build up 
Maratha influence at the Mughul Court. In doing this he succeeded 
in fulfilling his master’s promise—that he would rush to the rescue of 
the empire when in danger, and achieving his own design of getting 
control over the outlying provinces. Large Maratha armies roamed 
over the provinces of the empire and exacted tribute, but no thought 
appears to have been given to problems of their good government and 
prosperity. There were possibilities of restoring Hindu sovereignty 
in India, but that probably formed no part of the policy of the 


99 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Maratha successors of ShivajI and certainly did not materialize. 

Sir Jadunath Sarkar attempts to give an explanation of the 
failure. “The Peshwa’s work,” according to him “was that of a con¬ 
queror, not that of a consolidator. He was a matchless cavalry leader 
but no statesman, no far-sighted reformer. The very idea of remodel¬ 
ling the political institutions of the Marathas and setting up of schools 
for training the new type of captains and civil servants required by 
the altered conditions of the Maratha State, and the sudden impact 
of European arts and arms upon the old Indian world, never entered 
BajI Rao’s head, nor into that of his more happily situated son and 
successor. 1 ' 18 

How ill-managed were the state-finances of the Peshwd is writ 
large over his entire correspondence. The one topic of discussion 
that runs through all these papers is raising of money to meet the 
expenditure of the army and of the Raja’s court and household. It 
would appear that the Peshwd was unable to meet the expenditure 
of his large armies from the income of his jdgirs and the tribute he 
exacted. By 1736 the debts were mounting to twenty lakhs of 
rupees. In one of his letters he expresses his desperation to his 
Guru: “Tied an expedition to Hindustan (1736); the expedition was 
successful, but brought in little gain. The army suffered great hard¬ 
ships. I have fallen into that hell of being beset by the creditors. 
To pacify the Sahukars and Shileddrs I am falling at their feet till 
I have rubbed off the skin of my forehead. The other chiefs like 
Dabhade, Gaikwar and Bande have managed to get hold of treasures 
worth crores, while I, your devotee, am in straitened circumstances, 
even for my daily needs.” 119 

But it would be unjust to hold Peshwd BajI Rao responsible for 
all the lapses and failures of the Maratha State in the 18th century. 
A great man like ShivajI with a prophetic vision who moulds society 
to his heart’s desire and raises its intellectual and moral standards, 
is a rare phenomenon. Most of the great men are representative of 
their times and reflect the hopes and aspirations of the people among 
whom they move. A few of them succeed in realizing and giving 
shape to these aspirations. In this sense Jadunath Sarkar calls BajI 
Rao a Carlylean hero as a man of action.” He gave the young 
Maratha State stability and secured its freedom and opened before 
it a wide prospect of expansion. 


100 


PESHWA BAJ! RAO I 


NOTES 

1 Sardesai, Kulkarni and Vakaskar, Kavyetihas Sangraha Patre Yadi Vagaire 
(2nd Ed. 1930), No. 496, p. 495. 

2 Chitnis, Thorle Shahu Mahdraj Charitra (1924), p. 47; Grant Duff, History of 
the Mahrattas, (1921), Vol. I, p. 432; SPD, XIV, No. 32, XVII, Nos. 46, 47; 
SPD, XXX, 171. 

3. Yusuf Husain, The First Nizam (1963), pp. 34-53. 

4 Pawar, A. G., Tdrdbai Papers (Persian), 8, 12, 13; Yusuf Husain, op. cit., 
pp. 58-60. 

5. Pawar, A. G., Indian Historical Records Commission, Report, XVII (1940), 
Some Documents bearing on Mughal Grants to Raja Shahu, p. 204; Grant 
Duff, op. cit., 337-38; Irvine, Later Mughals, Vol. I, pp. 382-84, 406-07. 

Mawji and Parasnis, Treaties, Engagements and Sanads, pp. 1-10. 

6- Irvine, William, Later Mughals, Vol. II, p. 137. 

7 SPD, XXX, pp. 267-71; Peshwd Rozkird, 1724 (MS.). 

8. Yusuf Husain, op. cit., p. 136. 

9 Purandare, K. V., Purandare Daftar, I, 77. 

10 Khare, G. H., Nivadak Lekha, (1972), pp. 127-32. 

10a. Jadhav Ghardnyachi Kaifiyat, p. 81. 

11 . Hadiqat-ul-Alam, p. 138. 

12. MS (Sir Jadunath Sarkar Collection). 

13 Vad, G. C., Bala ji Bajirao, Peshwd Dianes, pp. 228-29. 

14 SPD, X, 50. 

15 Shahu Charitra, (1924), pp. 77-78. 

16. SPD, XXX, pp. 282-83. 

16a. SPD, XV, pp. 83-84. 

17 Field Marshal Montgomery of Alamein, A History of Warfare, (1968), p. 406. 

18 Kavyetihas Sangraha Patre Yadi Vagaire, (1930), p. 43. 

19 Elphinstone, History of India, p. 689; Mardtha History Seminar, (Kolhapur, 
1971), p. 157. 

20 Grant Duff, op. cit., (1921), Vol. I, p. 342. 

21. SPD, XXX, Nos. 349, 354; Bombay Gazetteer, Vol.. I, Pt. I, pp. 303-04. 

22 SPD, XXX, 312; Commissariat, A History of Gujarat (1957), Vol. II, pp. 410-15; 
Irvine, op. cit., Vol. II. pp. 170-71. 

23 Shahu Chhatrapati Diaries, 105; Itihas Samgraha, p. 11; Lele, Dhdr Sams- 
thdncha Itihas, pp. 16-30; Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. I, Pt. I, p. 307. 

24 Shahu Diaries, 105. 

25. SPD, XV, pp. 84-85. 

26 Shahu Diaries, 159. 

27 SPD, XXX. pp. 296-97: Gense & Banaji, Gaikwads of Baroda, Vol. I, p. 10; 
SPD, XII. Nos. 27, 32. 

27a. SPD, XV, p. 82. 

28. SPD, X, No. 72. 

29 SPD, XII, 42-6: Dabhade Ballad in BISM Quarterly, Vol. XIII, (1933), and 
Surat Factory Records, p. 614, Daniel Innes to Henry Lowther, 7 April 1731. 

30 Grant Duff, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 377. 

31 Siyar-ul-Mutakherin (Paniiii Ed.), p. 235: Elphinstone, op. cit., p. 687 and 
BISMQ, (1940), pp. 11-12. 

32 Shahu Charitra (1924), pp. 88. 

33. Parasnis, D. B.. Brahmendra Swamiche Charitra, p. 23. 

34 Bombay Council to Directors. 14 April. 1733; Shahu Charitra, pp. 88-89. 

35 Baji Rao Ballal. Roznishi (MS). 

36 SPD., Ill, 2. 

37 SPD, XXXIII. 10, 40: Purandare Daftar, 102-06. 

38 Kavyetihas Sangraha Patre Yadi Vagaire (1930). 22. 

39 SPD, III. 64-65, 69: Forrest. G. W.. Home Series, II. p. 51. 

40 Ibid. 

41 SPD , III, 7: Raj wade. MIS.. VI, 86; Purandare Daftar, I. 105. 

42 SPD, XXX. 95, XXXIII. 66: Rajwade. op. cit.. HI. 305. 

43 SPD. Ill, 78-80. 1 

44 SPD. XXXIII. 131. 

45 SPD. III. 179. 192. 


101 



THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


46. Ibid. 

47. Mawji and Parasnis, Treaties, Engagements & Sanads, pp. 107-113. 

48- Khafi Khan’s Muhtakhab-ul-lubab in Elliot and Dowson’s The History of 
India, Vol. VTi, p. 395. Hereafter referred to as Khafi Khan. 

49. Irvine, W., op. cit ., II, p. 163. 

50. Sarkar, Sir Jadunath, Aurangzib, V, p. 382. 

51- Sarkar, Sir Jadunath, op. cit., p. 385; Shiva Charitra Pradeep, Gadadhar 
Pralhad Shakavali, pp. 67-68. 

52. The claim made by Maratha writers like Sardesai, Raj wade and others that 
the Peshwd aimed at establishing Hindupadpddshahi or Hindu empire, ap¬ 
pears chauvinistic and seems to be going against facts. Shahu concluded 
treaties as a vassal of the empire and like other powerful vassals, attempted 
to influence Mughul politics. The Peshwds continued the policy and always 
spoke of defending, not replacing, the Mughul power. 

53-. Malcolm, Sir John, A Memoir of Central India, (1880 Ed.), Vol. I, pp. 44-46, 
50-51, 59. John Malcolm, who wrote his Memoir during the regime of Lord 
Hastings (1814-23) is a much more reliable guide to understand the senti¬ 
ments of the local people of Malwa than writers of modern times; Also See 
Holkar Kaifiyat, pp. 8-9. The Kaifiyat bears out what Malcolm says. 

54. SPD, XIII, 15-17, 23-28, 31-35 and Jaipur Akhbars. 

55. Sarkar, Sir Jadunath, History of Jaipur, (MS.). 

56. Ibid. 


57. SPD, X, 66. 

58- Shahu Roznishi, 198. 

59- SPD, XIII, 10, 22, 23, 30, 33, 45; Parasnis, D. B., Brahmendra Charitra, 

60. JASB,' 1878 (IV) pp. 297-98. 

61. SPD, XIII, 45, Rajwade MIS, in, 14; SPD, XXX, p. 291. 

62. SPD, XIV, 9; Mawji and Parasnis, Treaties, Engagements and Sanads, p. 32; 
B. D. Gupta, Maratha Bundela Relations. Maratha History Seminar, (Kolha- 

. pur), 1971, pp. 127-38. 

63. Raghubir Singh, Malwa in Transition, p. 194, 222; Irvine, op. cit., Vol. II. 

64. SPD, XIII, 54-56; SPD, XXX, pp. 301-07; KSPY (1930 ed.), 496; Itihds Sam- 
graha, Peshwd Daftar, p. 127, 203, 208. 

65. SPD, XIV, 65, SPD, XIV, 1, 2, 21-23, SPD, XV, 6. 

66. SPD, XIV, 24-27, XXII, 285; Siyar-ul-Mutakherin, p. 244 and Rustam Ali in 
Elliot & Dowson, History, Vol. VIII, pp. 50-51. 

67. Siyar-ul-Mutakherin (Panini Ed.), p. 242. 

68. SPD, XIV, 47. 

69. SPD, XIV, 39. 

70. SPD, (New Series), I, 27. 

71. SPD, XXX, 142-43. 

72. SPD, XIV, 50. 


73: SPD, XV, pp. 93-94 and Grant Duff, op. cit., Vol. I (1921 ed.), pp. 390-91 

74. SPD, XV, pp. 95-96. P 

75. Ibid, should be dated 29 Sept. 1736. 

76. Rajwade, MIS, VI, 95-97. 

77. SPD, XV, pp. 95-96. 

78 . SPD, X. 27; XXII, 339, 341. 

79. SPD, XV, 18, 47. 

80 Peshwd Rozkird and Elliot and DowSon, History, Vol. VTII, p 53- SPD XV 89 

81. SPD, XV, 17, 22, 27-28, 47; SPD, XXX, 198, 365-66. ’ ' ' 

82. Brahmendra Charitra, Correspondence, pp. 21-30. 

83- Grant Duff, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 393; Br. Charitra, Corresp., No. 27, p. 24. 

84, Br: Charitra, Corresp ., pp. 24-30; Siyar-ul-Mutakherin (Panini Ed ) pn 396-97- 
SPD, XV, 37, 47. pp. o»oy/, 


85- SPD, XV, 29, 47; Elliot and Dowson, op., cit., Vol. VIII p 55 
86. SPD, XV, 23, 79. 


87. SPD, XV, 29, 33; also Setu Madhav Rao Pagdi’s article in Nav Bharat Julv 1966 

88. SPD, XV, 44, 45, 48, 49. 

89. SPD, XV, 53; Irvine W., Later Mughals, Vol. II, p. 301. 

90. SPD, XV, 56, 58; Br.' Charitra, No. 134. 


91. Ibid. 

92. Duraha Sarai is about 20 miles s w. of Bhopal. 


102 




PESHWA BAJI RAO I 


93 The best authority for the campaign is Peshwa’s letter printed in Brahmendra 
Swamiche Charitra, Corresp., Nos. 33-36; also SPD, XV, 56, 59-60, 66. 

94. Brahmendra Charitra, Corresp., No. 35. 

95. Hart, Liddell, The War in Outline, p. 251. 

96. Br. Charitra, Corresp., No. 35, pp. 52-53. 

97. Irvine, op. cit., Vol. II, pp. 330-50; Br. Charitra, pp. 117-18. Lockhart, Nadir 
Shah, pp. 121-154. 

98 Rajwade, MIS, VI, 131; also Anand Ram Mukhlis, Tazkira, pp. 81-90. 

99. Irvine, W., op. cit., Vol. II, pp. 364-71; SPD, XXII, p. 193; also SPD, XV, 
pp. 71-6, 80; SPD, XXX, pp. 225-226, 229; Rajwade, MIS, VI, pp. 131, 
133-34; Brahmendra Charitra, Corresp., Appendix 41-42. 

100 SPD, XXX, 226; Hanway, Travels in Persia, Vol. IV, p. 142; Lockhart, 
Nadir Shah, p. 139. 

101. Br. Charitra, Corresp., No. 41. 

102. Salsette Chronicle, pp. 2-4; Grose, A Voyage to the Indies , p. 69; English Fac¬ 
tories in India, Vol. XI, p. 144; SPD, XVI, 11, 16, etc. 

103. SPD, XVI, 4, 5, 8 and Salsette Chronicle pp. 10-12, 24. Br. Charitra, Corresp., 
47. 

104. SPD, XXII, 348-50; Public Deptt. Diary, X, pp. 71-73; SPD, XXXIV, 23, 24; 
Salsette Chronicle, p. 37. 

105. SPD, XVI, 42; SPD, XXXIV, 20, 21, 25. 

106- For description of Bassein fort, see Thana Gazetteer (Old Ed.), Vol. XIV, 
pp. 28-34; SPD, XVI, 42, 44-45; SPD, XXXIV, 25; also Br. Charitra Corresp ., 
No. 52. 

'*'107. SPD, xxn, 359; Rajwade, MIS, VI, 114-15. Pissurlencar, Como Se perdue 
Bacaim. 

108 Pissurlencar, op. cit., p. 58; Danvers, History of the Portuguese in India. 

109. SPD, XVI, 147, 150. 

110. For an account of the final assault, see SPD, XVI, 162; Br. Charitra Corresp ., 
No. 52; also Forrest, Maratha Series, pp. 36-40; SPD, XXII, pp. 191-92. 

111. SPD. IX, 30-36; SPD, XXX, 363; Rajwade, MIS, VI, pp. 30-31. 

112. Br. Charitra Corresp., 55; Purandare Daftar, I, 138-39; SPD, XXII, 144; Grant 
Duff, History, I, (1921 Ed.), p. 410. 

113. Temple, Sir Richard, Oriental Experiences, I, p. 390. 

114. SPD, XVII, 46, 47; SPD XXX, 171; Shdhu Charitra, p. 47. 

115- Srinivasan, C. K., Baji Rao I , Introduction. 

116- Br. Charitra, p. 119. 

117. Khare, G. H., Hingne Daftar, I, p. 13. 

118- Sarkar’s Introduction to Sardesai’s Peshwd Bap Rao I. 

119- Br. Swamiche Charitra, Corresp., No. 32. 


103 



CHAPTER V 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

(a) Bengal Subah: 

Within a few years after Aurangzib’s death in 1707 Bengal be¬ 
came completely independent of imperial control under Murshid 
Quli Khan. At the time of Aurangzib’s death Murshid Quli Kh§n 
was naib ndzim or Deputy Governor of Bengal and full Governor 
of Orissa, as well as diwdn or revenue chief of these two provinces. 
On his accession to the throne in February 1713, Farrukh-siyar con¬ 
firmed him in the diwani of Bengal and, in September 1713, made 
him also Deputy Governor of Bengal and on 6 May, 1714, he received 
the subdhdari of Orissa with the title of Jafar Khan. In September, 
1717, he was made full subdhdar of Bengal with the title of Mutaman- 
ul-Mulk Alauddaulah Jafar Khan Bahadur Nasiri, Nasir Jang. He 
transferred the capital of Bengal from Dacca to Murshidabad, which 
was named after him. 

By moving the imperial court, Murshid Quli secured on 11 
September, 1711, an order by which the collectorship of customs of 
Hugli port and the faujddri of the Midnapur district, then held by 
Zia-ud-din Khan was again placed under the control of the provincial 
diwdn, from whom these had been removed and placed directly under 
the central government two years before. Murshid Quli could not 
dislodge Zia-ud-din from Hugli. But when Zia-ud-din received 
information on 22 April, 1713, that the emperor had appointed him 
diwdn of the western Karnatak he left Hugli at the end of June and 
the man appointed by Murshid Quli got possession of it. 1 

« 

As a strict ruler Murshid Quli sought to enforce his authority 
in various ways and established an efficient administration. He 
effectively reorganized the revenue system by converting all the 
officers’ jagirs in Bengal into Khdlsa directly under the Crown col¬ 
lectors and by introducing the ijara system according to which con¬ 
tracts were given for collection of revenue. “In the second or third 
generation, these contractors came to be called zaminddrs and many 
of them were dignified with the titles of Rajas and Maharajas, though 
not of princely birth, but merely glorified civil servants paid by a 
percentage on their collection”. Thus a new landed aristocracy was 
created in Bengal, whose “position was confirmed and made heredi- 


104 


DISRUPTION OF .THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

tary by Lord Cornwallis”. 2 The defaulters in collecting revenue 
were treated with draconic severity and so the revenue contractors 
tried to make collections in time. 

Increase of revenue was also due to Murshid Qull’s economy in 
administration and maintenance of internal peace by him. For re¬ 
venue collection he divided the whole of Bengal into thirteen chaklds 
or circles, ‘which were subdivided into thirteen tracts under collec¬ 
tion by jagfcrddrs and twenty-five areas reserved as Khdlsa (crown- 
land) farmed out to contractors’. 3 

While some of the zaminddrs enjoyed Murshid Qull’s favour and 
three ruling houses, that is, those of Cooch Bihar, Tipperah and the 
hill Raja of Jaintia paid tribute, Sitaram Ray of Bhusna pargand who 
had much influence in bis area, was crushed by him in February- 
March 1714, and thus disappeared the last Hindu kingdom in Bengal. 

To improve economic prosperity of the province, Murshid Qull 
showed much indulgence to the traders of all categories, but was 
somewhat partial*to the Mughuls (i.e., Persians). The Dutch and 
the French East India Companies were not in good condition, and 
the Ostend Company, started in Austrian Netherlands by a charter 
from the emperor in 1723 had its privileges suspended under diplo¬ 
matic pressure for seven years in 1727. The English East India 
Company secured some important concessions by sending an embassy 
to the Delhi Court under John Surman, and by emperor Farrukh- 
siyar’s farman of 1717, which permitted them to trade in Bengal, 
free of all duties, subject to the payment of Rs. 3,000 per annum, and 
to rent 38 villages of Calcutta. Though Murshid Qull opposed the 
grant of additional villages to the English, prosperity of Calcutta in¬ 
creased so that it came to have a population of 1,00,000 by 1735. 

Some contemporary Muslim writers have bestowed high praise 
on Murshid Qull. Writing in 1763, Salimullah, the author of Tarikh - 
i-Bdngdld,, observes: 

“Since the time of Shaista Khan there had not appeared in 
any part of Hindustan an dmir who could be compared with 
Jafar Khan for zeal in propagation of the faith; for wisdom in 
the establishment of laws and regulations; for munificence and 
liberty in the encouragement and support given to men of family 
and eminence; for rigid and impartial justice in redressing 
wrongs and punishing offenders. His judicial decisions were 
rational and proper.. 

“He despised all kinds of luxury, and particularly in dress 
and food. He possessed very extensive learning, and paid great 


105 



THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


respect to men who were eminent for their piety or erudition. 
During his government, the meanest peasant was secured from 
injustice and oppression. Two days in the week he admi¬ 

nistered justice in person and was so impartial in his decisions, 
and rigid in the execution thereof that no one dared to commit 
oppression.” 

Twenty-five years after Salimullah, the author of Riyaz-us-Saldtin 
added: ‘‘Never in his life did he take any consort except his one 
married wife. Such was his delicacy of feeling that he did not ad¬ 
mit into his harem any eunuch or any woman who was not of known 
character and trustworthiness”. 

After critically examining these observations Sir Jadunath 
Sarkar expresses the following view: “A puritan in his private life, 
strictly attentive to his public duties as he understood them, gravely 
decorous and rigidly orthodox as befitted a favourite disciple of 
Aurangzlb, and a propagator of his faith as ordained in his scrip¬ 
tures, Murshid Quli Khan presents one side of his character in a 
brilliant light. But his heart was cold and his sympathies narrow; 
his calculating vindictiveness, his religious bigotry, and his utter 
lack of warm, all-embracing benevolence, denied this conscientious 
civil servant the right to be ranked as a statesman or even as a truly 
great soul.” 4 

After the death of Murshid Quli Khan, on 30 June, 1727, with¬ 
out any male issue, his son-in-law Shuja-ud-din Muhammad Khan, 
who had been Deputy Governor of Orissa, ascended the masnad of 
Bengal. He had married Murshid Quli Khan’s daughter named 
Zinat-un-nisa, and had a son through her named Sarfaraz. Soon after 
his accession Shuja-ud-din appointed his friends and kinsmen to the 
principal offices of his government. His son, Sarfaraz, remained as the 
nominal diwdn of Bengal; his second son, Muhammad Taqi Khan 
(born of a wife different from the daughter of Murshid Quli Khan) 
was Deputy Governor of Orissa and his son-in-law, Murshid Quli II, 
was appointed Deputy Governor of Jahangiirnagar (Dacca). ‘All 
Vardi and his three nephews got high posts. Alam Chand, previous¬ 
ly diwdn of Shuja-ud-din in the Orissa Government, was now ap¬ 
pointed diwdn of the Khdlsd at Murshidabad and got from the im¬ 
perial court a personal mansab of 1,000 with the title of Rdy-i-rdydn , 
which had not been so long conferred on any Bengal officer. In 
managing all important affairs of administration Shuja-ud-din follow¬ 
ed the counsel of ‘All Vardi, of his brother Haji Ahmad, of Rdy-i- 
rdydn , Alam Chand, a loyal officer and an able financier, and of Jagat 


106 



DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Seth Fateh Chand, the famous banker of Murshidabad, who, being 
owner of vast wealth, had much influence in Bengal politics. 

During the early part of his regime Shuja-ud-din paid due at¬ 
tention to the affairs of administration and sought to promote wel¬ 
fare of his subjects. He was charitable to his old friends, kind and 
bountiful towards his officers and was hospitable towards those who 
happened to come to Murshidabad. With due regard for justice, he 
dispensed it impartially. Ghulam Husain, the author of Siytir-ul- 
mutakherin, observes: “He was so impartial an observer of justice, 
and a judge of so much benignity, that the poorest suitor was sure 
of being in his presence upon a footing with his very son; and the 
fearful sparrow, certain of finding in his bosom a shelter against the 
hawk’s pursuit, flew towards him with a perfect reliance on his good¬ 
ness. People acquainted with history thought they lived in Naushir- 
van’s reign”. 5 

But some vices in Shuja-ud-din’s private character impaired the 
efficiency of his administration towards its close. Supreme power 
fell into the hands of his advisers, HajI Ahmad, Alam Chand and 
Jagat Seth Fateh Chand, who degenerated into a clique of self- 
seekers and fomented intrigues and conspiracies to serve their own 
interests at the cost of government. 

Shuja-ud-din created four divisions for the administration of the 
Bengal subah, each being placed under a Deputy Governor. Wes¬ 
tern, Central and a portion of Northern Bengal formed the Central 
Division; the Dacca division comprised Eastern and Southern Bengal, 
a small portion of Northern Bengal, Sylhet and Chittagong; the third 
division was Bihar, and Orissa was the fourth division. Bihar was 
efficiently governed by its Deputy Governor, ‘All Vardi Khan; Dacca 
was administered well by Murshid Quli II, son-in-law of Shuja-ud- 
din, with devotedness and ability of his deputy Mir Habib. But some 
official changes in Dacca after Murshid Quli IPs transfer to Orissa on 
the death of Muhammad Taqi Khan caused deterioration in its ad¬ 
ministration, and Jaswant Ray, who served as its diwan for some 
time, resigned. The Rajahs of Cooch Bihar and Dinajpur were re¬ 
duced to submission. Badi-uz-zaman, the Afghan zamindar of Bir- 
bhum, was also brought under the Nawab’s control. 

Shuja-ud-din had to remit a sum of Rs. 1,25,00,000 a year to the 
Imperial Government at Delhi. 6 The standard collections received 
from the zarniiiddrs amounted, as before, to Rs. 1,42,45,561. Shuja- 
ud-din added to it a further amount of Rs. 19,14,095 by imposition 


107 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


of ahwnbs or additional imposts following an old practice of Murshid 
Qull Khan. 

Shuja-ud-din strictly asserted his authority over the European 
trading Companies in Bengal like the English, the Dutch and the 
French and some minor ones like the Austrian, the Polish, the Portu¬ 
guese, the Danish and the Swedish. The English described him as 
a “rash and powerful subah”, and did not consider it advisable “to 
risk an open rupture with him”. 7 They had to satisfy him occasional¬ 
ly by payment of large sums of money. 

After the death of Shuja-ud-din on 30 March, 1739, his body was 
interred in his favourite garden on the west bank of the river Bhagi- 
rathl. His son Sarfaraz ascended the masnad of Bengal and follow¬ 
ing the death-bed instructions of his father, he retained the old 
officers, the more important of whom were Haji Ahmad as the chief 
diwan, and Rdy-i-rdyan Alam Chand as diwdn of the khalsd. Ex¬ 
cessively addicted to debauchery Sarfaraz did not possess the essen¬ 
tial qualities needed for the ruler of a state and indulged in licen¬ 
tiousness. For all this he had to pay a heavy price by losing his life 
and the masnad of Bengal. The masnad was seized by ‘All Vardl. 

From humble positions in the government of Shuja-ud-din, ‘All 
Vardi Khan, originally known as Mirza Muhammad ‘All, rose gra¬ 
dually to higher ones by dint of his tact and ability. In 1728, Shuja- 
ud-din appointed him faujdar of the chakla Akbarnagar (Rajmahal), 
which was a place of historic importance, 73 in different periods. All 
Vardi governed this area efficiently securing peace and prosperity to 
its people. ‘All Vardi’s brother, Haji Ahmad remained at Murshidabad 
as one of the chief advisers of Shuja-ud-din; his eldest son Muham¬ 
mad Raza (later on called Nawazish Muhammad Khan) was appoin¬ 
ted Paymaster of the Nawab’s troops and Superintendent of Customs 
at Murshidabad and his second son Aga Muhammad Said (later on 
known as Said Ahmad Khan) was appointed jaujddr of Rungpur. 

There was a fortunate turn in the career of ‘All Vardi with his 
appointment as Deputy Governor of Bihar in 1733. Bihar was then 
in a disturbed state due to the weak administration for about seven 
years of its old Governor Fakhr-ud-daulah. ‘Ali Vardi restored peace 
and order in Bihar by some vigorous steps and measures of concilia¬ 
tion. He suppressed the disturbances with firmness. Its zamindars, 
who had not been quite amenable to the authority of the Nawab’s 
government, were reduced to submission. They were the Bhojpuri 
zamindars of Shahabad, Raja Sundar Singh of Tikari in the Gaya 
district, Kamgar Khan May! of Narhat-Samai, 8 and the Rajas of 


108 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Bettia and Bhanwara. 9 He then suppressed the Chakwars, a brave 
and semi-independent Hindu tribe, who with their stronghold at 
Sambhoo in the Begusarai district, had defied the authority of the 
emperors of Delhi and the subahdars of Bengal. ‘All Vardi also 
chastised the turbulent Banjaras who, disguising themselves as 
traders and travellers, had been devastating different parts of Bihar. 

Weakness of Delhi authority, inefficiency of Sarfaraz and machi¬ 
nations of HajI Ahmad at Murshidabad in collaboration with Rdy-U 
ray an and Jagat Seth Fateh Chand excited ‘All Vardl’s ambition to 
seize the masnad of Bengal for himself. With this object he left 
Patna for Murshidabad towards the end of March 1740. Sarfaraz 
was soon convinced of ‘Ali Vardl’s infidelity and left Murshidabad to 
check his advance. In a furious contest between the armies of the 
two parties at Gheria 10 on 10 April, 1740, there were heavy casual¬ 
ties in Sarfaraz’s army and he died from a chance shot on his fore¬ 
head. Marching from Gheria to Murshidabad, ‘Ali Vardi formally 
ascended the masnad. He secured imperial confirmation of his new 
position by remitting huge amounts of money to Delhi. He tried his 
best to assuage the wounded feelings of the relatives of Sarfaraz. 
Khwaja Abdul Karim writes that “by behaving kindly and being on 
friendly terms with all, by distributing money and by acting with 
discretion, ‘All Vardi gained over to his cause all men living far and 
near.” 103 

‘All Vardi made some changes in the offices of the government. 
He appointed his eldest nephew Nawazlsh Muhammad Khan diwan 
of crown-lands and Deputy Governor of Dacca with Husain Qull as 
his deputy. The Deputy Governorship of Bihar was given to his 
youngest nephew Zain-ud-din Ahmad, who had been married to his 
daughter Amina Begam (mother of Siraj-ud-daulah), ‘Abdul ‘Ali 
Khan, a cousin of ‘All Vardi, was placed in charge of the government 
of Tirhut in addition to his duties as the revenue-collector of the par- 
gands of Bihar and Biswak. Mir Muhammad Jafar Khan was ap¬ 
pointed Paymaster of the army in place of ‘All Vardl’s brother-in-law, 
Qasim ‘Ali Khan was made faujddr of Rungpur, and Nurullah Beg 
Khan was made Paymaster of the new army. Ataullah Khan, a son- 
in-law of HajI Ahmad and faujddr of Rajmahal, was appointed as 
faujddr of Bhagalpur also. ‘All Vardl’s new position was challenged 
in Orissa by its Deputy Governor Rustam Jang (originally known as 
Murshid Qull II). But the latter was ultimately overpowered and 
fed to the Deccan. 

The Bengal Revolution of 1739-40 is a clear instance of the 
Vitiated atmosphere of the period, and of the result of inordinate 


109 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


ambition, treachery and ingratitude. But the masnad of Bengal did 
not prove to be a bed of roses for ‘All Vardl. The repeated incursions 
of the Marathas into Bengal and Bihar from 1742 to 1751 harassed 
him very much, subjected its people to various oppressions and seri¬ 
ously affected its economic condition. The Maratha invasions were 
complicated by the rebellions of his Afghan Generals, Mustafa Khan, 
Shamsher Khan, Sardar Khan and the Afghan soldiers in 1745 and 
1748, and added to his troubles. During the Afghan insurrection of 
1748, ‘Ah VardTs nephew Zain-ud-din and his brother Haji Ahmad 
were assassinated and Patna was under Afghan usurpation for full 
three months which caused untold miseries to its people. The 
Afghans were ultimately vanquished by ‘Ah Vardi in a battle with 
them at Ranichak or Ranisarai, near Barh, in 1748. ‘All Vardi re¬ 
turned to Murshidabad in November, 1748, after staying at Patna 
for six months to arrange for its administration. He made his grand¬ 
son Siraj-ud-daulah nominal Deputy Governor of Bihar, while the 
actual work of administration was entrusted to Raja Janakiram as 
Siraj-ud-daulah’s Deputy. Janakiram worked in this capacity till his 
death in 1752, when Raja Ramnarain was appointed Deputy Gover¬ 
nor of Bihar. 

Worn out with incessant toil and weighed down with age, at the 
age of 75, ‘All Vardi Khan concluded a treaty with the Marathas in 
May or June, 1751, on the following terms: 

(1) Mir Habib was to be henceforth regarded as Deputy Gov¬ 
ernor of Orissa on behalf of the Nawab. 

(2) From October, 1751, twelve lakhs of rupees were to be paid 
annually to the Marathas from Bengal revenue as the 
chauth of that suhdh in two instalments, on condition that 
the Marathas would never set their foot again within the 
dominions of Bengal subdh. 

(3) The river Subarnarekha near Jalesar was fixed as the boun¬ 
dary of the Bengal subdh, and the Marathas agreed never 
to cross it again. 

Notwithstanding the odds noted above, ‘AH Vardi governed his 
province ably and with prudence and foresight. In his private life 
he was free from the prevailing vices of the ruling and aristocratic 
classes of those days. A contemporary historian, Ghulam Husain 
thus writes in high terms about him: “A prudent, keen general and 
a valorous soldier; there are hardly any qualifications, which he did 
not possess”. 11 Another contemporary writer Karam ‘All, author of 
Muzaffamdmah, equally praises him. With due allowance for exag- 

110 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

geration in the views of such writers who were obliged to the Nawfib 
in several ways, one can well assert that “he was, after all, a tactful 
and strong governor, who tried to infuse spirit and vigour into every 
branch of his administration and to serve the interest of the gov¬ 
erned”. 12 

“All VardI never realized money forcibly from the people, and 
the mode of collection was not arbitrary. But to meet extraordinary 
financial needs during the first eleven years of his government, when 
the revenue collections fell short of the standard assessments, he 
took ‘casual aids’ from the European traders and the principal zemin¬ 
dars of the province. ‘All Vardl’s attitude towards the European 
trading companies in Bengal was strict and he asserted his authority 
over them. But he was not in any way oppressive to them as he 
realized the importance of encouraging commerce in the interest of 
the State.” 

‘All VardI died on 10 April, 1750, and was succeeded as the subah - 
dar of Bengal by his favourite grandson and heir-designate Siraj-ud- 
daulah whose regime forms a turning point in the history, not only 
of Bengal, but of India as a whole. He had enemies among his near 
relations who coveted the Bengal masnad or influence through it. 
They were his cousin Shaukat Jang, who had been Naumb of Purnea 
since 27 March and his mother’s eldest sister Ghasiti Begam, who had 
amassed immense wealth which she had kept with herself, well guard¬ 
ed by armed retainers, in the castle of Motijhil, a few miles north 
of the city of Murshidabad. Siraj-ud-daulah’s most formidable enemy 
was Mir Ja‘far ‘Ali Khan, the Commander-in-Chief of the army. 
Siraj-ud-daulah “came to his long assigned throne in a house divided 
against itself, with a hostile faction in the army and a disaffected sub¬ 
ject population.” 13 

Soon after his accession Siraj-ud-daulah seized the huge wealth 
of Ghasiti Begam to curb her ambition for acquiring influence in 
government. He removed the traitor Mir Ja‘far from the post of 
bakhshi or Commander of the army and appointed in his place the 
brave and devoted Mir Madan. Another faithful and able officer, 
Mohan Lai, was made peshkdr of the diwdn-rkhanah. 

All this was followed by Siraj-ud-daulah’s rupture with the 
English. Siraj-ud-daulah had three specific grievances against the 
English. One was that they had “built strong fortifications and dug 
a large ditch in the King’s dominion contrary to the laws of the coun¬ 
try”. The second one was that they had “abused the privilege of 
their dastaks by granting them to such as were in no way entitled to 


111 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

I 

them, from which practice the King has suffered greatly in the re¬ 
venues of his customs”. His third complaint was that they had given 
protection in Calcutta to some of the King’s subjects and instead 
of giving them up on demand they allowed such persons to shelter 
themselves within their bounds from the hands of justice. He ex¬ 
pressed that he “would pardon their fault” if they promised “to re¬ 
move the foregoing complaints of their conduct” and agreed “to trade 
upon the same terms as other merchants did in the time of Murshid 
Qull Khan”. Certainly the charges were not baseless. The English 
in Calcutta also insulted Siraj-ud-daulah’s messenger Narayan Singh 
or Narayan Das. 

The conflict between the English and the Nawab soon started. 
On 4 June, 1756, the factory of the English at Kasimbazar was 
stormed by the Nawab’s soldiers, and starting for Calcutta on 
5 June, the Nawab captured Calcutta on 20 June. Already on 
19 June, Governor Drake with some of his followers had fled from 
Calcutta to Fulta and some Englishmen were made prisoners. But 
Hoi well’s story of the ‘Black Hole’ has been proved by modern re¬ 
searches to be untrue. 

Siraj-ud-daulah also made himself secure from the design of 
Shaukat Jang who being instigated by Mir Ja‘far, sought to contest 
the subahdarship of Bengal. By marching from Calcutta towards 
Purnea, on 24 September, 1756, Siraj-ud-daulah defeated and killed 
him in a battle at Manihari on 16 October, 1756. After this Siraj- 
ud-daulah returned to Calcutta “in gold-decorated boats with every 
pomp”. 14 

As the historian Ghulam Husain writes, Siraj-ud-daulah was 
now at the zenith of his power and prosperity. But his star soon 
began to pale. 

On hearing of the disaster of the English in Calcutta, the Madras 
Council sent there reinforcement of troops under Admiral Watson 
and Colonel Clive, who recovered Calcutta by the first week of 
February, 1757. Adverse circumstances now forced Siraj-ud-daulah 
to conclude the treaty of ‘Alinagar on 9 February, 1757, by which 
trade rights and factories of the English East India Company were 
restored to them, and restitution apd compensation money were pro¬ 
mised by the Nawab to the Company, its servants and tenants. Fur¬ 
ther, the English were granted permission by him to fortify Calcutta 
and to coin sicca rupees. Clive rightly described the terms of this 
treaty as both “honourable and advantageous for the Company”. 1 ' 5 


112 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


(b) Awadh (Oudh) 

The subah of Awadh also became virtually independent of the 
decadent Mughul empire. Jurisdiction of the subah of Awadh then 
extended not only over Awadh but also over Banaras to the east of 
it, a good part of the territory to its west and some districts near 
Allahabad and Kanpur. Sa‘adat Khan, an immigrant from Khora- 
san and originally known as Mir Muhammad Amin, was the founder 
of the kingdom of Awadh. After being in Sarbuland Khan’s service 
(1710-12), he joined Farrukh-siyar’s service, became faujddr of 
Hindaun and Bayana, and was made a noble on 9 October, 1720. He 
was appointed Governor, first of Agra (1720-22) and then of Awadh 
(September, 1722), and extended Awadh’s jurisdiction over Bana¬ 
ras, Ghazipur, Jaunpur and Chunar. He gradually acquired power 
and fame and was summoned to Delhi at the time of Nadir’s invasion. 
But, for some undesirable transactions with Nadir, he committed 
suicide on 20 March, 1739. Sa‘.adat Khan, a prominent Mughul 
noble, was a successful soldier and a wise ruler. The next Governor 
of Awadh was Sa‘adat Khan’s nephew and son-in-law, Safdar Jang 
(1739-54). 

After the first Maratha invasion of Bengal in 1742 emperor 
Muhammad Shah asked Safdar Jang to protect Bihar, and if neces¬ 
sary, to enter into Bengal. So, he started from Faizabad for Bihar 
in December, 1742. He entered Patna City on 7 December 1742 
and encamped at Bankipur, five miles west of it. From this place 
he began to behave as the virtual ruler of Bihar. At this ‘All Vardi 
requested the Mughul emperor to recall him from Bihar. So Safdar 
Jang left Bihar on 15 January 1743 and returned to his dominion 
early in February. 

Safdar Jang was appointed Vazir of the Mughul emperor in 
1748. Safdar Jang’s position was “one of unusual difficulty”. He 
was “considered an interloper by the old nobility whose pedigree 
went back to the reign of Aurangzlb or even earlier”. 16 He had to 
meet opposition of Nizam-ul-Mulk’s son and grandson, of Javid Khan, 
the “real power behind the throne”, and of the sons of the late va&ir 
Qamar-ud-din. He had contests with the Afghans (1748-52), was de¬ 
feated at Ram Chatauni in September 1750, and made peace with the 
Rohillas and Bangashes under orders of the emperor at the beginning 
of April 1752. Safdar Jang got his opponent Javid Khan murdered 
in 1753. Safdar Jang had no administrative capacity or statesmanly 
vision. He tried to grasp everything and became extremely domi¬ 
neering after the murder of Javid Khan. All this engendered Court 
conspiracy against Safdar Jang and caused a civil war between the 

113 

M.S.—(I 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


emperor and Safdar Jang from March 1753 and ultimately he de¬ 
parted for Awadh in November 1753. Thus ended Safdar Jang’s 
inglorious period of vazirship. But he gave “a lasting peace to 
Awadh and Allahabad; broken only by temporary Bangash occupa¬ 
tion of a part of the subdh and a few local, spasmodic outbreaks in 
the beginning of his rule.” 17 

Safdar Jang died in October 1754 and his son Shuja-ud-daulah 
became subdhdar of Awadh. Shuja-ud-daulah’s personal character 
was not at all commendable. M. Jean Law wrote about him thus 
from personal observation in 1758-61: “Shuja is the most handsome 
person I have ever seen in India. He towers above the Vazir (Imad- 
ul-Mulk) by his figure, the latter being small and I believe also by 
the qualities of his heart, but he has to yield to him (Imad-ul-Mulk) 
in all that relates to the spirit. He is occupied in nothing but plea¬ 
sures, hunting and the most violent exercises”. 18 Later, an English 
observer, not biased against Shuja-ud-daulah wrote: “Shuja-ud- 
daulah was not endowed with the genius of a soldier. He wanted that 
valour, or courage, which is ever shown in the event of common 
danger. He evinced throughout the Ruhela war a marked pusillani¬ 
mity sheltering himself in the rear and betraying evident signs of 
fear. He had acquired an extensive knowledge in the practice of 
every species of deceit, and could perform with facility every cha¬ 
racter that was necessary to conduct the various purposes of delu¬ 
sion or treachery. Generosity did not form a fixed part of his dis¬ 
position. He was equally rapacious in acquiring, as sordid in pre¬ 
serving wealth. His excesses in venery, which knew no control, led 
him to commit actions derogatory from his station, as well as perni¬ 
cious to his health.” 19 

But Shuja-ud-daulah had an important role in history in that 
period of rapid and significant political changes. Shuja-ud-daulah’s 
relations with the Imperial Vazir, Imad-ul-Mulk, were extremely 
bitter and led to plots and counter-plots. After some fighting there 
was peace between the two in June 1757. Malignant hostility of the 
unscrupulous, jealous and all-powerful Vazir Imad-ul-Mulk led the 
Imperial Prince ‘Ali Gauhar (Shah ‘Alam II) into friendship with 
Shuja-ud-daulah. In 1758-59 Shuja-ud-daulah encouraged Prince 
‘Ali Gauhar to invade Bihar. But ‘Ali Gauhar's Bihar expedition 
in 1759 ended in failure. 

During the Maratha-Afghan contest (1759-61) each of the rival 
parties sought to draw him over to its side and he engaged himself 
in various activities during it. He fought as an ally of the Abdall. 


114 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Shuja-ud-daulah was formally invested by Shah ‘Alam II with 
the office of the Vazir on 15 February, 1762. 20 In March-April 1762, 
Shuja-ud-daulah conducted an expedition against Hindupati, lord of 
the major part of Bundelkhand, taking Shah ‘Alam II with him. 
After some negotiations it was settled that Hindupati would pay a 
fine of seventy-five lakhs of rupees and an annual tribute of twenty - 
five lakhs. 

Deposed and driven by the English in July 1763, Nawab 
Mir Qasim got shelter in the court of Nawab Shuja-ud-daulah of 
Awadh. The emperor Shah ‘Alam II was also then with the Nawab 
Vazir and agreed to help Mir Qasim in his efforts to get back Bihar 
and Bengal when Mir Qasim visited him in February 1764. Shuja- 
ud-daulah also agreed to help Mir Qasim in recovering his lost pro¬ 
vince more out of motives of self-interest than out of humanitarian 
considerations to help a distressed brother-ruler. The exile Mir Qasim 
helped Shuja-ud-daulah in subduing the rebels of Bundelkhand. 
Mir Qasim promised to pay to the emperor and Shuja-ud-daulah ten 
and seventeen lakhs, respectively. Joined by a party of French ad¬ 
venturers, the allies marched to Bihar. In the first half of 1764 there 
were some indecisive engagements between the English army and 
the army of the allies. The English army was not then under proper 
discipline due to lack of military talent of Major Carnac. But on the 
arrival of Major Hector Munro as commander of the army, they were 
duly brought under control, the mutineers among them being 
punished. 

The two armies met at Buxar on 22 October, 1764. It resulted 
in Shuja-ud-daulah’s crushing defeat. After running from one place 
to another he was finally defeated at the battle of Kora on 3 May 
1765. Munro had already handed over the command of the army 
to Colonel Fletcher on 6 January, 1765, and the latter overran Shuja- 
ud-daulah’s territory and occupied Banaras, Buxar and Allahabad. 
Awadh fell completely under British control. Shah ‘Alam II, who 
had been insulted by Shuja-ud-daulah shortly before the battle and 
abandoned after it, threw himself under the protection of the English 
who arranged for his residence in the Allahabad fort. 

The battle of Buxar was certainly one of the decisive battles of 
Indian history. It confirmed British supremacy over Bengal and 
Bihar and placed Awadh and Shah ‘Alam II completely under their 
influence. “The victory has proved so complete” wrote the Council 
in Calcutta to the Court of Directors on 26 November, 1764, “that 
our troops meet with no further resistance”. Referring to this battle 
Broome rightly observes: “Thus ended the famous battle of Buxar 


115 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

on which depended the fate of India, and which was as gallantly dis¬ 
puted as it was important in its results’’. 21 

Clive returned to Bengal as Governor of the. English Company 
for the second time in May 1765. He met Shuja-ud-daulah at Banaras 
on 2 August and the Mughul emperor at Allahabad on 9 August and 
concluded treaties with both of them within a few days. By the 
Treaty of Allahabad dated 16 August, 1765, all the territories of 
Shuja-ud-daulah were restored to him, with the exception of the dis¬ 
tricts of Kora and Allahabad which were given to the emperor, Chu- 
nar which was retained by the English, and the zcmindari of Banaras, 
which was to belong as before to the family of Balwant Singh under 
English protection, though formally subordinate to the Nawab of 
Awadh. Shuja-ud-daulah agreed to pay 50 lakhs of rupees to the 
English as compensation for expenses of the recent war. He en¬ 
tered into a defensive treaty with the English for mutual support in 
the defence of his territories and agreed to defray the cost for main¬ 
tenance of troops for this purpose. This treaty made the Nawab of 
Awadh for all practical purposes a dependent and subordinate ally of 
the English, to be utilized against invasion of their territories by the 
Marathas. 

Clive convened a congress at Chapra in north Bihar in July, 1766, 
which was attended by Shuja-ud-daulah and the envoys of the em¬ 
peror, the Jat Raja and the Rohilla chiefs. They concluded a treaty 
“for their mutual defence and security” against all attempts of the 
Marathas to invade their respective territories. Referring to the 
terms of the treaty with Shuja-ud-daulah, the Select Committee in 
Calcutta wrote to the Court of Directors on 8 September, 1766: “The 
cheerfulness with which he (Shuja-ud-daulah) met the Right Honour¬ 
able President at the last Congress held in the Bihar province, the 
ready compliance he showed in paying the remainder of the indemni¬ 
fication to the Company stipulated by treaty even before the time 
limited for payment expired, and the engagements which he has 
renewed for mutual defence and security, afford the strongest testi¬ 
mony of the sincerity of his gratitude and friendship”. The emperor 
who had conferred the vazlrship of the empire upon his son on being 
abandoned by Shuja-ud-daulah at the end of 1764, now reappointed 
Shuja-ud-daulah as Vazir under pressure from Clive, 

At Chapra, Shuja-ud-daulah managed to obtain Clive’s consent to 
punish those whom he considered to be disloyal officers and on his re¬ 
turn to, his kingdom he proceeded to deal with them. The first man 
to suffer from this was Shuja-ud-daulah’s prime minister Beni Baha- / 
dur. After Beni Bahadur, Muhammad Elich Khan became prime 

116 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHXJL EMPIRE 

minister of Shuja-ud-daulah in March 1767. Shuja-ud-daulah remo¬ 
delled his army on the western model. But his early designs 
for subjugation of Rohilkhand were foiled. Further, Richard Smith, 
who commanded the Company’s brigade at Allahabad, sent reports 
to the Select Committee in Calcutta about what he considered to be 
anti-English designs of Shuja-ud-daulah. Smith’s reports were, how¬ 
ever, rejected by the Select Committee as there was no ground for 
accusing Shuja-ud-daulah of anti-English designs. But as a measure 
of precaution the English concluded a treaty with Shuja-ud-daulah 
on 29 November, 1768, which “checked the strength and progress of 
the Vazir’s army and freed the English from apprehension from their 
ally.” 22 This treaty left a scar on the heart of Shuja-ud-daulah, who, 
as a contemporary English writer observed, “saw that his ambition 
and schemes of aggrandisement would ever be encountered with the 
jealousy of the English, whom he now beheld with mistrust and re¬ 
sentment; and knowing the Frenchmen were the common enemy of 
our nation, the Wazir held out many inducements to engage their 
assistance”. 23 This treaty did not cement the alliance between the 
English and Shuja-ud-daulah, with whom “it was a sore point”. 24 
Hastings wisely reversed it in 1772 and cancelled it fully on 8 Sep¬ 
tember, 1773, permitting Shuja-ud-daulah to maintain an army as he 
desired. 

Shuja-ud-daulah’s relations with the Mughul empire were not 
quite cordial between 1765-68 as he'wanted to have full control over 
the imperial court as de facto vazir by eliminating the influence of 
Munir-ud-daulah in whom the emperor had much confidence. But a 
deputation consisting of Cartier, Smith and Russell went to Allaha¬ 
bad and effected a reconciliation between the emperor and Shuja-ud- 
daulah in November 1768, and the latter now became the de facto 
vazir for which he had been trying since 1766. As regards the em¬ 
peror, the relations between him and Shuja-ud-daulah were cordial in 
the period from 1769-71. But when in 1771 emperor Shah ‘Alam XI 
returned to Delhi with Maratha help, Warren Hastings deprived him 
of the districts of Kora and Allahabad and transferred these to Shuja- 
ud-daulah in lieu of fifty lakhs of rupees and an annual subsidy foif 
maintenance of a garrison of the Company’s troops for the protection 
of the Nawab. This arrangement was ratified by the treaty of BanS- 
ras on 7 September, 1773, when blastings had a conference with the 
Nawab-vcmr. 

Some other matters were settled between the Nawab-nazir and 
Warren Hastings at the Banaras conference. Warren Hastings pro¬ 
mised to help Shuja-ud-daulah in conquering Rohilkhand; cancella- 


117 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


tion of the treaty of 1768 was confirmed. Shuja-ud-daulah agreed to 
receive an English gentleman of Warren Hastings’ confidence to stay 
at his court and act as Political Resident in Awadh; the claim of Chait 
Singh and his heirs to the estate of Balwant Singh was recognized 
by a special agreement dated 6 September, 1773, and Warren Hast¬ 
ings decided not to pay tribute any longer to Shah ‘Alam II. 

What was decided between Warren Hastings and Shuja-ud-daulah 
at this time led to the war against the Rohillas. The fertile region of 
Rohilkhand, situated at the base of the Himalayas to the north-west 
of Awadh with a population of 6,000,000, the bulk of whom were 
Hindus and governed by a confederacy of Rohilla chiefs under the 
leadership of Hafiz Rahmat Khan, had been coveted by the Marathas 
since 1771. The Nawab of Awadh also wanted to occupy Rohilkhand 
as he had no love for the Afghans. But common interest now drew 
them together. To prevent incursions of the Marathas into Rohil¬ 
khand a treaty was concluded between Shuja-ud-daulah and the Rohil¬ 
las in the presence of the British Commander-in-Chief, Robert 
Barker, on 17 June, 1772, by which the Rohillas promised to pay forty 
lakhs of rupees to Shuja-ud-daulah on his expelling the Marathas 
from their territory. When the Marathas invaded Rohilkhand in the 
spring of 1773 they were repulsed by the combined British and 
Awadh forces. After this they could not then think of repeating 
their incursions into Rohilkhand due to their internal troubles in 
Maharashtra after the death of Peshwa Madhav Rao I. Shuja-ud- 
daulah demanded from Hafiz Rahmat Khan, leader of the Rohillas, 
payment of the stipulated sum of forty lakhs, but the latter evaded 
payment. At this, early in February 1774, Shuja-ud-daulah demand¬ 
ed, from the English, help in this matter on the strength of the treaty 
of Banaras (September 1773). Warren Hastings and the Council in 
Calcutta acceded to this demand. A British army was sent under 
Colonel Champion on 23 February, 1774. The combined forces of 
Shuja-ud-daulah and the English marched into Rohilkhand on 17 
April, 1774. The decisive battle was fought at Miranpur Katra six 
days later. Hafiz Rahmat Khan was killed fighting bravely. About 
20,000 Rohillas were expelled beyond the Ganga, and their province 
became a part of the Awadh kingdom. But a fragment of it to¬ 
gether with Rampiir, and some other adjacent districts yielding a 
revenue of Rs. 14,75,000 was left with Faizulla Khan, son of ‘Ali 
Muhammad Rohilla, founder of the Rohilla power, according to a 
treaty between him and Shuja-ud-daulah, concluded through the in¬ 
tervention of Colonel Champion. It was also stipulated that the 
Khan would retain in his army only 5,000 troops, and would at all 
times and on all occasions support him. 25 


118 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Shuja-ud-daulah died on 26 January, 1775, and was succeeded by 
his eldest son Asaf-ud-daulah. Awadh, for all practical purposes, be¬ 
came a dependency of the East India Company. 

(c) The Deccan: 

The Deccan also became independent of Mughul control under 
Nizam-ul-Mulk. His grandfather, Khwaja Abid Shaikh, Shaikh- 
ul-Islam of Bokhara, migrated to India and entered the service of 
Aurangzlb about the middle of the seventeenth century, and his 
father, Ghazi-ud-din Firuz Jang held several important posts in the 
Mughul empire. Chin Qilich Khan also held various posts in different 
parts of the Mughul empire. At the time of Aurangzib’s death, Chin 
Qilich Khan was at Bijapur, and observed a neutral course during 
the war of succession among the sons of Aurangzlb. Bahadur Shah 
removed him from the Deccan and made him the Governor of Awadh 
and faujdar of Gorakhpur on 9 December, 1707. For some time he 
retired from public service and joined it again towards the close of 
Bahadur Shah’s reign with the title of his father, Ghazi-ud-din Firuz 
Jang. In 1713 Farrukh-siyar appointed him Governor of the six 
subahs of the Deccan by investing him with the titles of Khan 
Khanan and Nizam-ul-Mulk Bahadur Fath Jang as a reward for his 
having espoused his cause. 26 Extremely ambitious, he wanted to 
rule over the Deccan independently of Delhi and he used the troubles 
prevailing in the Delhi Court to his own advantage. 

From the commencement of his viceroyalty in the Deccan 
Nizam-ul-Mulk as an astute diplomat sought to check the growing 
power of the Marathas by stopping the payment of chauth and by 
indefatigably instigating the disaffected, self-seeking and ambitious 
chieftains of Maharashtra against Shahu 27 With selfish motives and 
personal ambitions chieftains like Chandrasen Jadhav, Rambhaji 
Nimbalkar, Shripat Rao Pratinidhi, Raghuji Bhosle and Dabhade, 
undermined the prestige of the central authority. But intrigues of 
the Delhi Court soon led to Nizam-ul-Mulk’s recall from the Deccan 
by the end of 1715 and Husain Ali was appointed Governor of the 
Deccan. Nizam-ul-Mulk was transferred to Muradabad and sub¬ 
sequently his removal to Bihar was also contemplated. But before 
he assumed charge of his new office, the regime of Farrukh-siyar 
came to a close and he was transferred to the Government of Malwa. 
He started for Ujjain on 15 March 1719 on receiving the pledge that 
he would not be transferred again. 

In Malwa Nizam-ul-Mulk was able to lay the foundation of 
his future greatness. His activities here roused the jealousy of the 
Sayyid brothers and an order was passed for recalling him on the 


119 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

plea that it was necessary for the protection of the Deccan that 
Husain ‘All Khan should have the charge of Malwa. This time 
Nizam-ul-Mulk decided to act in self-defence by arms. He occupied 
the fortress of Asirgarh on 20 May, 1720, and three days later 
Burhanpur fell into his hands. The Sayyid brothers sent urgent 
orders to Sayyid Dilawar ‘All Khan and the Deputy Governor ‘Alam 
‘All Khan to oppose the march of Nizam-ul-Mulk. But Nizam-ul- 
Mulk defeated and slew Dilawar ‘All Khan in the battle of Khandwa 
on 19 June, 1720. ‘Alam ‘All Khan was defeated and killed at the 
battle of Balapur on 10 August, 1720. Husain ‘AH while getting 
ready to march against the Nizam was stabbed to death by Haidar 
Beg, also a Sayyid, near Toda-Bhim, on 8 October, 1720. Sayyid 
Abdullah was defeated in a battle at Hasanpur on 13 November, 1720 
and imprisoned. After two years he was done to death by poison. 

After the fall of the Sayyids, Nizam-ul-Mulk made himself mas¬ 
ter of the six subdhs of the Deccan and began his operations against 
the growing power of the Marathas. But the very next year he re¬ 
ceived an Imperial summons to proceed to Delhi at once and in 
February 1722 “he was appointed vazir and received the usual robe, 
a dagger, an ornamental pen case and a diamond ring of great 
value”. 28 The vitiated atmosphere in the Delhi Court was not con¬ 
genial to him and his enemies poisoned the emperor Muhammad 
Shah’s mind against him. 29 So he left for the Deccan in the third 
week of December 1723, and reached Aurangabad, the capital of 
the Deccan in June 1724. But the enemies of Nizam-ul-Mulk suc¬ 
ceeded in persuading the credulous emperor to believe that he 
was in rebellion and to send secret instructions to Mubariz Khan, 
Governor of Hyderabad, urging him to fight against Nizam-ul- 
Mulk and promising him the viceroyalty of the Deccan in case of 
his success. Mubariz Khan had offended the Marathas by his hostile 
activities. So Nizam-ul-Mulk could enlist support of the Marathas. 
With their combined armies Nizam-ul-Mulk marched out in the 
first week of September 1724. A decisive battle was fought in 
October 1724 at Sakharkharda in Berar where Mubariz Khan was de¬ 
feated and slain. 30 Nizam-ul-Mulk followed up his success by re¬ 
ducing Mubariz Khan’s son and taking possession of Hyderabad by 
the beginning of 1725. “From this period may be dated”, writes 
Irvine, “Nizam-ul-Mulk’s virtual independence and the foundation 
of the present Hyderabad State. Henceforth he bestowed offices in 
the Dakhin (Deccan); he made promotions in rank, conferred titles 
and issued assignments on the land revenue at his own will and plea¬ 
sure. The only attributes of sovereignty from which he refrained 


120 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHXTL EMPIRE 

were the use of scarlet or imperial umbrella, the recitation of the 
Friday prayer in his own name, and the issue of coin stamped with 
his own superscription”. 31 Nizam-ul-Mulk’s strong administration 
in the Deccan has elicited much praise from Khafi Khan. 32 Ghulam 
Husain, the author of Siyar~ul-mutakherin also remarks: “It is such 
an extensive tract (the Deccan subdh) that he governed with an ab¬ 
solute authority for the space of seven and thirty years.” 33 

The Nizam-ul-Mulk justly realized that the activities of Peshwa 
Baji Rao I were opposed to his policy of establishing supremacy in 
the Deccan, and so he took steps to oppose him seriously. He also 
incited many Maratha chieftains against the Peshwa. He made them 
his allies by grant of jdgirs and also instigated Raja Shambhuji (of 
the Kolhapur branch of ShivajI’s family) against Shahu (of the 
Satara branch). So Nizam-ul-Mulk, Shambhuji and Trimbak Rao 
Dabhade whose interests in Gujarat had been rudely interfered with 
by BajI Rao I, united against the Peshwa. Baji Rao I was thus en¬ 
gaged in a war with them which lasted for about five years from 
1727 to 1732. In November 1726, after the departure of Baji Rao 
and the Sendpdti for Karnatak, the Nizam started hostilities against 
Shahu. But Baji Rao I took the counter-offensive within a year and 
won a victory over the Nizam at Palkhed in February, 1728. This 
was followed by the treaty of Mungi-Shevgaon concluded on 6 March, 
1728, in which Nizam-ul-Mulk .accepted all the terms dictated by 
Baji R&o I, except one. By his superior genius Baji Rao I foiled the 
ambitions and plans of the confederates. The Nizam was defeated 
at Palkhed in 1728 and his great adversary at the Court Sendpati 
Trimbak Rao Dabhade was slain in a battle in 1731 fought on the 
plains of Bhilapur near Dabhoi between Baroda and that town. 

The death of Sentip&li Dabhade knocked the bottom out of 
Nizam-ul-Mulk’s intrigues and he felt that under the prevailing cir¬ 
cumstances it would be advisable to come to terms with the Peshwa. 
The latter realized that it would not be possible to carry on his cam¬ 
paigns in the north so long as Nizam-ul-Mulk threatened his base in 
the Deccan. So in consideration of self-interest the two chiefs 
arrived at a compromise in December 1732 by which the Nizam was 
to be at liberty to gratify his ambitions in the south, the Peshwa in 
the north. 33 

After Baji Rao’s sudden dash on Delhi, the Mughul emperor 
summoned the Nizam from the Deccan. The Nizam responded to 
this call and leaving his second son Nasir Jang in charge of the sou- 


121 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


them dominions proceeded towards Delhi and reached there about 
July, 1737. The emperor showered many favours on the Nizam 
and conferred on him the title of Asaf Jah which meant “equal in 
dignity to Asaf, the minister of King Solomon”. After collecting 
forces and securing services of some of the Rajput chiefs, the Nizam 
marched towards Malwa, but he was defeated near Bhopal and was 
compelled to conclude on 7 January, 1738, a convention at Duraha 
Sarai (sixty-four miles from Sironj). “In his own handwriting the 
Nizam promised to grant to Baji Rao the Subdhdari of Malwa, and 
rights over the territory between the Narmada and the Chambal; 
tc obtain a confirmation of this cession from the emperor; and to use 
every endeavour to procure the payment of fifty lakhs of rupees, to 
pay Baji Rao’s expenses”. 35 

During Nadir Shah’s invasion the emperor called Nizam-ul- 
Mulk to Delhi to negotiate the terms of agreement with the invader. 
But nothing could be done in this matter because of Nadir’s increas¬ 
ing demands. The Nizam retired at the age of 70 for good to the 
Deccan. Early in 1741 he suppressed the rebellion of his second son 
Nasir Jang and restored order in the Karnatak. In 1743 he appoin¬ 
ted Nasir Jang subdhdar of the Karnatak and granted him the jdgir 
of Adoni. Nizam-ul-Mulk died on 21 May, 1748, at the age of 
seventy-seven. After this, the question of succession in the Deccan 
and the Karnafak gave opportunities to the Marathas and the Euro¬ 
pean trading Companies to fish in the troubled waters of the Deccan. 
After many vicissitudes Nizam ‘All rose to power about 1760 and 
held the highest post till the end of the century. 

The Deccan soon fell into disorder and confusion due to the 
policy of the revived Mar at ha power after their recovery from the 
blows of Panipat, the rise of Haidar ‘Ali of Mysore to power, the 
vacillating policy of the Nizam, and growing political ambition of the 
English, frequent shifting of alliances among them making confusion 
worse confounded. In 1765 the Madras Council agreed to help the 
Nizam against Haidar ‘Ali and in 1766 the English, the Marathas and 
the Nizam formed a triple alliance against Haidar. The Nizam 
marched against Mysore on April 17 with a party of English troops 
under the command of General Joseph Smith, but his enterprise was 
not successful. Under the influence of Mahfuz Khan, brother and 
rival of the pro-English Nawab Muhammad ‘All and enemy of the 
English, the Nizam soon deserted the English and formed an alliance 
with Haidar. But General Smith defeated the new allies at the 
Pass of Changama and Trinomali in September 1767. Haidar’s 
fickle ally, the Nizam, soon left his party and concluded an ill-ad- 


122 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


vised treaty with the English on 23 February, 1768. By this the 
Nizam confirmed his old treaty engagements with the English in as 
irresponsible a manner as he had broken them. The Nizam promis¬ 
ed to help the English and the Nawab of Karnatak in chastising 
Haidar and the English agreed to “send two battalions of sepoys and 
six pieces of artillery, manned by Europeans, whenever the subah 
(the Nizam) would require them and the situation of their affairs 
will allow of such a body of troops to march into the Deccan, provid¬ 
ed the subah pays the expenses during the time that the said .troops 
are employed in his service”. This treaty did not prove to be help¬ 
ful to the English, but rather provoked Haidar more bitterly than 
before. “You have brought us into such a labyrinth of difficulties”, 
wrote the Court of Directors to the Madras Council, “that we do not 
see how we shall be extricated from them.” Ultimately, the Nizam 
had to pay a heavy price for his vacillation and quick change of 
alliance and he was reduced to the position of the weakest of the 
Indian powers. In September 1798 he entered into a subsidiary alli¬ 
ance with the English and became their subordinate ally. 

(d) Invasions of Ahmad Shah AbddU: 

Nadir Shah never returned to India after his first terrible in¬ 
vasion. He was assassinated in 1747. One of his officers named 
Ahmad Shah, an Afghan noble of the Abdall clan, made himself in¬ 
dependent ruler of Afghanistan. He styled himself Durr-i-Durran, 
“the pearl of the age”, and his clan henceforth came to be known as 
the Durrani. While coming to India with Nadir Shah, Ahmad Shah 
Abdall had seen with his own eyes “the weakness of the empire, the 
imbecility of the emperor, the inattentiveness of the ministers, the 
spirit of independence which had crept among the grandees”. So, 
after strengthening his position at home, Ahmad Shah Abdall invaded 
India seven times between 1748 and 1767. 36 These invasions were 
not mere predatory raids. They indicated a general revival of the 
Afghans within and outside India, who made a bid for supremacy on 
the ruins of the Mughul empire. 37 In analysing the motives of Ahmad 
Shah Abdall’s Indian expeditions Elphinstone has noted that through 
these he hoped to consolidate his power at home £y gaining resources 
through foreign wars and thus obtain means to heap favours and re¬ 
wards on the Afghan chiefs. 38 

After having conquered Qandahar, Kabul and Peshawar, Ahmad 
Shah Abdall invaded India for the first time in January 1748 with 
12,000 picked troops. But he was defeated at tho battle of Manupur 
by Ahmad Shah, the Mughul heir-apparent, and Muin-ul-Mulk or 


123 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Mir Mannu, son of the deceased vazir Qamar-ud-din, and was re¬ 
pulsed. Mir Mannu was appointed Governor of the Punjab. But 
he had to encounter various difficulties which prevented his being 
settled in his new position. So Ahmad Shah Abdali invaded the 
Funjab for the second time in 1750 and conquered it after defeating 
its Governor. In the absence of any support from the Delhi Court, 
the Mughul Governor found resistance futile and entered into an 
agreement with the invader. Ahmad Shah Abdali invaded India for 
the third time in December 1751, defeated Mir Mannu, conquered 
Kashmir and forced the Mughul emperor Ahmad Shah to cede to 
him the portion of India up to Sirhind. This meant further reduc¬ 
tion in the territorial extent and power of the Mughul empire. Mir 
Mannu submitted to the invader and was appointed by him his Gov¬ 
ernor of the Punjab in 1752. He promised to remit to the Abdali the 
surplus revenue of the Punjab and not to transact any important 
business without his orders. 

After the death of Mir Mannu in November 1753 and that of 
his son and successor in May 1754, the province of the Punjab fell 
into disorder and anarchy, due largely to the caprices of Mir Mannu’s 
widow—Mughlani Begam. On an appeal from her for help, Imad- 
ul-mulk, the all-powerful vazir at Delhi, marched to the Punjab 
which he coveted for himself. He brought it under his control, 
appointed Mir Mumin, “the leading nobleman of Lahore”, Governor 
of the province and put Mughlani Begam, whom the Abdali had 
addressed as daughter, under restraint. All this enraged Ahmad 
Shah Abdali, who invaded India for the fourth time in November 
1756. This invasion was more serious than before and Ahmad Shah 
reached Delhi on 23 January, 1757. The imperial city was “plunder¬ 
ed and its unhappy people (rich and poor) were again subjected to 
pillage”. Imad-ul-Mulk surrendered to the invader and was par¬ 
doned by him. The invader further forced ‘the Mughul emperor to 
formally cede to him the Punjab, Kashmir and Thatta as also the 
Sirhind district. For the government of these ceded tracts Ahmad 
Shah left his son, Timur Shah as his viceroy in Lahore, with Jahan 
Khan, an able Afghan general as the latter’s vazir. After plunder¬ 
ing the Jat country, south of Delhi, the Abdali returned from India 
in April 1757. 

During Timur Shah’s administration for one year, from March 
1757 to April 1758, utter lawlessness and disorder prevailed in the 
Punjab. Ghazi-ud-din recovered Delhi and deprived Najib-ud-daulah, 
a leading chief of the Rohilla Afghans of his high office and influence 
in the Mughul government. Jahan Khan infuriated the Sikh commu- 


124 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


nity by “maltreating one of their most respected members, a religious 
guide. The Sikhs rose up on all sides”. 39 Adina Beg Khan, gov¬ 
ernor of the Jullundur Doab, revolted against the Afghans and re¬ 
quested the Marat has to help him. Raghunath Rao marched to Delhi 
with a strong Maratha army and proceeded to the Punjab in April 
1758. He defeated the Abdali’s governor there and expelled the 
Afghans. .Raghunath Rao and his army left the Punjab by appointing 
Adina Beg Khan as their governor there on payment of an annual 
tribute of 75 lakhs. Adina Beg died in October 1758. Ahmad Shah 
Abdall invaded India for the fifth time in October 1759 and secured 
the alliance of the Rohillas and Shuja-ud-daulah of Awadh (jealous of 
Ghazi-ud-din and his Maratha allies). As both the Marathas and 
the Afghans were aspiring for the supremacy of Hindustan, a severe 
clash between them became inevitable. This took place on 14 
January, 1761, on the historic field of Panipat, where the fate of 
India had been decided twice before. This battle “registered crown¬ 
ing victory” for the Abdall and its results were disastrous for the 
Marathas. It frustrated their ambition for north-western advance, 
caused them heavy losses in men and money and dealt a severe blow 
to their prestige. 

Ahmad Shah Abdall retreated from India on 20 March, 1761. 
Najib-ud-daulah and Munir-ud-daulah agreed to pay him, on behalf 
of the Mughul government, an annual tribute of forty lakhs of 
rupees. The Abdali’s parting instructions were that “Shah Alam 
should be recognized as Emperor, lmad reappointed as vnzir and 
Najib Mir Bakhshi. . .. But a river of blood lay between Shah Alam 
and lmad, and the opportunist Najib used this fact to secure his own 
elevation as regent of the empire for the next ten years”. 40 

But the Sikhs soon recovered their power, occupied Lahore, 
killed Khwaja Abid, governor of the Durrani at Lahore, and occu¬ 
pied the city in February 1764. At this Ahmad Shah Abdall in¬ 
vaded India for the seventh time in March 1764. But after a fort¬ 
night’s stay at Lahore he had to retreat to his own country, owing 
to internal troubles there, particularly mutiny of his own troops. 
Ahmad Shah Abdall invaded India for the last time in 1767. But he 
could not suppress the Sikhs and had to retire soon “with a con¬ 
sciousness of his ultimate failure”. The long “contest with a nation 
in arms (the Sikhs), while no dependable ally or lieutenant could 
be found by him in India, at last wore Abdall out; his illness, too, 
proved to be hopelessly intractable; his soldiers became rowdy 
through his frequent failure to pay them, and a large contingent of 
them mutinied and left for Afghanistan in open mutiny”. 41 


125 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Ahmad Shah Abdall returned home hurriedly. But his re¬ 
peated invasions of India affected the history of this country in 
several ways. Besides checking the rapid progress of Marathas in 
Hindustan, it hastened the dismemberment of the Mughul empire. 
Further, it indirectly helped the rise of the Sikh power. It has been 
significantly observed that the Abdall’s “career in India is very inti¬ 
mately a part of the Sikh struggle for independence”. 42 

(e) The Sikhs: 

After the assassination of Guru Govind Singh in 1708, the Sikhs 
got a leader in Banda, his chosen disciple, about whose antecedents 
and early life nothing very definite and trustworthy is known, though 
there are several accounts about these. 43 With Banda began the 
Sikh war of independence against Mughul imperial authority. 
Banda gathered round him about 40,000 well-armed Sikhs,^ “bearing 
with him the arrows of Govind as the pledge of victory”. He over¬ 
powered the Mughul authorities in the neighbourhood of Sirhind 
and captured Sirhind for wreaking vengeance on Wazir Khan, faujdar 
of the place and murderer of Guru Govind’s children. The faujdar 
was killed by a musket-shot. “The baggage was plundered, the ele¬ 
phants captured. Not a single Muhammadan escaped with anything 
but the clothes upon his back.” 44 Banda committed great atrocities 
at Sirhind by way of vengeance. Here all power passed into the 
hands of the Sikhs, and one Bar Singh, belonging to pargana Haibat- 
pur Patti in the Bari Doab was appointed Governor of Sirhind. 
Banda occupied the area between the Sutlej and the Jamuna and built 
the strong fort of Lohgarh at Mukhlispur, half way between Nahan 
and Sadhaura, where he tried to assume something of regal state. 
“He was the Sacchd Padishah, or Veritable Sovereign, his disciples all 
Singhs or lions. A new form of greeting, Faith daras (May you be¬ 
hold victory!) was invented.... coin was struck in the new sove¬ 
reign’s name”. 45 

On hearing of the movements of Banda, emperor Bahadur Shah 
hastened towards the Punjab, where his local officials had been en¬ 
gaged in suppressing the Sikh rising. Banda was besieged in his new 
stronghold. After some successive skirmishes Banda escaped 
with many of his followers into the hills north of Lahore, and “laid 
the fairest part of the Punjab under contribution”. 46 Bahadur Shah 
on reaching Lahore died there on 28 February, 1712. After this 
Banda came out of his hiding place, recovered the fort of Lohgarh, 
occupied the town of Sadhaura, and built a fort of considerable size 
with high and thick walls at Gurdaspur between the Beas and the 


126 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

Ravi. The Viceroy of Lahore marched against Banda but he was de¬ 
feated in a pitched battle. A party of the Sikhs advanced towards 
Sirhind; the governor marched forward to oppose them, but he and 
his followers were overpowered. 

At this emperor Farrukh-siyar ordered Abdus Samad Khan, the 
governor of Kashmir, a Turani noble and an able general, to assume 
the command in the Punjab and sent some chosen troops to help him 
in 1715. With many of his warlike countrymen and a train of artil¬ 
lery, Abdus Samad Khan left Lahore and defeated the Sikh army 
after a fierce resistance on the part of Banda. “The success was 
followed up, and Banda retreated from post to post, fighting valiant¬ 
ly and inflicting heavy losses on his victors; but he was at length 
compelled to shelter himself in the fort of Gurdaspur.” 47 The Sikhs 
fought desperately “contending among themselves for martyrdom 
and many among them were captured after a fierce resistance” 
against “all the forces that the empire could bring against them for 
the space of eight months”. 48 But Banda eventually surrendered on 
17 December, 1715, after all provisions in the fort were exhausted. 
Banda and his followers were sent to Delhi and severe tortures 
were inflicted upon them. Banda was kept in an iron cage, placed 
on the back of an elephant. “A reward was given for every Sikh 
head”. Taunted by a Muslim noble, Banda replied that he had been 
“a mere scourge in the hands of God for the chastisement of the 
wicked and he was now receiving the meed of his own crimes against 
the Almighty”. Government committed all kinds of atrocities. 
Banda’s own son was killed before his eyes; and he himself ‘was 
tormented to death’ with various tortures on 19 June, 1716. 

After the death of Banda “an active persecution was kept up 
against the Sikhs, whose losses in battle had been great and depress¬ 
ing”. 49 In fact, “fortunes of the Sikhs were reduced to the lowest 
ebb in 1716.” 

But the military spirit of the Sikhs could not be completely 
crushed. “The tenets of Guru Nanak and Govind had taken root in 
the hearts , of the people; the peasant and the mechanic nursed their 
faith in secret, and the more ardent clung to the hope of ample re¬ 
venge and speedy recovery”. Gradually the disorganized Sikhs be¬ 
gan to rai£e their heads again and they found a leader in Kapur 
Singh, a resident of Fyzullapur, who began organizing what later on 
developed as the celebrated Dal Khdlsd or the army of the theocracy 
of the Singhs. The invasion of Nadir Shiah in 1739, which brought 
confusion and disorder in Upper India, helped recovery of the Sikhs. 


127 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


“The Persian invasion is a very important event in the history of 
the rise of the Sikh power. In the first place, it enfeebled the strong 
government of Zakariya Khan (in the Punjab). The commotion 
and the confusion were very favourable to the rise of the Sikhs. ,,5 ° 
They utilised these to augment their financial resources and to in¬ 
crease their military power. “The suppression of the Sikhs, difficult 
under all circumstances, became even more difficult now”. 51 Even 
in 1745 after the death of Zakariya Khan, Jassa Singh came down to 
the plains, and raided Kasur with the help of other Sikh Sardars. 

The Sikhs organized themselves at a place called Dalewal and 
built a fort there. From this place they carried on their depreda¬ 
tions round the country and extended them up to the very neigh¬ 
bourhood of Lahore. Nadir Shah confirmed Khan Bahadur Zakariya 
Khan in the Nizamat of Lahore, whereupon the Sikhs withdrew from 
Lahore and its neighbourhood and carried on their activities in the 
Jullundur Doab. After the departure of Nadir Shah, Khan Bahadur 
Zakariya Khan placed Adina Beg Khan in charge of Jullundur Doab 
authorising him to reduce the Sikhs. But Adina Beg did not exe¬ 
cute his task properly by trying to subjugate the Sikhs completely, 
“which he thought, would undermine his influence and power”. 52 
The Trans-Sutlej Sikhs were kept under check by Zakariya Khan till 
his death in 1745. But “in the Cis-Sutlej region under the Delhi 
Subdh, the utter weakness of the Government gave the Sikhs a much 
freer hand to carry on their plundering raids”. 53 

After the death of Zakariya Khan in 1745 intrigues of the rival 
parties in the Mughul Court prevented immediate appointment of 
governor of the Punjab. Soon vazir Qamar-ud-din Khan was made 
the absentee governor. All these factors contributed “to destroy 
the peace and prosperity which the just rule of Zakariya Khan had 
given to the Punjab.... Disorder broke out. Everywhere law¬ 
less men, plunderers and adventurers, who had so long kept them¬ 
selves in hiding, now came out in the open and began to desolate the 
realm.... On one side the Raja of Jammu rebelled and on the 
other the Sikhs began to cause tumult and trouble”. 54 At last the 
emperor agreed to the appointment of Yahya Khan, a son of Zaka¬ 
riya Khan, as the Deputy Governor with the vazir as the titular 
subdhdar. After receiving the reins of government Yahya Khan 
tried to suppress the Sikhs. Many Sikhs lost their lives at Sahid- 
ganj, the chief martyr being Bhai Taru Singh, one of the revered 
Sikh religious leaders. Yahya Khan passed an order for a general 
massacre of the Sikhs. But this was prevented by quarrel between 


128 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Yahya Khan and Shahnawaz (Hayatullah, another son of Zakariya 
Khan). Whenever Yahya Khan sent troops against the Sikhs, Shah 
Nawaz helped the latter in various ways. “This fratricidal war gave 
the Sikhs the breathing space which they so badly needed”. 55 

Ahmad Shah Abdall led his first invasion against India in 1748 
and his repeated inroads between 1748-1767 “exercised a very deci¬ 
sive influence on the history of the rise of the Sikh power”. 56 It has 
therefore been said that Ahmad Shah Abdall’s “career in India 
is very intimately a part of the Sikh struggle for independ¬ 
ence”. 57 In his first invasion Ahmad Shah Abdall had some initial 
success. But under the able guidance and the gallantry of the de¬ 
ceased vazlr’s (Vazlr Qamar-ud-din died on 11 March, 1748) son, 
Muin-ul-mulk or Mir Mannu, the imperial army fought bravely. In 
the battle which took place at Manupur, a village ten miles north¬ 
west of Sirhind, the Abdall had 12,000 picked troops and the num¬ 
ber of the imperial army was between 60,000 and 70,000. But due 
to an accident in the Afghan army, which found some rockets in 
Lahore and used them in the wrong way, the Abdall had to retreat. 
The Sikhs pursued the Afghan army up to the banks of the Indus 
and plundered Abdall’s baggage. In the confusion which followed 
it, the Sikhs began to consolidate their position quickly and brought 
a large portion of the Bari and Jullundur Doabs under their control. 
During the Abdall’s flight, Sikh Sardars like Jassa Singh, -Chharat 
Singh, Bharo Singh and Karora Singh, organized a party of six to 
seven thousand fighters and named it Dal Khdlsdji or the army of the 
theocracy of the Singhs. 

The Subahdcvr of Lahore, Muin-ul-mulk or Mir Mannu tried 
his best to subdue the Sikhs. But their depredations could not be 
thoroughly checked, though many of them were imprisoned and kill¬ 
ed. “Those Moslems who could bring severed Sikh heads got re¬ 
wards”. 58 Muin-ul-mulk could not devote his undivided attention to 
the suppression of the Sikhs, as Safdar Jang, who was appointed 
vazlr on 20 June, 1748, was jealous of him and fomented plots and 
conspiracies against him. The first instrument of Safdar Jangk 
malicious design was Nasir Khan, whom Muin-ul-mulk had appoin¬ 
ted faujdar of the ‘four mahals’ —Sialkot, Pasrur, Gujarat and Auran¬ 
gabad, but because of his treachery Muin-ul-mulk compelled hhn to 
retire to Delhi. Safdar Jang also utilized Shah Nawaz Khan, ffeft 
second son of Zakariya Khan, against Muin-ul-mulk. All -this 
some respite to the Sikhs. But they had as yet no strong fortified 
place to fall back upon and were scattered throughout the province 
of the Punjab. 

129 

M.S.—9 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Ahmad Shah Abdall invaded the Punjab once again in 1750. 
This time, after an indecisive engagement, Muin-ul-mulk considered 
it advisable to come to an understanding with the Abdali. 59 He, 
therefore, stopped his advance by promising to pay him fourteen 
lakhs of rupees as surplus revenue of the four mahals —Sialkot, 
Pasrur, Gujarat and Aurangabad. 60 During the next two years the 
Abdall did not press Muin-ul-mulk, who devoted himself to chastise 
the Sikhs. During the commotion which followed, Jassa Singh, 
Ahluwalia, Hara Singh, Karam Singh, Jassa Singh Ramgarhia, Naja 
Singh and Chharat Singh “had asserted themselves with their com¬ 
bined host, the Dal Khalsdji”. 61 Adina Beg, whom Muin-ul-mulk 
had engaged to suppress the Sikhs, did not take suitable steps for 
this but began to intrigue with them. The Sikhs built the mud fort 
of Ramrauni, later on famous as Ramgarh. But Muin-ul-mulk soon 
effectively subdued the Sikhs. As the Sikhs sought shelter in the 
hills or the jungles, the hill Rajas were asked to drive them from 
their territories and to send them to Lahore. Many Sikhs lost their 
lives at gahidganj. “The Sikh nation might have been destroyed”, 
writes Forster, 62 “but for the intervention of Mir Mannu’s minister, 
Koura Mai, himself a member of the Khalsa sect”. Through his 
mediation an accommodation was reached. The Sikhs “were left to 
strengthen themselves, enlarge territory;.... whilst Koura Mai 
lived, his influence upon the Sikhs restrained their depredations”. 

Muin-ul-mulk continued his ruthless policy against the Sikhs 
till his death. One expedition led by himself against the Sikhs to¬ 
wards the close of 1752 has been thus described by his page: “When 
the Nawab Sahib (i.e., Muin-ul-mulk) was out on an administrative 
tour, in the Batala district, he heard that a large body of Sikhs were 
causing disturbances in the neighbourhood, stopping the roads and 
ruining the cultivators. He then sent Sayyid Jamil-ud-din Khan 
with his Bakhshi Ghazi Beg Khan to punish them. These officers 
marched to the scene, fought the Sikhs and put them to flight. Nine 
hundred of the Sikh infantry threw themselves into the small fort of 
Ramrauni, close to Chak Guru Hargovind, which Jamil-ud-din im¬ 
mediately invested. After a few days the garrison rushed out sword 
in hand, fell upon the besiegers, and were all slain.” 63 But “this 
slaughter had no more effect than stamping upon a few hundred 
white ants. Such conflicts with Sikh bands continued till the very 
day of Muin’s death (1753), and grew more numerous after him”. 64 

Various factors, such as the “support of Koura Mai, the selfish 
policy of Adina Beg, rivalry between Safdar Jang and Mir Mannu, 
Javld Khan and Safdar Jang, the weakness of Ahmad Shah, the 

130 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Mughul emperor, the ability of his namesake, the Abdali chief 
—all had something to do with the survival of the Sikhs”. 65 

The Sikhs again plundered Jullundur Doab. This led Muin- 
ul-mulk to send Adina Beg and Siddiq Beg Khan against them. 
This time Adina Beg attacked them at Makhowal, killed many of 
them, and forced them to disperse. “He checked them but did not 
try to crush them entirely.” 66 “He entered into a secret under¬ 
standing with them, by which their excursions were limited. .. . 
and they gathered strength and resources for future efforts.” 

After Muin-ul-mulk’s death the Punjab was in a state of utter 
confusion and disorder, which were aggravated by the “profligacy 
and capriciousness” of his wife, Mughlani Begam. When all this 
was happening, Ahmad Shah Abdali invaded India for the fourth 
time in November 1756. The Sikhs had already been strengthening 
themselves. “The Sikhs took all those advantages which the local 
distractions of a falling empire offered them, of extending and esta¬ 
blishing their power. Their bands under their most active leaders 
plundered in every direction”. 67 

When Ahmad Shth Abdali invaded India for the fourth time in 
November 1756, the Sikhs could not openly oppose him, but “hung 
about his wings, plundered all people who straggled from his camp 
and cut off his provisions”. Sikh marauders caused some troubles 
to the Abdali army and so he asked those whom he left behind “to 
take vengeance on the Sikhs for all the excesses which they had com¬ 
mitted”. 68 The Mughul emperor formally ceded to Ahmad Shah 
Abdali the Punjab, Kashmir, Thatta and the Sirhind district. Ahmad 
Shah Abdali left his son, Timur Shah for administration of these 
districts with the able Afghan General, flahan Khan, as his vazir. 

Timur Shah and Jahan Khan soon thought of subjugating the 
Sikhs. On hearing that many Sikh soldiers had assembled at Chak- 
guru, that is, Amritsar, for their holy bath, Jahan Khan attacked and 
defeated them there. Many of the Sikhs were killed. “Amritsar 
was occupied and the holy shrine desecrated”. 

The Sikh community was very much infuriated when Jahan 
Khan insulted one of their notable religious guides who was also 
a rich revenue-farmer. “From that day the peace and orderly 
rifle which had been recently established in the country disappeared 
and the Sikhs rose in rebellion on all four sides”. Adina Beg Khan, 
faujddr of the Jullundur Doab, was summoned by Jahan Khan to 
help him in this critical situation. But instead of obeying the sum¬ 
mons, he fled away to the Balwan (Balsan?) hills. He even entered 


131 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

into an alliance with the Sikhs “founded on a scheme of combined 
hostilities with the Afghans”. “In consequence of it, utter disorder 
spread throughout the Punjab. The Vazlr Jahan Khan sent Sar- 
faraz Afghan of Attock and Gafran Khan as governors of Jullundur 
and Kashmir respectively, but both of them returned defeated in 
the course of a month. Utter lawlessness prevailed. Every force 
that was sent out by Timur was defeated. Even the environs of the 
capital were not safe. Every night thousands of Sikhs used to as¬ 
semble and plunder the suburbs lying outside the walls of Lahore; 
but no force was sent to repel them, and the city gates were kept 
closed by way of precaution”. 69 This disorderly state of affairs last¬ 
ed from November 1757 to February 1758. The Sikhs gathering to¬ 
gether under Maratha advice, “began to attack Abdall’s rule; from 
some places they expelled his outposts. They defeated Sa‘adat Khan 
Afridi, plundered all the Jullundur district, and forced him to flee to 
the hills. By order of the Subdhdar , Khwaja Abid came from 
Lahore with 20,000 horse and foot soldiers to fight the Sikhs. In the 
end, he was defeated, many of his captains were slain, all his camp 
and baggage were plundered; all the artillery left behind by Abdall 
was captured”. 70 

Adina Beg invited the Marathas to help him against the Afghans. 
The first Maratha invasion of the Punjab began by the middle of 
February 1758, and Adina Beg joined the Marathas before Sirhind, 
and Abdus Samad, the Durrani Governor of Sirhind, was worsted, 
“the Marathas and Sikhs thoroughly looted Sirhind city”. 71 But a 
genuine Sikh-Maratha combination could not be effected. “The un¬ 
becoming pride and presumption of the Marathas, their failure to 
grasp the realities of the situation, the proverbial Maratha greed for 
plunder, the presence of the wily Adina Beg, whose interest it was 
to keep the two peoples divided, the prevalent Sikh view that re¬ 
garded the Marathas as intruders—all combined to make a fusion be¬ 
tween the two peoples beyond even the domain of possibility”. 72 

A new scene was opened with another Abdall invasion and the 
defeat of the Marathas on the historic field of Panipat on 14 January, 
1761. In the course of his return march, the Abdall was harassed 
by the Sikhs. Browne wrote: “After the third battle of Panipat as 
soon as the Durrani army had passed the Sutlej the Sikhs began to 
plunder the stragglers, but Ahmad Shah could do nothing as his 
army was loaded with plunder. Every night he had to throw up a 
light work round his camp and in this manner he continued his 
march up to Attock, the Sikhs following him all the way. When the 
Afghans crossed the Attock, the Sikhs returned to blockade Lahore”. 73 

132 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

In the post-Panipat period, the Abdall repeated his inroads into 
India till 1767, which aggravated confusion and disorder in the Punjab 
and afforded opportunities for further assertion of Sikh influence and 
’power. “The Sikh nation was now”, a modern writer has observed 
significantly “far more strong and far more well organized than it 
had been in the days of Zakariya Khan. The most glorious chapter 
of Sikh history was now to begin. It is a record'of the duel in which 
the all-powerful Afghan conqueror was worn out by an obscure 
people who successfully wrested from his closed fist that part of 
India which the House of Timur had failed to preserve from him”. 74 
The Sikhs bravely withstood defeats and persecution, including the 
coercive pressures against them on the part of Najib-ud-daulah, the 
AbdalTs friend in India and virtual dictator of Delhi (1761-70). But 
undaunted by these they presented stiff opposition to the Afghan in¬ 
vader and his followers. In 1764, the triumphant Sikhs assembled 
at Amritsar and struck here the first coins of good pure silver with 
the inscription “ Degh, Tegh, Fateh”, This was the first public pro¬ 
clamation of the establishment of sovereignty of the Sikh commu¬ 
nity. On the final retreat of the Abdall from the Punjab, the Sikhs 
“reappeared in all their force. Lahore was reoccupied as also the 
entire open country.” 75 Between 1767 and 1773, the Sikhs extend¬ 
ed their power from Saharanpur in the east to Attock in the west, 

* t 
from Multan in the south to Kangra and Jammu in the north, and 

they organized themselves into twelve misls or confederacies, the 
Bangi Misl, the Ahluwalia Misl, the Faizullapuria Misl, the Ram- 
garhia Misl, the Kanheya Misl, the Sukerchakia Misl, the Nakhai 
Misl, the Dalewalia Misl, the Karora Singhia Misl, the Phulkias of 
Patiala, Nabha, Jhind and Kythal. 

(f) The Rohillds: 

In the sixteenth century the Mughuls wrested the sovereignty 
of Hindustan from the Afghans. But there was an Afghan bid for 
supremacy in the middle of the 18th century oh the growing dis¬ 
memberment of the Mughul empire. After the second battle of Pani- 
pat (1556) the Afghan ruling houses in different, parts of India had 
disappeared and there was no Afghan State in any quarter of this 
country. But there were Afghan settlements in Allahabad, Dar- 
bhanga, Orissa and Sylhet, which had been replenished in the 17th 
century and in the first half of the 18th century when there was a 
fresh wave of Afghan immigration into Northern India 76 Afghan 
adventurers found military employment in many places either as re¬ 
tainers or as mercenaries. Many of them settled in a solid block be- 


133 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

tween Delhi and Agra on the west and Awadh and Allahabad on the 
east and became a serious menace to the declining Mughul empire 
by the middle of the 18th century. Their Indian settlement, former¬ 
ly known as Katehr, now came to be called Rohilkhand from its ‘new 
dominant race’. This area was bounded by the Ganga on the west 
and the Garra (also called Deoha) river on the east, with the Ram- 
ganga flowing almost midway between the two. 

The Rohilla power had its beginning in the early years of the 
18th century in a village situated at the south-west corner of the 
Bareilly district, through the efforts of Da’ud, an Afghan soldier of 
fortune, who came from Qandahar province. Da’ud and his party 
of Afghan adventurers hired themselves out first to the landowners 
and then to the imperial governor of that place. Da’ud “laid the 
foundations of an estate”. On his death in 1721, his adopted son ‘All 
Muhammad Khan obtained command of his retainers and sought to 
implement his ambitious plans. By occasionally serving the im¬ 
perial faujdar of Muradabad and further by depriving the local 
zamindars and jdgirdars of their territories, he soon formed a big 
estate in the Bareilly district, with its centre at Aonla, a village 
eighteen miles south-west of Bareilly city. 

There was a favourable turn in the career of ‘All Muhammad 
Rohilla when, after his victory at Manauna over Muhammad Salih, 
an eunuch of the Mughul imperial court in 1727, he seized the villages 
which had been granted on lease to the latter. “After this success, 
he ordered high and low alike to call him Nawab, appointed the 
officials usual to a royal court and set up a crimson tent for him¬ 
self, which was an exclusive privilege of the emperors of Delhi”. 77 
Through the intercession of the vazir Qamar-ud-din Khan, he got 
himself appointed as revenue-collector in the place of his victim. 

The adverse effects of the invasion of Nadir Shah on the Mughul 
empire, emboldened ‘All Muhammad Rohilla to seize territories right 
and left. At this, the vazir , to whom had been granted the district 
of Muradabad as a fief, asked his local deputy, Raja Harnand Arora 
to expel the Rohilla chief. But the Raja was defeated at the village 
of Asalatpur-Jarrai on the Aral river, and killed in a night attack, 
all his property being captured by the Afghans. “This far-reaching 
success immensely increased the resources and fame of the Ruhela 
upstart; the country lay helpless at his feet, and thousands of 
Afghans flocked to his victorious standard.” 78 

By various concessions received from the unprincipled vazir, 
“the Ruhela power, as represented by Muhammad, gradually extend¬ 
ed westwards from a few pargands in Badaun and Bareilly (dis- 


134 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


tricts). About 1740-1741 he managed to annex the bulk of Mura- 
dabad”. 79 Between 1741 and 1748 ‘All Muhammad Rohilla extended 
his conquests in the north and the east, occupied the Pilibhit district 
and the kingdom of Kumaun. In 1748 the whole of the Bijnor dis¬ 
trict passed under his control. 

By 1742 ‘All Muhammad Rohilla had gathered a force of thirty 
to forty thousand horsemen, besides many others permanently set¬ 
tled in Rohilkhand. Further, the numerical strength of the Afghan 
force, its racial character and military organization made it still 
more formidable. An eye-witness of the imperial campaign against 
‘All Muhammad Rohilla in 1745 noted in his diary: “Every soldier 
in his army, whether horse or foot, carries a musket; every com¬ 
mander of ten or a hundred infantry has his own small banner of 
parti-coloured cloth, and these are carried at the head of the caval¬ 
cade in marching, so that it looks as if a flower garden is travelling 
with them”. 80 The Afghan soldiers possessed excellent fighting 
qualities. “They were cool, accurate shots, clever in executing night 
attacks and ambuscades, extremely mobile on foot, and yet capable 
of acting in concert and of controlling their fire at the direction of 
leaders. Their well-regulated volleys, delivered at the right 
moment, had an electric effect in shaking their enemies’ nerves and 
deciding battles at one stroke”. 81 Moreover, above the feud be¬ 
tween one clan and another of the Afghans there arose “the con¬ 
sciousness of the oneness of their race”. 82 Though not free from 
vindictiveness and cruelty, the Afghan race, as rulers, protected and 
encouraged the peasantry and traders and drove the robbers from 
their lands. Thus they won their sympathy and support. 

The emperor Muhammad Shah was persuaded by Safdar Jang, 
who had been appointed Mir Atish in 1744 to lead an expedition 
against ‘All Muhammad Rohilla in 1745. After three months’ cam¬ 
paigning it “achieved only a superficial and ephemeral victory and 
that too, more by persuasion than by compulsion”. 83 

Apprehending the risks of journey during the ensuing rainy 
season, the emperor was persuaded by the vaz%r to make peace with 
‘All Muhammad Rohilla on 23 May, 1745. The Rohilla chieftain 
agreed to dismantle the fortifications of Bangarh and to surrender 
the fiefs usurped by him to the new imperial officer, Farid-ud-din, 
the son of Shaik Azmatulla Khan of Muradabad. Soon he received 
a 4,000 mansab and was sent to Sirhind as imperial faujdar of 
that place after being detained at Delhi for some months, his two 
sons being kept there as hostages for his fidelity. But the new 
arrangement in Rohilkhand removing the usurper’s authority, caused 


J35 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

anarchy there. The author of the Siyar-ul-mutakherin who was 
then present in Bareilly observed: “Thousands of Afghans were 
living there, and having struck their roots had become owners of 
the 'land and made it impossible for anybody else to govern that 
tract”. 84 

Hedayat ‘All (father of the historian Ghulam Husain) who was 
sent to administer Bareilly and seventeen other mahdls on behalf of 
the Nizam, to whom these had been granted previously, could not 
successfully cope with the situation there, and he had to retreat to 
Delhi with great difficulty. On hearing of Ahmad Shah Abdall’s cap¬ 
ture of Lahore and his intended advance towards Delhi, ‘All Muham¬ 
mad Rohilla left his post at Sirhind in the middle of February, 1748, 
and returned to Rohilkhand with his full contingent of Afghans. 
He re-established his own authority by March/April 1748. Thus im¬ 
perial rule was overthrown in Rohilkhand. 

‘All Muhammad Rohilla died on 15 September, 1748. Of his six 
sons, the eldest two, Faizullah and Abdullah, were then captives at 
Qandahar where the Abdali had sent them after his capture of Sir- 
hind, and the other four were very young. “Summoning, there¬ 
fore, his Chiefs around him he made his will before them. His third 
son, Sadullah was to be his successor until, if ever, his elder sons re¬ 
turned. Rahmat Khan was to be regent ( hafiz) and Dundi Khan 
Commander-in-Chief. .. . Fatti Khan was to be steward (Khan-i- 
saman) with the special care of his three younger sons, while Sardar 
Khan was appointed paymaster of the troops. These chiefs were en¬ 
joined to consult together when any common danger required their 
concerted action”. 85 This arrangement was thought necessary to 
protect the Afghans from ambition and hostility of their powerful 
neighbours. “Hafiz Rahmat, Dundi Khan and others were each the 
father-in-law of a son of ‘All Muhammad and in the names of their 
sons-in-law divided the conquests of ‘All Muhammad among them¬ 
selves and brought the lands into their own hands. Giving a few 
villages for sustenance to their sons-in-law, they themselves enjoyed 
the rest in royal pomp”. 86 As Sadullah was of an extremely dissi¬ 
pated character, “the whole charge of the revenue and the manage¬ 
ment of the troops devolved on Hafiz”. The ambition of Shaikh 
Qutb-ud-din to get back the faujdari of Rohilkhand, which his grand¬ 
father had once enjoyed, was frustrated at the beginning of 1749 
after his defeat in a battle at Dhampur, 38 miles north-west of 
Muradabad. 

After sometime the vazir Safdar Jang formed a new plan to 
suppress the Rohillas. “He did not like Afghan rule in a district 


136 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


so close to his subdh. .. . and looked upon the Ruhelas as serpents 
infesting his road to Delhi”. He sought to destroy one Afghan, by 
means of another, “so that whichever side lost he had one enemy the 
less”. 87 

Safdar Jang instigated Qaim Khan (the Bangash chief) to drive 
out the Afghans by appointing him faujddr of Rohilkhand and, after 
some negotiations which were not acceptable to the Rohillas, the 
latter fought a battle with them at Daunri, four miles south-east of 
Badaun city. After some successes at the beginning, Qaim Khan’s 
army met with disaster and he himself was shot dead. “All the 
possessions of the Bangash house on the left or eastern bank of the 
Ganges (except three pargands) were annexed by the Ruhela re¬ 
gent (Hafiz Rahmat), but he dissuaded his victory-flushed clansmen 
from crossing the river and invading Qaim Khan’s territories on its 
western bank, saying that the Afghans should mot destroy one an¬ 
other by internecine war”. 88 

Within a few months, Safdar Jang became unpopular with the 
Bangash Afghans, was defeated at the battle of Ram Chatauni on 
13 September, 1750, and was disgraced at the Delhi Court. But he 
soon re-established his position and formed an alliance with the 
Marathas and the Jats for invading Rohilkhand. The allies won a 
resounding victory over the Rohillas (April 1751). But on hearing 
of the Abdalfs invasion of the Punjab in early 1752, the emperor 
asked the vazir to make peace with the Afghans of Rohilkhand. So 
at the beginning of 1752 a peace was concluded on the-following 
terms: “Farrukhabad and some other mahdls worth 16 or 22 lakhs 
of rupees a year, were left to Ahmad and other sons of Muhammad 
Khan Bangash, while the sons of ‘All Muhammad Rohilla were con¬ 
firmed in the possession of Mirabad and some other mahdls which 
they had seized after the death of Qaim Khan, but they were sub¬ 
jected to the payment of revenue for these. Qanauj, Akbarpur 
Shah, and other possessions of the Bangash family were put in the 
possession of Govind Pant Bundele, the Maratha agent. Safdar Jang 
kept a few of the places, for himself. The Bangashes and Rohillas 
thus emerged from this overwhelming invasion with surprisingly 
little permanent loss”. 89 

“Matters remained in this position till after the third battle of 
Panipat in January 1761”. By rendering good services to the 
Abdall in this battle, the Rohillas and the Bangashes made some 
gains. 


137 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Hafiz Rahmat Khan was not only a brave warrior but also a wise 
ruler and the years 1761 to 1768 formed a peaceful and prosperous 
period of Rohilla rule. 90 

But Rohilkhand was again threatened by the Marathas in 1772. 
The Nawab of Awadh also coveted Rohilkhand. But the common 
Maratha menace led to the conclusion of a treaty between the Rohillas 
and the Nawab of Awadh on 17 June, 1772, in the presence of Sir 
Robert Barker. This soon dragged the Rohillas into a war with the 
English, the result of which was their complete defeat though they 
fought with “great bravery and resolution”. Hafiz Rahmat Khan 
was killed while fighting bravely; about 20,000 Rohillas were ex¬ 
pelled beyond the Ganga. Their province was annexed to the 
Awadh kingdom; only a fragment of it, together with Rampur, was 
left in the possession of Faizullah. Khan, son of ‘All Muhammad 
Rohilla. 

(g) The Bundelas: 

Reference has been made in the preceding volume (pp. 379-80) 
to the career of Chhatrasal up to the death of Aurangzlb. 

In the early part of Bahadur Shah’s reign Chhatrasal did not 
attend to the summons of the Delhi Court. But on 30 May, 1708, 
when Bahadur Shah was proceeding to the Deccan to fight against 
his younger brother, Kam Bakhsh, Harde Narayan and the other sons 
of Chhatrasal appeared before him and got mansabs. On 22 April, 
1710, when the emperor was at Karatiya in the Kota country on his 
return journey to northern India, Chhatrasal presented himself be¬ 
fore him and joined the army which was then marching against the 
Sikh leader, Banda. On 10 December, 1710, he participated in the 
assault on the Sikh fortress of Lohgarh. He retained imperial 
favour during the reign of Farrukh-siyar. On 21 January, 1714. 
he got the rank of 6,000 zait (4,000 horse). On 3 May, 1718, three 
of his sons and some grandsons attended imperial court and received 
presents. 91 

On 25 December, 1720, Muhammad Khan Bangash was re¬ 
warded with the government of Allahabad for deserting Sayyid 
Abdullah Khan. Within the area of this province lay the greater part 
of Bundelkhand including the entire portion over which Chhatrasal 
had established his authority. The Mughuls had little authority in 
this region. 92 Dilir Khan, a favourite follower of Muhammad Khan 
was placed in charge of this area. In 1720, the Bundelas revolted, 
sacked Kalpi and killed the local amil. In a fierce fight on 25 May, 


138 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


1721, between Chhatrasal and his men with those of Dilir Khan, the 
latter and his five hundred men were slain. Chhatrasal had already 
incurred the displeasure of the imperial government by sending aid 
to Girdhar Bahadur at Allahabad and to the rebel Kichar Zamindar 
of Asothar in the Doab. After Dilir Khan’s defeat and death, Chha- 
trasal’s suppression was considered imperative by the Delhi Govern¬ 
ment. This was postponed for some time due to the Mughul em¬ 
peror’s quarrel with Raja A jit Singh of Jodhpur. 

After peace with Ajit Singh, concluded towards the end of 
1723, Muhammad Khan was asked to lead an expedition into Bundel- 
khand to check the aggressions of Chhatrasal. But Muhammad 
Khan remained engaged in other quarters and the Bundelas con¬ 
tinued their inroads and Baghelkhand was overrun by them. 

Towards the end of 1726, Muhammad Khan was asked to res¬ 
tore order in Bundelkhand. Crossing the Jamuna on 3 February, 
1727, his vanguard first cleared the eastern part of Bundelkhand, 
with the exception of Tarahwan. Entrusting his eldest son, Saif 
Khan, to conduct the siege of that place, Muhammad Khan moved 
on to within eight miles of Sahenda. He brought under his posses¬ 
sion pargand Bhend, Mauda, Pailani, Agwasi and Simanni. Tarah¬ 
wan also was occupied by Qaim Khan on 22 December, 1727. 

On 22 May, 1727, Muhammad Khan encountered the entrenched 
position of the Bundelas at Ijoli in pargand Mahoba. Chhatrasal 
and his party sought refuge in the forest of Salhat, nine miles due 
east of Jaitpur. Here also the imperial army attacked. them on 19 
June, 1727. But- before the Muhammadan troops could come near 
the Bundelas, the latter went away to Mahoba. The former pitched 
their camp two miles beyond Mahoba and after spending the rainy 
season there resumed their advance in November 1727. Active 
hostilities were resumed in April 1728, and in the month of Decem¬ 
ber 1728, the fortress of Jaitpur fell into the hands of the Muham¬ 
madans. Qaim Khan cleared the country to the east as far as 
Bargarh. Muhammad Khan sent a detailed report about the battle 
to the emperor. 93 

After some time during which there were signs of submission 
by the Bundelas, they renewed their activities by February 1729, 
and Muhammad Khan met with difficulties and reverses. Raja 
Chhatrasal beseeched the Peshma to come to his aid and the Mara- 
thas under the Peshma, BajI Eao, responded and attacked Muhammad 
Khan in his encampment on 22 Match, 1729. Muhammad Khan and 
his troops were reduced to straits and had to suffer much for lack of 


139 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


provisions. On hearing of this at Tarahwan, Qaim Khan reached 
Supa, 12 miles north-east of Jaitpur, with some reinforcements and 
supplies. Coming out of their hiding places the Bundelas fought 
against Muhammad Khan, who withdrew to Jaitpur, The Marathas 
after defeating Qaim Khan besieged the town and the fort into which 
Muhammad Khan had withdrawn. Here also the garrison was sub¬ 
jected to acute troubles, for want of foodstuffs. Muhammad Khan 
appealed to the emperor and the great nobles to help him in this dire 
distress. “Not a hand was raised to help or encourage him”. 94 
Khan-i-Dauran Samsam-ud-daulah, whom the emperor asked to pro¬ 
ceed to Jaitpur, put off his journey and secretly encouraged Chha¬ 
trasal to proceed against Muhammad Khan. 

On the outbreak of epidemic in the Maratha camp and before 
the rains set in, the Marathas raised the siege and returned to the 
Deccan. Considering that it would be more prudent to come to 
terms, Chhatrasal and his men allowed Muhammad Khan to eva¬ 
cuate Jaitpur in August 1729 “on signing a written agreement not 
to attack them again, but content himself with the tribute they had 
formerly paid”. 95 Muhammad Khan and his party recrossed the 
Jamuna at Kalpi on 3 October, 1729 and never again came to Bundel- 
khand. 

Chhatrasal died at Panna on 14 December, 1731, at the age of 
eighty-two. Of his many sons, the eldest two Harde Sah and Jagat 
Raj divided the State between themselves. A small jdgir was also 
granted to the Peshwd. Harde Sah became Raja of Panna and died 
in April 1739. Jagat Raj became Raja of Jaitpur and died in 1758. 
The younger sons got small appanages for their maintenance. 

(h) Rajasthan: 

Aurangzib’s intolerance and persecution had alienated the Raj¬ 
puts. So after his death the prominent Rajput rulers like Amar 
Singh of Mewar (Udaipur), Ajit Singh of Marwar (Jodhpur) and 
Jay Singh of Amber (Jaipur) sought to cast off their allegiance to 
the Mughul empire and to assert independence. When Bahadur 
Shah proceeded to subdue them, Amar Singh averted the attack on 
him by sending his brother Bakht Singh to Agra with a letter of 
congratulations, one hundred gold coins, one thousand rupees and 
some costly presents. The emperor also brought Amber under his 
control and made it over to Bijay Singh,. Jay Singh’s younger bro¬ 
ther, who on 30 April, 1708, received the tilde of Mirza Raja. 36 

After staying in Amber for three days Bahadur Shah continued 
his march towards Jodhpur. Its ruler Ajit Singh also tendered sub- 


140 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

mission to Bahadur Shah. He received the title of Maharaja and 
the rank of 3,500 zat and 3,000 horse, a standard and kettle-drums. 
But soon on 30 April, 1708, Ajit Singh of Jodhpur, Jay Singh II of 
Amber and Durgadas Rathor left the emperor’s camp, when it was 
near Mandasor in Malwa. They had “entered into an agreement 
for joint resistance”. 97 

In view of the Sikh rising in the north of Sirhind, Bahadur 
Shah adopted conciliatory measures in relation to the Rajputs be¬ 
tween October 1708 and June 1710. On 6 October, 1708 on the in¬ 
tercession of Prince ‘Azlm-ush-shan, Jay Singh and Ajit Singh were, 
restored to their ranks in the Mughul service. 

During the confusion which followed Bahadur Shah’s death Ajit 
Singh, “after forbidding cow-killing and the call of prayer from the 
Almagiri mosque, besides ejecting the imperial officers from Jodhpur 
and destroying their houses, entered the imperial territory and 
took possession of Ajmer”. 98 Sayyid Husain ‘All was sent to sub¬ 
due Ajit Singh. But so vitiated was the court politics of those days 
that “official orders were given in one sense, and the opposing side 
received secret letters of a different purport, assuring them of future 
favour if they made a vigorous defence and defeated the imperial 
general sent against them. Letters were despatched to Raja Ajit 
Singh urging him to make away with Husain ‘All in any way he 
could, whereupon the whole of the BakhshVs property and treasure 
would become his; and he would, in addition, receive other rewards.” 99 
But Ajit Singh did not offer any opposition and concluded a treaty 
according to one article of which he agreed to give one of his 
daughters in marriage to the emperor. The marriage was celebrated 
next year. 

During the reign of Farrukh-siyar “the houses of Jodhpur and 
Jaipur played a conspicuous part in Delhi politics arid by their oppor¬ 
tune aloofness or adherence they added to their kingdoms a large 
portion of the empire”. To strengthen their own party the Sayyids 
attached to it the Rajput chiefs who got various appointments, be¬ 
sides holding their fiefs in their own territories. Ajit Singh received 
the governments of Ajmer and Gujarat, which he held till 1721. On 
the fall of the Sayyids, Jay Singh of Jaipur became also the Gov¬ 
ernor of Agra. After Muhammad Shah’s accession he was conci¬ 
liated by being given the government of the Sarkar of Surat and a 
large amount of money. “In this way the country from a point 
sixty miles of Delhi to the shores of the ocean at Surat was in the 
hands of those two Rajas, very untrustworthy sentinels for the 
Mughals on the exposed frontier”. 100 Ajit Singh secretly assisted 


141 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


the Marathas in their movements in western India. But after re¬ 
action in the Mughul court against the Sayyid brothers, who had 
been in alliance with the Rajputs, he was removed from the govern¬ 
ment of Gujarat at an inopportune time when this 1 subah was in the 
welter of internal anarchy, and Haidar Quli Khan was appointed in 
his place. Thus Jodhpur was alienated and Gujarat moved away 
from Mughul control. Ajit Singh met with a tragic death at the 
hands of his second son, Bakht Singh. 

The revival of the Rajput chiefs after decadence of the Mughul 
empire was temporary and was not of a national type, the chiefs be¬ 
ing led by motives of personal aggrandisement. Absence of internal 
unity and cohesion produced confusion and disorder in Rajasthan 
and subjected it to external aggression. Sir Jadunath Sarkar ob¬ 
serves: “The imperial Government of Delhi had held together and 
protected all the feudatory States of India. But when the Emperor 
became a lifeless shadow confined within the harem, when the 
wazir’s role was pursuit of pleasure varied only by contests with 
his court rivals, this unifying bond and common controlling autho¬ 
rity was dissolved. No superior power was left to enforce lawful 

rights and prevent ambitious conflicts between one vassal State and 

> 

another, and between one prince and another of the same royal 
house. All the pent-up personal ambitions and inter-State rivalries 
(hitherto checked) now burst forth without fear or check. And 
Rajputana became a zoological garden with the barriers of the cages 
thrown open and the keepers removed. The fiercest animal passions 
raged throughout the land”. 101 

The chief storm centres in Rajasthan during the second quarter 
of the eighteenth century were Bundi, Jaipur and Marwiar. The 
Hada country of Bundi was confronted with a threat when Sawai 
Jay Singh embarked upon a campaign to make Bundi a vassal State 
of Jaipur by removing its legitimate ruler Budh Singh and giving its 
throne to Dalil Singh in 1729. For the following nineteen years the 
dispossessed Budh Singh and his gallant son Ummed Singh made 
various attempts to recover their own authority and there was ulti¬ 
mately complete triumph of Ummed Singh. In Jaipur there was 
struggle between Ishwari Singh (reign 1743-1750) and his younger 
brother Madho Singh, ishwari Singh tried t6 keep Madho Singh 
satisfied by heavy concessions to him and he got the throne only 
after the death of the former without any issue. In Marwar there 
was rivalry between Ram Singh, the successor of Maharaja Abhay 
Singh and his paternal uncle Bakht Singh, the chief of Nagore. 
They entered into contest in 1749 soon after the death of Abhay 

142 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

Singh. Bakht Singh gained the throne in 1751 and bequeathed it 
to his own progeny. But there was no peace in the territory till the 
death of the dispossessed Ram Singh in 1773. 

The deplorable effects of these internal quarrels have been aptly 
described in the following words: “Each of these three dynastic 
quarrels drew into its vortex the neighbours of the two main con¬ 
testants, and in time all three became merged into one, with a clear- 
cut array of allies facing opponents similarly confederated. The 
Marathas were called in to decide the issue, and that by every party 
and almost in every year. In the end the three claimants mention¬ 
ed above gained their ancestral thrones, but only after ruining and 
weakening their kingdoms and leaving the Marathas in supreme com¬ 
mand over a divided, impotent and impoverished Rajputana which 
lay helplessly subject to their annual exactions and ravage.” 102 

The Maratha advance into the province of Malwa served as a 
“convenient starting point for raids into Rajputana”. The Marathas 
defeated and killed its subtihdar, Girdhar Bahadur, in the plain be¬ 
tween Amjhera and Tirla near Mandu, on 29 November, 1728. His 
cousin Daya Bahadur was also killed in another part of the same 
field. On 22 April, 1734, Malhar Rao Holkar and Ranoji Sindia at¬ 
tacked Bundi. This caused alarm in the whole of Rajasthan and in 
the second half of October 1734, Sawai Jay Singh summoned a con¬ 
ference of all the Rajas of Rajasthan at Hurda to prepare a concer¬ 
ted plan for checking Maratha spoliation of their country. But no¬ 
thing came out of it. 

On 15 January, 1736, the Peshwd BajI Rao I appeared at the 
southern frontier of Mewar. The terrified Rana Jagat Singh (1734- 
1751) welcomed him at Udaipur and signed a treaty promising there¬ 
by to pay an annual tribute. The treaty “remained in force during 
ten years when grasping at the whole they despised a part, and the 
treaty became a nullity”. 103 

After Nadir Shah’s invasion had dealt a shattering blow to the 
Mughul empire, the imperial authority disappeared from Rajputana 
in all but name. “The Rajput princes were left entirely to them¬ 
selves, to wrangle and fight within the confines of their own coun¬ 
try, with the result of establishing a new master, the Marathas, as 
the arbiter of their destinies. This change was rendered easier be¬ 
cause in the course of the next eleven years all the last Rajput 
princes who had counted for anything in imperial politics were re¬ 
moved from the scene—Sawai Jay Singh in 1743, Abhay Singh in 
1749 and Ishwari Singh in 1750. The smaller men who succeeded 


143 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

N 

them and who could not look up to any great suzerain for support, 
were naturally powerless to make a stand against the Marathas.” 104 

Jay Singh died on 21 September, 1743 and was succeeded by 
his eldest son ishwari Singh, but his reign of seven years was one 
long struggle with his younger brother Madho Singh and his Rajput 
and Maratha allies. Jagat Singh supported the claim of his nephew 
Madho Singh and advanced towards Jaipur. But with the support 
of the Mara thas, Ishwari Singh defeated the Rana early in February 
1745. The Rana then managed to secure the help of Malhar Rao 
Holkar. In March 1747, a combined army consisting of the troops 
of Marwar and Bundl assisted by Holkar’s under his son Khande Rao 
was defeated at the battle of Rajmahal (ten miles north of Deoli 
cantonment and south of a bend in the Banas river). 

At the end of 1750, Jaipur had to suffer from “a new and dis¬ 
astrous visitation of the Mara thas and saw a revolution in its affairs”. 
Disgusted with the galling yoke of the Marathas, ishwari Singh com¬ 
mitted suicide in December 1750, and Madho Singh occupied the 
throne. But in this war of succession the Marathas became the arbi¬ 
ters of Rajputana. 105 

Jagat Singh had no strength of character and administrative 
ability to prevent Maratha aggressions. In the reign of his successor 
Pratap Singh II (1751-1754) the Marathas exacted large contributions 
from Mewar, which was tormented by disputed successions. During 
the reign of Raj Singh II (1754-61) the repeated invasions on his 
country so exhausted it ‘‘that the Rana was compelled to ask pecu¬ 
niary aid from the Brahmin Collector of the revenue, to enable him 
to marry the Rathor chieftain’s daughter”. 106 

Even after 1761 the recurring Maratha raids into Rajasthan 
sucked its life-blood and added to the woes of its unhappy people. 
The Maratha invasions resulted in anarchy, plunder, economic ruin 
and humiliation of the noble race (the Rajputs) who ultimately 
courted alliance with the British power by entering into treaties with 
it during the Governor-Generalship of Marquess of Hastings. 

(i) Mdlwa: (1707-1818 A.D.) 

The story of the infiltration of the Marathas in Malwa, of the 
defeat of the Mughul Subdhdar Girdhar Bahadur in November 1728, 
and of his successors by Peshwd BajI Rao, has been told in detail 
in the earlier chapter. The Nizam by the convention of Durah? 
Sarai in January 1738 promised to obtain for the Peshwd the Subdh - 
aari of the province. The promise was fulfilled three years later, 

144 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


when in July 1741 the Peshwd (Balaji Rao) was granted the deputy- 
governorship of Malwa. Thus, Malwa ceased to be a part of the 
empire. 

1. The Maratha Domination (1742-1766 A.D.) 

Maratha domination over Malwa having been thus legalised, it 
was finally and completely cut off from the Mughul empire. The 
Mughul administrative control and the government machinery there¬ 
of had been rapidly breaking up since the battle of Amjhera (Nov¬ 
ember, 1728) and now it was completely destroyed. The Marathias 
had by then been in virtual control of the entire province for about 
ten years, but they did not provide any centralised provincial ad¬ 
ministrative machinery of their own to take the place of the shat¬ 
tered Mughul administrative set-up in the province. Consequently 
after the end of the Mughul rule in Malwa, the different Maratha 
commanders did not find it very easy to establish, much less to 
strengthen, their hold over the parganas assigned to them, which 
were generally spread over large areas and geographically non-con- 
tiguous. During the early decades the Peshwd too was quite often 
changing these assignments to different commanders. Therefore, 
their revenues were invariably quite inadequate even for their ever- 
increasing armies, more often than not on the move, and more so 
for the local administrative purposes. 

The Maratha commanders in charge of the Malwa region had, 
however, to contend with another important factor in the polity 
of Malwa, viz., the Rajput principalities and estates, of varying status 
and powers, spread throughout the province. Having been there 
for quite some time, these Rajput ruling families were well entrench¬ 
ed in their respective principalities; therefore, the Maratha com¬ 
manders had necessarily to leave them alone, provided their due con¬ 
tributions were paid off with some semblance of regularity. Hence, 
with the establishment of the Maratha domination there, all these 
Rajput States of Malwa, began to assume for themselves added powers 
and greater authority than ever before. 

Moreover, there was complete anarchy within khdlsa par - 
gands and those held by absentee landlords. Various daring Rajput 
adventurers in the region collected bands of roving horsemen, and 
taking advantage of the prevailing fluid conditions, began to esta¬ 
blish estates or zamiiiddris of their own. Many of the petty Rajput 
estates and thikanas in Central and Western Malwa, not comprised 

145 

M.S.—10 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

in the then existing Rajput principalities, were thus established 
during these troublous decades of anarchy after 1732 A.D. These 
adventurous new occupants were later accepted by the Maratha 
commanders as the masters of those territories, as they readily 
agreed to pay off the Maratha dues levied on their holdings. Later, 
by the end of the 18th century, when the successors of these estate 
holders were dispossessed of their holdings, many of them readily 
became outlaws and disturbers of peace, and came to be termed 
‘girasva$\ 

With the passage of time the cruel hand of death brought about 
series of inevitable changes in the personnel controlling the Mara¬ 
tha affairs in Malwa., The principle of heredity had already begun to 
prevail in matters of succession to these early Maratha jucftrs 
in Malwa. But th Maratha commanders had been getting 
more and more involved in the Rajasthan and Delhi affairs since 
1747 A. D. wherein the House of Sindia suffered series of casualties. 
Malhar Rao Holkar, however, secured in 1757 A.D. from Madho 
Singh of Jaipur the pargands of Rampura-Bhanpura in north-wes¬ 
tern Malwa, once ruled over by the Chandrawats, but the dispossess¬ 
ed Chandrawats lost no opportunity to disturb the pargands or to 
seize Rampura. Again, due to l^ck of sufficient Maratha forces in 
Malwa, none of the Maratha commanders were able to strengthen 
their hold even on their saranjdm pargands there. Thus seething 
discontent among the residents and the local zaminddrs of Ahirwada, 
including the Raja of Raghogarh, came to surface in May, 1760, 
which made roads passing through that region unsafe for traffic and 
even for Maratha couriers. 

The repercussions of the Maratha disaster at the third battle 
of Panipat (1761) were very great in Malwa. “Everywhere the dis¬ 
possessed or humbled original chieftains, and even petty landlords, 
raised their heads and talked of shutting the southern invaders out 
of their country”. The Chandrawats captured Rampura, the Bhopal 
Nawab occupied Bhilsa, and Abhay Singh Rathor, an officer of Maha- 
rao of Kota, raised the standard of revolt in the Malwa pargands of 
the Kota State. For full three months or more the position of the 
Marathas in Malwa was very critical. But Malhar Rao Holkar, the 
only senior notable survivor, now in supreme control of the Malwa 
affairs, successfully retrieved the situation, as there was no great 
leader among the countless separate caste and tribal chiefs in Malwa 
to unite them and win their freedom from the Maratha domination. 
Malhar Rab Holkar was, however, ailing, and he died at Alampur on 
May 20, 1766. With him not only the first phase of the anarchy in 


146 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


Malwa ended, but also the predominance of the Holkars in Malwa 
affairs. With the rise of Mahadji Sindia the balance of relative im¬ 
portance naturally tilted in his favour. 

2. Increasing Mardthd hold on Malwa (1766-1795 A.D.) 

The forces of the revived Maratha power were once again on 
their northward march, but the affairs of Malwa continued to remain 
unsettled as the youthful Peshwd Madhav Rao took some time to 
come into his own to assert his authority. In the meanwhile Ahalya 
Bai had assumed herself all ruling powers over the possessions of the 
Holkar family and retained her hold over them till the end. Her 
benign and benevolent rule ensured peace and prosperity in those 
regions, which were only occasionally disturbed by irreconcilable 
Rajput zaminddrs or restive Bhils, who were successfully put down 
at her bidding. 

Similarly, there was much delay in the appointment of a perma¬ 
nent successor to the House of Sindias; hence the situation in the 
Malwa possessions of the Sindia House remained fluid. Mahadji 
Sindia was ultimately acknowledged the sole successor to the Sindia’s 
heritage. Still even thereafter the overall situation in Northern 
Malwa continued to remain quite chaotic. The Ahirs were in revolt 
and in the adjoining Khichiwada the Raja of Raghogarh became de¬ 
fiant, Elsewhere too in all the mahdls Bhils, Bhumias, and Rangda 
Girasias (Rajput outlaws) were disturbing the entire country. But 
as Mahadji could only occasionally spend a few months in Malwa 
and that too while passing through it, no lasting results could be 
achieved. 

During the First Anglo-Maratha War, however, when in 1760, 
the British decided to invade Malwa, Mahadji rushed to save it and 
cantoned there during that rainy season. He was thus able to avert 
the loss of Malwa, but even then he could not follow it up with any 
further effective measures to consolidate his Own hold there. Hence, 
even after being made the Deputy Regent of the Mughul empire, 
in 1784 A.D., Mahadji found the vital line of communication to 
Ujjain and southwards threatened due to intransigency of Raja Bal- 
want Singh of Raghogarh. The expeditionary force sent against him 
ultimately made the Raja and members of his family captive, and 
confined them in different forts. All his property was confiscated 
and thus an attempt was made to extinguish this old Rajput State, 
but the redoubtable Khichis could not possibly be thus crushed. Sher 
Singh, a Khichi cadet, rose in revolt, secured the escape of Jay Singh, 

147 


THE MAEATHA SUPREMACY 


the son of Raja Balwant Singh, from his prison in the Bhilsa fort, 
and then both of them together carried on ceaseless guerilla war¬ 
fare in this region, making the Deccan roads more unsafe than be¬ 
fore. Even Mahadji’s wife, then proceeding northwards, would have 
been captured by them, but for personal interposition of the Minis¬ 
ter, Chhote Khan of Bhopal. The fateful battle of Lalsot (July 27, 
1787) had serious repercussions throughout Malwa, and there were 
series of risings all over the province, and Mahadji had to send out 
forces to put them down. Thus, after seizing the Raghogarh State 
from the guerillas Mahadji wisely made up with Raja Balwant Singh 
by restoring his territories to him on the promise of paying tribute. 
This policy of pacification, coupled with the armed fist, proved effec¬ 
tive and there was some peace in the Malwa region. 

The military might of Mahadji increased due to De Boigne’s 
trained battalions, and it ensured the continuance of semblance of 
peace in Malwa for some years till 1795 A.D., which marks the end 
of an epoch in Malwa. Due to their increasing military might the 
Maratha hold on Malwa continued to increase in spite of local up¬ 
risings and serious discontent throughout the region against Maratha 
domination. But nothing was done by the Maratha rulers there 
either to organise the local administration or to mitigate the misery 
of the people of Malwa in the least. Hence as a result of series of 
deaths among the Maratha ruling houses in Malwa, when new per¬ 
sons came to the helm of affairs, even this semblance of peace and 
order there finally ended. 

3. The Last Phase of Anarchy and ‘Gardz kd Waqt 9 in Malwa: 

(1795-1817 A. D.) 

Daulat Rao Sindia succeeded Mahadji Sindia to the heritage of 
the House of Sindias, but the administrative disorder and falling re¬ 
venues of the State made it impossible for his appointees in Malwa 
to do anything at all there. Moreover, before long the situation fur¬ 
ther worsened as a result of some fateful happenings in Poona. 
Taking advantage of his dominance at the Poona Court, Daulat Rao 
tried to regulate the affairs of the House of Holkar after the death of 
Tukoji Holkar, which ultimately resulted in the ascendancy of 
Yashwant Rao Holkar, the illegitimate son of Tukoji Rao Holkar. 
In the meanwhile Daulat Rao Sindia’s war with Mahadji’s widows 
entered Malwa and Yashwant Rao Holkar joined them to complicate 
the situation there. Thus “in the year 1798 the dark clouds of 

anarchy, rapine and popular suffering descended on the unharrov 
land (of Malwa)”. 


148 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

Daulat Rao Sindia ruined Malwa by wrong policies and dilato¬ 
riness. After his victory at Newri and defeat at Satwas, Yashwant 
Rao Holkar captured Ujjain (July 1801). Three months later 
Daulat Rao’s general, Sarje Rao Ghatge, defeated Yashwant Rao 
Holkar at Indore (October 1801), but Daulat Rao could not follow 
up the victory due to utter lack of money and daily mutinies of his 
long unpaid soldiery. Efforts for peace between them failed because 
of irreconcilable claims of both sides, and then Yashwant Rao 
Holkar carried his war against Daulat Rao to the gates of Poona, 
which ultimately shattered Daulat Rao’s power and destroyed Mara- 
tlia hegemony once for all. 

One major outcome of the Second Anglo-Maratha War was that 
all European officers of Sindia’s forces, save Jean Baptiste Filose 
were seduced away by the British. This greatly reduced the mili¬ 
tary might of Sindia. Again, during the following decade the series 
of court intrigues and consequent ministerial changes by Daulat Rao 
repeatedly threw his policies and his entire administration into tur¬ 
moil time and again. Naturally it became weak, confused and 
bankrupt. 

The treaties concluded with the British also greatly reduced 
Sindia’s territories with the result that the ambitions and arms of 
Sindia were now cooped up within the barren sands of Rajasthan 
and the then desolate plains of Malwa. Daulat Rao sent his expedi¬ 
tionary forces against the various Rajput States in Malwa to extend 
his power over them and to exact as much money or territory from 
them as possible. The Raghogarh Raja Jay Singh became a fugitive 
and his State was annexed. This Rajput policy of Daulat Rao Sindia, 
following in succession to their decades-old military suppression 
under Mahadji Sindia, left a legacy of bitter hatred for the Maratha 
name in Rajput hearts. 

The situation within the territories under the control of the 

i 

house of Holkar was no better. Yashwant Rao Holkar, the only man 
cf military leadership among the Marathas then living, returned to 
Malwa after concluding the Treaty of Rajghat (Dec. 24, 1805) with 
the British. Making Bhanpura (48 miles south of Kota) his head¬ 
quarters he began to reorganise his military forces, when on 20 
October, 1807 he had his first fit of insanity. During the period of 
his insanity there was complete anarchy in the Holkar State. When 
Yashwant Rao Holkar died at Bhanpura on 27 October, 1811, he was 
succeeded by his minor son Malhar Rao Holkar, born of Kesar Bai. 

The series of treaties concluded by the British with Daulat Rao 
Sindia and Yashwant Rao Holkar up to 1805, had ended hostilities 


149 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


between them, but it marked the beginning of ever increasing dis¬ 
order and anarchy throughout Malwa. The unpaid, unruly, starving 
soldiers of the inflated armies of Sindia and Holkar then began to 
roam about over the length and breadth of Malwa like beasts of prey 
attacking the undefended inhabitants, rich and poor alike, through¬ 
out the region. Amir Khan, the Pathan employee of Yashwant Rao 
Holkar, who had collected a large powerful army of banditti under 
his leadership, became a major factor at the court of insane Yash¬ 
want Rao Holkar, and ultimately also the absentee regent of the 
minor Malhar Rao Holkar. To these were added the large hordes 
of Pindaris, who were loosely grouped into *Shinde-ShdhV and 
‘Hoikar-'Shdhi* bands and worked without the least fear or restraint 
under the protection of these two major Maratha ruling Houses in 
Malwa. These Pindari hordes had their own notorious leaders, and 
the sole objective of these myriads of wolves was to plunder and 
collect wealth, for which they committed most atrocious outrages 
upon all classes of peaceful inhabitants. These human locusts spread 
utter devastation, desolation and destruction wheresoever they went. 

Thus this period of anarchy and utter devastation, known in 
Malwa as the ‘Gardi-fcd-Waqt’ reduced it to the state of utter misery 
and severe distress. All this was further augmented by the Mara¬ 
tha subahdars sent out by the various Maratha rulers to collect re¬ 
venue, accompanied by large military detachments, which were ob¬ 
liged to live on the country, while at the same time extorting maxi¬ 
mum funds for their rulers. By 1817 A.D. the disorder in Malwa 
was complete and reached its climax, ‘a state of anarchy and general 
distress, ever unheard of, which had reached its crisis in the abso¬ 
lute depopulation of the country’. 

4. The Establishment of the British Domination over Malwa 
and Malcolm’s Malwa Settlement: (1817-1818 A.D.) 

When Lord Moira (Hastings) began his campaign for suppres¬ 
sion of the Pindaris towards the close of 1817, ‘the hunt of the Pin¬ 
daris became merged in the Third Maratha War’, which sounded the 
death-knell of the absolute domination of the Maratha rulers over 
Malwa. Sindia had to sign the Treaty of Gwalior (5 November, 
1817). Holkar, defeated in the battle of Mahidpur on 21 December, 
1817, signed the Treaty of Mandasor on 6 January, 1818. The Pin¬ 
daris, in the meanwhile, had been driven across the Chambal, and by 
the end of January 1818, their organised bands had been eliminated. 

Thus the path was clear for the vitally important settlement of 
Malwa, which was effected by Sir John Malcolm, the victor of the 


150 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

battle of Mahidpur. Agreement previously made with the Naw&b 
of Bhopal in the last months of 1817 became the basis of a formal 
Treaty (26 February, 1818). Amir Khan and his brother-in-law, 
Gafur Khan of Jaira, were confirmed in their territorial possessions in 
Malwa. But the territories of all the States, big and small, and the 
estates and jnglrs of varying sizes and differing in status, were so 
interspersed and intermixed, that there was inextricable confu¬ 
sion as regards their actual boundaries, particularly because of con¬ 
tinuous disputes and changing situations, vis-a-vis the two conflict¬ 
ing parties. Hence Malcolm froze the boundaries of one and all as 
they existed in January 1818, and took up the task of finalising their 
respective claims. Moreover, they were all linked up together by 
political agreements or specific understandings, which could not pos¬ 
sibly be duly enforced by either party. 

Consequently, Malcolm secured to the Maratha rulers their due 
tributes, and at the same time secured to their tributaries their tan- 
khas, which were originally a form of blackmail. These tributaries 
were also guaranteed the permanent possession of the land they then 
held, so long as they kept the peace and carried out the conditions 
laid out in their respective scrnads. All these agreements, mediated 
by Sir John Malcolm or his assistants between the two parties, the 
Maratha ruler on the one side and the Rajput ruler or thdkur on the 
other, carried in addition to signatures of both parties an endorse¬ 
ment of the same having been ‘confirmed and guaranteed by the 
British Government’. The basis of all these agreements was thus 
enunciated by Lord Hastings: “No acknowledged usage stood in the 
way to establish principles between the sovereign and the subject 
advantageous to both, giving these principles a defined line of prac¬ 
tical application, a departure from which would afford to either 
party a right of claiming the intervention of our paramount power. 
While the sovereign had his legitimate authority and his due re¬ 
venue insured to him, the subject was protected against exaction and 
tyrannical outrage”. 

Malcolm’s much-acclaimed Malwa Settlement produced imme¬ 
diate results and before long, peace descended on this greatly troub¬ 
led land of ancient glory and greatness and the most distracted popu¬ 
lation then in India became in a few months a comparatively law- 
abiding community. But the general confusion that existed in the 
administrative sphere for a long time, however, could not possibly 
be eliminated forthwith due to the continued serious distrust be¬ 
tween the Rajput feudatories and their Maratha overlords, which 
had far-reaching effects in the years to come. Under the ‘guarantee 


151 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


system’ introduced by Malcolm in the Malwa Settlement, the Bri¬ 
tish had merely undertaken to ensure that the Maratha ruler and 
his feudatory, both carried out their prescribed parts duly and faith¬ 
fully, and to intervene only if the conditions laid down in the agree¬ 
ments were disregarded. But in reality there grew a form of politi¬ 
cal practice, greatly resented by the Maratha overlords, which was 
very much different from what was actually contemplated by Lord 
Hastings or ever thought of by Malcolm, and the same could ulti¬ 
mately be ended only a century later on 14 March, 1921. 

(j) The Jats: 

Reference has been made in the preceding volume (p. 375) to 
the early career of Churaman Jat till the death of Aurangzlb. He 
took full advantage of the war of succession, after Aurangzib’s death, 
between Bahadur Shah and his brother A‘zam with a view to streng¬ 
thening his position. After the victory of Bahadur Shah, he pro¬ 
fessed allegiance to him and received a mansoib of 1500 zat, 500 
horse. A clever man as he was, his policy was to wait for a suitable 
moment for furtherance of his own ambition. Next he joined the 
imperial forces at Ajmer and fought in their campaign against the 
Sikhs at Sadhaura and Lohgarh (1710). 107 

In 1712, on the decease of Bahadur Shah there was again a war 
of succession among his four sons, and Jahandar Shah, the eldest 
son, having been triumphant, ascended the throne, but he was total¬ 
ly unfit to wield the sceptre. Churaman took this opportunity to go 
back to his own country and devoted his energy to increase his 
power. But when Farrukh-siyar, the nephew of Jahandar Shah, 
approached Agra to contest the throne, Churaman without rendering 
any aid to the emperor, looted the baggages of both parties. 

On the defeat of Jahandar Shah, Farrukh-siyar ascended the 
throne (January 1713). Chabela Ram, the imperial Subdhdar of 
Agra, then tried hard to subdue the Jat leader, but in vain. By 
conciliatory method, the next Subahdar Samsam-ud-daulah ( Khan - 
i-Daur&n) succeeded in bringing him to the imperial court, where 
he was cordially received and placed in “charge of the royal high¬ 
way from Barapula near Delhi to the crossing on the Chambal. 
But by slow degrees he fell into disfavour, the extent of the country 
he took possession of was thought excessive, his realization of road 
dues was objected to, and his interference with jdgtr-holders was. 
disliked. All that a jagirdccr could collect from him was a little 
money thrown to him as if it were an alms”. 108 Churaman had also 


152 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

constructed a fortress at Thun in the midst of a thick and thorny 
forest. 

The conduct of the Jat leader enraged the emperor who want¬ 
ed to punish him and entrusted the task to Sawai Jay Singh of 
Jaipur. On arrival in the Jat country the latter besieged Churaman 
in his fort of Thun (November 1716). The siege dragged on for 
a long time, and, at last, tired of it, and, experiencing various diffi¬ 
culties, Churaman made proposals of peace to the Vazir, Sayyid 
‘Abdullah, offering to pay a tribute of thirty lakhs of rupees to the 
imperial government and a present' of twenty lakhs of rupees to the 
Vazir himself. Both parties having agreed to the conditions, peace 
was ratified, and Jay Singh was compelled to raise the siege. There¬ 
after, the Jat leader visited Delhi with his nephew Rupa in April, 
1718. 109 

When, later on, quarrels broke out between Sayyid ‘Abdullah 
and the emperor Muhammad Shah, Churaman joined the former, 
and to him “was confided the duty of harassing the imperial force 
and plundering it wherever he could”. 110 On the first day of the battle 
between the emperor and his minister, near Hasanpur, he plundered 
the imperial baggage, but when, on the following morning, Sayyid 
‘Abdullah’s position became hopeless, he plundered the baggages of 
both sides and retired with the spoils to his own country (Novem¬ 
ber 1720). 111 

Besides his faithless conduct, Churaman’s alliance with Ajit 
Singh of Jodhpur against the interests of the imperial government 
and his assistance to the Bundelas against the Mughul governor of 
Allahabad irritated the emperor who ordered Sa‘adat Khan, the new 
governor of Agra, to chastise him. But his deputy Nilkanth Nagar, 
while riding out on an elephant, was shot dead by a Jat. 112 

Churaman had undoubtedly gained in strength, but he com¬ 
mitted a serious mistake by imprisoning his nephew Badan Singh 
who, when released at the intervention of other influential Jats, fled 
to the Mughul camp. On the other hand, as Sa‘adat Khan was un¬ 
able to bring the Jat leader to his heels, he was replaced by Jay 
Singh as governor of Agra. On advancing into the Jat country the 
Raja besieged the fort of Thun; Badan Singh pointed out its weak 
places to him and thus helped him in its reduction. In the meantime 
Churaman had quarrels with his son Muhkam Singh and committed 
suicide by taking poison. Despairing of success after some resist¬ 
ance, Muhkam took to flight whereupon the imperial army occupied 
the fort (November 1722). 113 


153 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Badan Singh 

Badan Singh, the son of Churaman’s brother Bhao Singh, was 
then recognized as the chief of the Jats by Jay Singh and this was 
confirmed by the Imperial Court. 114 It was a very critical time for 
the Jats. “There was as yet no Jat State, no politically united Jat 
nation, no Jat King” and even the ‘small beginning of a tribal orga¬ 
nisation and foundation of a state was totally destroyed’ after the 
death of Churaman and fall of Thun. 115 So, Badan Singh had to 
commence everything afresh. By his amiable conduct he won over 
the support of Jay Singh who bestowed on him “the tika, the 
nishan^ the kettle-drum, the five coloured flag and the title of Brajay 
raj (or lord of the Holy Land of Mathura)... But... Badan very 
astutely abstained from assuming the title of Rajah. .. . and through¬ 
out life styled himself only Thakur or baron and represented him¬ 
self publicly as a mere vassal of the Rajah of Jaipur”. 116 An apt 
and capable leader with indefatigable energy, he united the scatter¬ 
ed units of the Jats, and all lands and wealth held by Jat village 
headmen were brought under his control. He strengthened his posi¬ 
tion in two ways—-first, by application of force where necessary, and 
secondly, by matrimonial alliances, specially with some influential 
families of Mathura. 

* 

He organized a strong army, consisting of infantry and cavalry, 
constructed four strong forts, viz., Dig, Kumbher, Ver and Bharat- 
pur, and provided them with ample provisions and sufficient artil¬ 
lery. 117 

It was Badan Singh who laid the foundation of a new ruling 
house, viz., that of Bharatpur, with an enlarged territory. In 1752 
he was created “a Raja with the title of ‘Mahendra’ by the Mughul 
emperor Ahmad Shah”. 118 

Badan Singh was also a patron of architecture. He constructed 
a temple at Vrindavan, known as Dhir Samir, fine palaces in the 
fort of Dig, a beautiful house with a large garden in the fort of 
Ver (Wair), 119 and palaces at Kamar and Sahar. 120 

He died on 7 June 1756, at a ripe old age, and was succeeded by 
his adopted son Suraj Mai. 

Suraj Mai 

V- 

During the latter half of Badan Singh’s regime his son Suraj* 
Mai acted as regent owing to the inactivity and growing blindness 


154 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


of the father, and it was during this period that he earned fame as 
an able warrior, efficient leader and able statesman. 

When, after the death of Sawai Jay Singh, a serious struggle 
ensued between his two sons, Suraj Mai, on appeal for assistance 
from the eldest son, joined him with 10,000 cavalry; undaunted by 
the enormous strength of the enemy, he earned undying fame 
for his valour and military skill. 121 On January 1, 1750, he inflicted 
a crushing defeat on Salabat Khan, the commander-in-chief of the 
Mughul army, and compelled him to accept his terms.. In the same 
year and, again, in 1751-52, he rendered material assistance to the 
imperial Vazir Safdar Jang against Ahmad Khan Bangash of Far- 
rukhabad and the Rohillas. 122 A few days later “the office of faujdar 
of Mathura” was conferred on Suraj Mai. “This gave him the gov¬ 
ernorship of most of the territory on the two sides of the Jamuna, 
in the province of Agra and the environs of that city for an annual 
tribute”. 123 

During the civil war (1753) between the Mughul emperor 
Ahmad Shah and Safdar Jang, Suraj Mai, out of gratitude, render¬ 
ed all possible assistance to the latter and plundered old Delhi and 
its suburbs mercilessly. 124 After the civil war he obtained pardon 
of the emperor through the new Vazir Intizam-ud-daulah. 125 Next, 
the Jat country passed through a great ordeal due to Maratha attack 
under Raghunath Rao and Malhar Holkar, and eventually, the coun¬ 
try was saved on promise of payment of a heavy indemnity. 126 

On the death of Badan Singh (1756) Suraj Mai assumed powers 
in name as well as in fact. By this time he had established his re¬ 
putation as an able ruler and efficient general, and he could tackle 
every problem of the State with due foresight. 

After settling the affairs in Delhi, Ahmad Shah Abdali marched 
to the Jat' country for forcible realization of tribute and compelling 
the Jat Raja to enter his service. He besieged and captured the fort 
of Ballabhgarh, putting to death all its inmates (March 1757). 

In the meantime, overcoming the opposition of Jawahir Singh, 
Jahan Khan, the Abdali’s general, entered Mathura and carried on 
indiscriminate plunder and massacre of the inhabitants. Gokul was 
saved by the stiff resistance of four thousand warlike Naga San- 
nyasis, but, for want of opposition at Vrindavan, it suffered ter¬ 
ribly. 127 

In 1760 the Abdali again demanded tribute from Suraj Mai and 
invaded the Jat country, besieging the fort of Dig, but fortunately 

155 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

for the Jats, the siege was afterwards lifted and the Abdali moved 
towards Mewat. 

The political situation in India became unusually tense due to 
the rivalry and deadly animosity* between the Marathas and the 
Abdall. The former enlisted the support of Suraj Mai, but soon a 
rift occurred between them for various reasons—Sadashiv Rao 
Bhiau’s rejection of the war-plan of Suraj Mai who was in favour of 
predatory warfare and keeping the army free from women and 
heavy baggage; 128 and the removal of the silver ceiling of the 
Divxin-i-Khas. l2 $ Suraj Mai felt so much disgusted that, deserting 
the cause of the Marathas, he returned to his own country, appre¬ 
hensive of a future Maratha attack against it in case of their victory 
against the Abdali. 

But notwithstanding their differences, Suraj Mai was generous 
enough to provide food and shelter to the Maratha fugitives who 
survived the disaster of Panipat and entered his country. He did 
this at the risk of vengeance from the Abdali 130 whom he appeased 
by an offer of tribute. On receiving a rich booty worth fifty lakhs 
of rupees by capturing and plundering the city of Agra, he paid one 
lakh to him, promising him to pay five lakhs more, which he never 
did. 

By his tactful and efficient guidance of the State affairs dur¬ 
ing this period of turmoil, Suraj Mai not only proved his political 
foresight and sagacity, -but remained “the strongest potentate in 
India with absolutely unimpaired forces and an overflowing trea¬ 
sury, while every other chief had been more or less ruined”. 131 

Suraj Mai then wrested considerable portions of the Doab from 
the Marathas, recovered his lost places in Aligarh and Bulandshahar 
districts from the Abdall’s possession and conquered also some places 
of the Agra district and Haryana. But his bright' and victorious 
career came to an end by his sudden death in a contest with Najib- 
ud-daulah, the Rohilla chief and the Mir Bakshi and “Regent of the 
imperial administration” on the bank of the Hindaun, about four¬ 
teen miles east of Delhi (December 25, 1763). 132 

Suraj Mai was then fifty-five years of age and his demise was a 
rude shock to the Jats. Sayyid Ghulam Husain says that Suraj Mai 
was “the eye and the shining taper of the Jat tribe—a prince who 
rendered himself famous by his good manners and civil deportment, 
as well as by his conquests and his superior knowledge in the arts 
of government”. 133 He gave his State peace and prosperity, was 


156 



DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


loved and respected by his subjects and admired and feared'by 
foreigners. He has also been described as “the Plato of the Jat 
tribe” and “the Jat Ulysses” for “his political sagacity, steady in¬ 
tellect and clear vision”. 134 

V 

During his regime the Jat State reached its highest extent. Be¬ 
sides the original Bharatpur principality, it embraced the districts 
of Agra, Dholpur, Mainpuri, Hathras, Aligarh, Etawa, Mirat, Rohtak, 
Farrukhnagar, Mewat, Rewari, Gurgaon and Mathura. Its annual 
revenue was one hundred and seventy-five lakhs of rupees, where¬ 
as the expenditure was sixty to sixty-five lakhs, and he left a re¬ 
serve fund of ten crores, inherited and acquired taken together. At 
the time of his death his army consisted mainly of 15,000 cavalry 
and 25,000 infantry, besides fort garrisons. 135 His cavalry, in parti¬ 
cular, was highly spoken of by Sayyid Ghulam Husain. 136 

Suraj Mai possessed fine taste for architecture which is testi¬ 
fied by his construction of noble edifices at Dig like Gopal Bhavan, 
Suraj Bhavan and Krishna Bhavan. Thornton says that the palaces 
which he constructed “are surpassed in India for elegance of design 
and perfection of workmanship only by the Tajmahal of Agra”. 137 

Jaw&hir Singh (1764-1768) 

Suraj Mai left five sons, of whom Jawahir Singh succeeded in 
capturing the vacant throne of his father. 138 

He made grand preparations against Najib-ud-daulah with a 
view to taking revenge of his father’s death. Besides his own army 
he hired twenty-thousand Maratha cavalry under Malhar Rao Hol- 
kar and fifteen thousand Sikhs, 139 marched to Delhi and laid siege 
to it. Shahdara, which had large stocks of grain was plundered, and 
although the beleaguered city was suffering from acute shortage of 
provision, and its fall became inevitable, the Jats could not reap the 
desired benefit due to the faithlessness of Malhar Rao and treache¬ 
rous conduct of a section of the Jat officers. Finally, an agreement 
was arrived at in 1765; but it was not possible for Jawahir Singh to 
achieve the object for which the campaign had been undertaken. 140 

On his return from the above campaign he turned his attention 
against those influential and powerful Jat leaders whom he con¬ 
sidered to be refractory. He enlisted into his service foreign troops, 
including the contingents of Captain Samru, and With their aid, he 
arrested the Jat leaders, including Balaram, “once the chief minister 
of the State”, and Mohanram, “the ex-chief of the artillery”. Bala- 


157 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


ram committed suicide in prison, Mohanram and some other chiefs 
died under torture, and others saved their lives by surrendering 
their wealth. Jawahir Singh imprisoned also his rebellious cousin 
Bahadur Singh but released him later on. All such actions alarmed 
the Jat people, alienated their sympathy from him and created a 
feeling of bitterness against him. 140a 

After the above, he was involved in a quarrel with the Mara- 
thas who had supported his brother Nahar Singh in his claim to the 
throne of his father. Jawahir Singh defeated his enemies (March 
1766) and captured Dholpur, held by Nahar Singh as an appanage. 
In conjunction with the Jat prince of Gohad he raided also the 
Maratha possessions in Northern Malwa. 141 In the rainy season. of 
1767 he invaded Ater and Bhind, formerly tributary to the Mara- 
tlias, “and quickly effected a conquest of all the domains of the 
Marathas and the petty Zamindaris, up to Kalpi”. 142 

Freed from troubles and master of a big and flourishing State, 
he was then at the height of his power, but he soon brought misfor¬ 
tune upon himself by his quarrel with Madho Singh, the Raja of 
Jaipur. Besides, frontier disputes, his pride and insolence, his de¬ 
mand for the surrender of the widow of Nahar Singh, who had taken 
refuge in Jaipur and, lastly, damage done to Jaipur territory by the 
Jat soldiers during their march through that State to the Pushkar 
lake, greatly offended Madho Singh. When Jawahir Singh was on 
his return journey, the Jaipur army, which had been following the 
Jat army, attacked him at Maonda in Jaipur territory on Decem¬ 
ber 14, 1767. Although Jawahir Singh maintained his ground till 
nightfall and claimed the victory, he lost his artillery, tents and 
baggage. Sir Jadunath Sarkar has justly observed that “it was a 
most pyrrhic victory”, and he “returned home pillaged, stupefied 
and overthrown.... The country beyond the Chambal rose at the 
first report of that rout and was gone as quickly as it was taken”. 143 

Madho Singh then invaded the Jat country and defeated Jawahir 
Singh, but, when the latter was reinforced by 20,000 Sikhs, the Raj¬ 
puts retired to their country. 

In the same year (1768) Jawahir Singh was assassinated by one 
of his soldiers. 

He was a strong ruler and centralized all powers in his own 
hands. But this centralization of power, with mercenary troops at 
its back, weighed too heavily on the freedom-loving spirit of the Jats. 
He did not possess foresight, tact and wisdom, as shown by his 


158 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

father Suraj Mai. His finances were, however, in good order and he 
maintained a magnificent court. 

Ratan Singh (1768-1769) 

“Brain and character alike were wanting among the successors 
of Jawahir Singh, and, in addition, the lack of a strong man at the 
head of the State let loose all the selfishness and factious spirit 
among the other members of the royal family, which completed the 
national downfall in a few years”. 144 

Ratan Singh, younger brother of Jawahir Singh, succeeded to 
the throne of Bharatpur, but he was thoroughly unfit for such a posi¬ 
tion. Neglecting the duties of the State, he wasted his time in 
worthless, amusements. He reigned less than a year and was mur¬ 
dered by an alchemist on 8 April, 1769. 

Kesari SUgh (1769-1775) 

Kesari Singh, the infant son of Ratan Singh, succeeded to the 
throne of his father. During his rule a civil war ensued between 
the regent Nawal Singh and his brother Ran jit Singh, both half- 
brothers of the late Raja, for the above post, leading to the invita¬ 
tion of the Marathas and the Rohillas. The Jat State suffered ter¬ 
ribly due to this civil war, the legacies of which were “a mutilated 
State, a factious nobility, a demoralised army,” and “a depleted trea¬ 
sury”. 145 Although Nawal Singh remained regent, the losses to the 
State were beyond calculation. 

One ominous cloud after another enveloped the political hori¬ 
zon of this State. In 1772, the desertion of Rene Madec, who had 
rendered valuable services to it, weakened its military efficiency. 
In the following year, the imperialists under Mirza Najaf Khan, the 
commander-in-chief, attacked it, and, after defeating the Jat army, 
plundered the city of Barsana 146 and occupied the fort of Kotavan. 147 
Then the forts of Agra (February, 1774; and Ballabhgarh fell be¬ 
fore his arms. Farrukhnagar was also occupied. Added to these 
losses, was the desertion of Samru with his contingent. “The Jats, 
mostly ignorant peasantry, had not been able to adopt the European 
discipline and tactics which had now come to sway Indian warfare. 
This military weakness of their state was for a time concealed by 
their employment 148 of Madec and Samru, but with their exit, the 
weakness of the Jat army was revealed.” 

The imperialists again invaded this State and took possession 
of many territories including the pargana of Jewar and the fort of 
Ramgarh (Aligarh) (1775). 


159 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

On the death of Nawal Singh, the regent, at Dig in August 1775, 
Mulla Rahimdad, the Rohilla chief, an ally of the Jats, who was 
then there with his army, seized the person of Kesari Singh and re¬ 
taining him on the throne, proclaimed himself regent. 

Ran jit Singh marched secretly at night from Kumbher to Dig 
with his loyal followers and two thousand Maratha mercenaries, and 
drove away the traitor. After this, in view of the grave dangers 
facing the State, he was installed on the throne in place of his minor 
nephew Kesari Singh. 

Ranjit Singh (1775-1805) 

Ran jit Singh had to face serious troubles both from within and 
outside. Within the State disunion and discords among the Jat 
leaders were rampant, and, on the other hand, Mirza Najaf Khan, 
the Mughul Vazir, marched to Dig and laid siege to it. Hard-pressed 
by food shortage, epidemic of disease and desertions from the gar¬ 
rison, Ranjit Singh left the fort one dark night (April 1776) and 
succeeded in reaching the fort of Kumbher. 

Taking advantage of the pre-occupation of Najaf Khan else¬ 
where^ Ranjit Singh surprised the Mughul collector of Farah, mid¬ 
way between Mathura and Agra, killed him and ravaged the terri¬ 
tories up to the walls of Agra. On hearing this, Najaf Khan took 
the field, drove the Jats back and captured the forts of Sonkh (al¬ 
most midway between Kumbher and Mathura) and Kumbher. 
Bharatpur was then besieged. Unable to defend it long, the Jat 
Raja had to yield, and, on the entreaty of Rani Kishori tc show 
mercy, Najaf Khan gave her the fort of Kumbher for her residence 
and territories around it for her support. The fort of Bharatpur and 
territories yielding a revenue of seven lakhs of rupees were bestow¬ 
ed on Ranjit Singh (c. February 1778). 149 The Jat State was thus 
reduced to a very sad plight. 

Ranjit Singh entered into a defensive and offensive alliance with 
the English in September 1803, and fought with them in the battle 
of Laswari against Daulat Rao Sindia. But repudiating the condi¬ 
tions of the above alliance, he joined Yashwant Rao Holkar I, in the 
following year in his attack on Delhi against the English and the 
same feeling of hostility having been shown by him against them at 
Dig, it was besieged and captured. The English then laid siege to 
Bharatpur. With the utmost valour, Ranjit Singh repulsed four 
successive assaults of General Lake. But as his men began to lose 
heart, he became apprehensive and opened negotiations for peace 


160 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

which was finally concluded (April, 1805). He promised to pay an 
indemnity of twenty lakhs of rupees and desist from holding any 
communication with the enemies of the English or employing any 
European without their permission. The English held on to Dig till 
they were satisfied with his faithful observance of the terms of the 
treaty. As he remained faithful, Dig was afterwards restored to 
him. 150 

Ran jit Singh died about seven months after the above treaty. 
He left four sons, of whom, the eldest, Randhir Singh succeeded his 
father. 

(k) Jammu and Kashmir: (1707-1818) 

1. Jammu 

The hill States lying between the Indus and the Ravi in the 
outer ranges of the Himalayas fell into two political groups. The 
first group comprised Kashmir and many small States situated be¬ 
tween the Indus and the Jhelum, all ruled over by Muslim chiefs. 
The second group embraced Jammu and the petty States lying be¬ 
tween the Jhelum and the Ravi, numbering twenty-two in all. 
Out of these, eight States, chiefly situated between the Jhelum 
and the Chenab, were under Muslim chiefs, mostly descending from 
Hindu Rajas. They were Akhnur, Riasi, Kishtwar, Rajauri, Punch, 
Kotli, Bhimbar and Khari-Khariali. The remaining fourteen were 
Hindu, all lying between the Chenab and the Ravi, namely Jammu, 
Bahu, Dalpatpur, Samba, Jasrota, Trikot, Lakhanpur, Mankot (now 
called Ramkot), Behandrata, Chaneni, Bhoti, Bhadu, Balor (now 
known as Basohli) and Bhadarwah. Ten States—Jammu, Bahu, Dal¬ 
patpur, Samba, Jasrota, Trikot, Lakhanpur, Mankot, Riasi and 
Akhnur—were ruled by a family of which the chief of Jammu was 
the head, and three—Basohli, Bhadu and Bhadarwah—were govern¬ 
ed by branches of the same family. Jammu had been under the rule 
of a Hindu Rajput dynasty since olden times. 

The Mughul Faujdars 

The Mughul emperors kept a Muslim faujdar at Jammu to rea¬ 
lise tribute from the hill States and to suppress any revolt in the 
region. As long as the tribute was regularly and punctually paid, 
he did not interfere in their internal affairs. 

On Guru Gnvind Singh’s death in October, 1708, Banda Baha¬ 
dur took charge of the political and military affairs of the Sikhs. 
In May 1710, he conquered Sirhind province and appointed Sikh 

161 

M.S.— 11 



THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


officers in the civil and military departments. He was expelled 
from his capital at Lohgarh by emperor Bahadur Shah in December, 
1710. Banda seized Pathankot and Gurdaspur in March, 1711. In 
June Qutb-ud-din Khan Kheshgi, faujdar of Jammu, marched 
against him. His nephew Shams Khan was the jaiujddr of Sultan- 
pur in the Jullundur Doab. He advanced to join his uncle. In the 
battle fought in the area of Raipur-Bahrampur Shams Khan was 
shot dead, while Qutb-ud-din Khan was seriously wounded, and died 
after three days. 151 

Emperor Farrukh-siyar appointed Zakariya Khan faujdar of 
Jammu in 1713. Banda had recovered Lohgarh by that time. He 
was again besieged by the imperial army. Banda held his ground 
for six months. He then escaped into the hills and rested on the 
bank of river Chenab, 60 miles from Jammu. The place came to be 
called Derah Baba Banda. Zakariya Khan pursued him, captured 
a number of Sikhs and sent their heads to Delhi where they were 
produced before Farrukh-siyar on 13 December, 1713. Zakariya 
Khan was granted a robe of honour with the rank of 3,000 Zat and 
1,000 Sawar. 152 

Zakariya Khan was again present in the siege of Banda at 
Gurdas Nangal, a hamlet 4 miles to the west of Gurdaspur. Banda 
with 1,250 followers faced the Mughul army from Delhi, Sirhind, 
Lahore and Jammu for eight months, and surrendered with 740 
followers on 7 December, 1715. Zakariya Khan accompanied these 
prisoners first to Lahore and then to Delhi and participated in their 
procession in the streets of the capital. 

With the decline of the Mughul power, the Raja of Jammu 
began to assert his independence. About 1746 he stopped paying 
tribute to the Mughuls. 153 

Raja fianjit Deo - 

Jammu was under Ran jit Deo from 1750 to 1781. He was a 
man of great administrative ability. Taking advantage of the con¬ 
fused political state of the Punjab, owing to the decline of the 
Mughul rule, the Durrani invasions and the rise of the Sikhs, Ranjit 
Deo extended his authority over all the hills situated between the 
Chenab and the Ravi, and over some of those lying to the west of 
the Chenab. His dominions stretched into the plains to the northern 
parts of Sialkot district. Ranjit Deo was a dependable ally of Ahmad 
Shah Abdall. He helped the Shah in conquering Kashmir in 1752 
and again in 1762. In April, 1757, Ahmad Shah Abdali confirmed 


162 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

his alliance with Ranjit Deo by granting him three parganas of 
Zafarwal, Sankatra and Aurangabad. He held sway over the coun¬ 
try lying north of a line drawn from Dinga in the Chaj Doab to the 
river Chenab at Kalowal, and from Roras to Sankatra, extending 
up to Munda Khail in Shakargarh pargana on the Ravi. 154 

Ranjit Deo struck coins during the earlier part of his reign in 
the name of the Mughul emperors of Delhi; but later on they were 
struck in his own name. On these coins he used the Yikram Samvat, 
but retained the year of the reign of Shah ‘Alam II (1759-1806). It 
was a time of upheavals and extreme lawlessness, “yet his little 
State was an abode of peace and safety ( dar-ul-aman )”. 155 During 
Ranjit Deo’s reign the city of Jammu prospered greatly. It became 
a centre of trade both of the plains and hills including Kashmir. 
Even rich bankers, merchants and high officials of Lahore and Delhi, 
both Hindus and Musalmans, found a place of refuge at Jammu. 
During Abdali’s third invasion (December 1751 to March 1752) 
Muin-ul-Mulk, the Viceroy of the Punjab, sent his family and trea¬ 
sures to the care of Raja Ranjit Deo of Jammu. 

A despatch received by the Governor-General at Calcutta on 
9 April, 1780, spoke highly of Ranjit Deo: “That said Raja is dis¬ 
tinguished for his courage and valour and is so just and kind to his 
ryots that the inhabitants of the Punjab and the Doab (Ganga) 
have since the time of Nadir Shah’s invasion, always found a safe 
refuge in his country from the tyranny of unscrupulous adven¬ 
turers .... The writer knows of no people from Attock to Delhi 
who live more free from care and fear than those of Jammu”. 156 

Ranjit Deo could not escape the Sikhs. About 1770 he submit¬ 
ted to Jhanda Singh Bhangi and agreed to pay tribute. 157 

On Ranjit Deo’s death in 1781 he was succeeded by his son Brij 
Raj Deo. During his reign the Jammu State came completely under 
the subjection of the Sikhs. 


2. Kashmir 

‘Abdus Samad Khan was the governor of Kashmir under Baha¬ 
dur Shah and Jahandar Shah. Farrukh-siyar transferred him from 
Kashmir to the Punjab. The great Mughul emperors had maintain¬ 
ed their hold on Kashmir by visiting the valley frequently in hot 
weather. Akbar, Jahangir, Shah Jahan and Aurangzlb built palaces 
and gardens at Srinagar. After Aurangzlb’s death the decline of the 
Mughul power affected the political condition of Kashmir, which 
generally remained disturbed up to 1752. No Mughul emperor 

163 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

visited Kashmir after Aurangzlb. Ahmad Shah Abdali conquered 
Kashmir in 1752. The Afghan rule lasted for 67 years up to 1819. 

Afghan kings were mainly interested in getting tribute which 
was fixed at twenty lakhs of rupees a year. As long as this amount 
was remitted punctually and regularly, the kings left the governors 
with full powers, and would take no notice how they ruled, ably or 
tyrannically. 158 

There were twenty-eight governors during the Afghan rule. 
Only one of them was a Hindu while all others were Afghans. 
‘Abdullah Khan Ishaq was the first Governor. His chief secretary 
was Sukhjiwan Mai, a Punjabi Khatri of Bhera. He had taken up 
service under Abdali’s prime minister, Shah Vali Khan, during the 
first invasion of Ahmad Shah Abdali in 1748. Shah Vali Khan was 
so much impressed with his ability and honesty that he appointed 
him to this high post in 1752. 159 

‘Abdullah Khan Ishaq was a despot and a despoiler. He 
denuded the State treasury, and for money he fleeced the people 
sparing none from his operations. In six months he collected about 
a crore of rupees in cash and goods. In order to deposit it safely in 
his home town, Kabul, he left for Afghanistan appointing Khwajah 
‘Abdullah Khan as his deputy. His rule was equally unpopular on 
account of his greed and extortion. 

A local leading noble, Abdul Hasan Khan Bandey, prevailed up¬ 
on Sukhjiwan to murder Khwajah ‘Abdullah Khan, and assume the 
governorship himself. The deputy was killed after four months’ 
rule. Sukhjiwan took charge of the State and conveyed his submis¬ 
sion to Ahmad Shah Abdali. This took place in the earlier part of 
1753. He was the first Hindu chief in Kashmir since 1320 in 433 
years. Ahmad Shah Abdali confirmed him and appointed Khwajah 
Kijak as his deputy. 

Sukhjiwan was a brave soldier, wise administrator, scholar, 
linguist and a poet. He engaged five good scholars to compile a his¬ 
tory of Kashmir from the earliest times. Each writer was provided 
with ten assistants. The head of these historians was Muhammad 
Taufiq whose original name was Lalaju. 160 

Sukhjiwan’s government proved the best and most efficient 
both for Hindus and Muslims, Sunnis and Shias. His liberal and 
sympathetic outlook won the hearts of all. In 1754 a severe famine 
broke out in Kashmir owing to the failure of rains. Sukhjiwan pur¬ 
chased large quantities of rice from the Punjab, and distributed one 
lakh bags of rice among, the poor quite free, while to the rich it 


164 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


was sold at a concessional rate. Again in the winter of 1755 heavy 
snowfall and blizzards destroyed all vegetation. Sukhjiwan sup¬ 
plied subsidized ration to the people. 161 

Ahmad Shah Abdali “demanded an exhorbitant tribute equal to 
ten times the revenue of the country”. Sukhjiwan ignored the de¬ 
mand on the, ground that no money could be saved from regular re¬ 
venues, whilst he was opposed to extortion. He offered allegiance 
to emperor ‘Alamgir II (1754-59) who conferred the title of Raja 
on him. 162 

Ahmad Shah Abdali was in the Punjab from January to Decem¬ 
ber 1762. In June he sent an expedition against Sukhjiwan, but it 
failed. Ranjit Deo of Jammu was hostile to Sukhjiwan. He en¬ 
vied his efficiency and popularity. Besides he cast longing eyes on 
the pretty valley. Hence another expedition was despatched in 
October under the guidance of Ranjit Deo. The Afghan forces en¬ 
tered Kashmir by Tosha Maidan Pass. Sukhjiwan came to oppose 
them at the head of 50,000 troops. His commander-in-chief Bakht- 
mal, was won over by Ranjit Deo, and he deserted his master. 
Sukhjiwan was captured, immediately blinded and sent to Lahore 
where he was trampled to death by horses. 163 After this the Afghan 
rule in Kashmir was mainly a tale of atrocities. 

In Sarbuland Khan Bamzai’s rule, 1763-65, Sunni-Shia riots 
broke out, in which the latter sustained heavy losses in men and 
material. The next five years saw six governors in quick succession. 
Amir Khan Jawansher, 1770-76, built a number of bridges and build¬ 
ings, but his deputy Mir Fazil persecuted the Pundits. 164 Haji 
Karimdad Khan (1776-82) fleeced money from everybody, Hindus 
and Muslims alike. Azad Khan (1782-95) and Madad Khan (1795- 
96) were both cruel. 

Mir Hazar Khan in 1793 sewed up Hindu leaders in gunny bags 
and threw them into the Dal Lake to be drowned. 165 ‘Abdullah. Khan 
Alkozai (1796-1800) collected one crore of rupees as his personal 
wealth. 166 Ata Muhammad Khan Alkozai (1800-05) forcibly seized 
pretty girls to satisfy his lust. “Many parents were compelled to 
shave the heads of their daughters rather than allow them to be 
molested and degraded. 167 Many Pundit families migrated to Batote, 
Kishtwar, Bhadarwah, Punch, Rajauri and Delhi. 168 As a result of 
this oppression great unrest spread in the province, The neigh¬ 
bouring tribes like Kakkas, Bambas and Gujars sacked the Valley. 169 
It was conquered by Ranjit Singh in 1819. 170 


165 



THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 
NOTES 


1. History of Bengal, Vol. I, Ed. by Jadunath Sarkar (1948), pp. 407-08. 

2. Ibid, pp. 409-10. 

3. .Ibid, p. 414. 

4. Ibid, pp. 420-21. 

5- Siyar-ul-Mutakherin (English Translation), Vol. I, p. 323. 

6- Letter to Court of Directors, 29 Nov. 1735, para 71. 

7. Letter to Court, 26 Dec. 1733, para 57. 

7a. Muzajfamamah, f. 124. 

8- This zamindari extended over the south-east of old Zila Bihar. An area of 
10£ sq. miles of the Narhat pargana was in the south-east of the old Bihar sub¬ 
division of the Patna district, while the rest of it and the whole of the 
Samai pargana were in the old Nawadah sub division of the Gaya district. 

9- Bhunra, 19 miles north-east of Bettia. 

10. Giria is situated on the east bank of the Bhaglrathl at a distance of about five 
miles north-west of Jangipur. 

10a. Bayan-i-waqai by Khwaja Abdul Karim, fs. 101-03. 

11. Siyar-ul-Mutakherin, Vol. II, p. 162. 

12. Datta, K. K., Alivardi and His Times , p. 140. 

13- History of Bengal, Vol. II, p. 470. 

14. Muzajfamamah, f. 576. 

15. Hill, S. C., Bengal in 1756-57, III, p. 239. 

16- Sarkar, Sir Jadunath, Fall of the Mughal Empire, Vol. I, (second edn.), p. 195. 

17- Srivastava, A. L., The First Two Nawdbs of Oudh, p. 246. 

18- Sarkar, Jadunath, Fall of the Mughal Empire, Vol. II, p. 531. 

19. Ibid . 

20- Srivastava, A. L., Shuja-ud-daulah, Vol. I, p. 141. 

21. Broome, Bengal Army, p. 480. 

22. Srivastava, A. L., Shujti-ud-daulah, Vol. II, p. 84. 

23. Forster, George, A Journey, etc., p. 158. 

24. Davies, C. C., Warren Hastings and Oudh, p. 15. 

25- Calendar of Persian Correspondence, Vol. IV, No. 13158. 

26- Irvine, Later Mughals, Vol. I, p. 268-72. 

27. Dighe, V. G., Peshwa Bdji Rao I, (1944), p. 8. 

28- Khafi Khan, in Elliot & Dowson’s History of India, Vol. VII, p. 518. 

29- Ibid, pp. 523-25. 

30- Irvine, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 148. 

31. Ibid, Vol. II, p. 154 

32. Elliot and Dowson, op. cit., p. 527. 

33- Siyar-ul-Mutakherin, Vol. Ill, p. 283. 

34. Elphinstone, History of India, p. 657; B.I.S.M. Quarterly, XXVI, pp. 11-13. 

35- S.P.D., Vol. XV, pp. 56, 59-60, 86. 

36- In some English records there is a reference to an invasion of the Punjab by 
Ahmad Shah Abdall in 1769; Indian Historical Quarterly, Dec. 1934. 

37- Datta, K. K., Alivardi and His Times, p. 114. 

38- Sinha, N. K., Rise of the Sikh Power, p. 19. 

39 Ibid, p. 44. 

40. Sarkar, Fall of the Mughal Empire, Vol. II, p. 377. 

41. Ibid, p. 500. 

42. Sinha, N. K., op. cit., p. 19. 

43- Cunningham, History of the Sikhs, p. 86. 

44. Irvine, op. cit., I, p. 96. 

45. Ibid, p. 110. 

46. Cunningham, op. cit., p. 87. 

47- Ibid, p. 88. 

48- Irvine, op. cit., I, p. 315. 

49. Cunningham, op. cit., p. 89. 

50. Sinha, N. K., op. cit., pp. 10-11. 

51. Ibid, p. 12. 

52. Ibid, p. 14. 


166 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


53. Ibid, p. 14. 

54. Sarkar, Fall of the Mughal Empire, Vol. I, (Revised Edn.), p. 107. 

55. Sinha, N. K., op. cit., p. 17. 

56. Ibid, p. 18. 

57. Ibid, p. 19. 

58. Ibid, p. 24. 

59- Siyar-ul-Mutakherin, III (Eng. translation), p. 289. 

60. Ibid. 

61. Sinha, N, K., op. cit., p. 27. 

62. Quoted in ibid, pp. 28-29. 

63. Quoted in Sarkar, Fall of the Mughal Empire, Vol. I, (1932), p. 426. 

64. Ibid. 

65. Sinha, N. K., op. cit., p. 32. 

66 Ibid, p. 35. 

67. Quoted in Sinha, N. K., op. cit., p. 39, from Malcolm, Sketch of Sikhs, p. 93. 
68 Malcolm, op. cit., p. 94. 

69. Quoted in Sarkar, Fall of the Mughal Empire, Vol. II, p. 69. 

70. Ibid . 

71. Ibid, p. 73. 

72 Sinha, N. K., op. cit., p. 49. 

73 Browne, India Tracts, p. 22. 

74. Sinha, N. K., Rise of the Sikh Power, p. 64. 

75. Ibid, p. 84. 

76. Sarkar, Fall of the Mughal Empire, Vol. I (Revised Edn.), pp. 25-26. 

77. Ibid, p. 28. 

78- Ibid, p 29. 

79. Quoted in ibid. 

80. Quoted in ibid, p. 30. 

81. Ibid. 

82. Ibid. 

83- Ibid, p. 33. 

84. Quoted in ibid, p. 36. 

85- Quoted in ibid, p. 211 from Bareilly Gazetteer. 

86. Ibid. 

87. Ibid, p. 213. 

88. Ibid, p. 215. 

89- Ibid, p. 231. 

90. Sir J. Strachey, Hastings and the Rohilla War (1892), pp. 31-32. 

91. Ibid, p. 230. 

92. Ibid. 

93 • Ibid, pp. 233-36. 

94. Ibid, p. 239; J A S B., 1878, IV, pp. 297-8. 

95. Ibid, p. 241. 

96. Irvine, The Later Mughals, Vol. I, pp. 45-47. 

97- Ibid, p. 67. 

98. Ibid, p. 285. 

99. Ibid, p. 286. 

100- Irvine, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 4. 

101. Sarkar, Fall of the Mughal Empire, Vol. I (Revised Edn.), p. 131. 

102. Ibid, p. 134. 

103. Tod, Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan, Vol. I (Crooke’s Edn.). 

104. Sarkar, Fall of the Mughal Empire, Vol I (Revised Edn.), p. 156. 

105. Tod, op. cit., Vol. I, Chap. XV, SPD, II, 19, 31, XXI, 34. 

106. Tod, Annals of Mewdr, Chp. XVI. 

107. S<adhaura is twenty-six miles east of Ambala, and Lohgarh twelve miles north¬ 
east of Sadhaura. 

108- Irvine, W., The Later Mughals , I, p. 323. 

109- Ibid , pp. 323-27; Siyar-ul-Mutakherin Vol. I, pp. 106-07. 

110. Irvine, op. cit., II, p. 81. 

111. Ibid, pp. 85-6, 89, 93. 

112. Siyar-ul-Mutakherin, tr. Vol. I, pp. 238-39; C.H.I., IV, p. 348. 

113. Qanungo, K. R., History of the Jdts, p. 59; Siyar-ul-Mutakherin, tr. Vol. L 
p. 239. 


167 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


114. Siyar-ul-Mutakherin, tr. Vol. I, p. 239. 

115. Sarkar, Sir J. N., Fall of the Mughal Empire, Vol. II (1934), p. 425. 

116- Ihid, p. 428. Badan Singh was in possession of a part of Braj (Mathura). 

but his son Suraj Mai brought the whole of it in his possession. 

117. Ibid, pp. 428-30; Qanungo, K. R., op. cit., p. 64. 

118- Sarkar, Sir J. N., op. cit., II, p. 435. 

119. Ver is about twelve miles north-west of Bayana. 

120. Qanungo, K. R., op. cit., p. 64. Growse, Mathura, p. 139. 

121. Qanungo, op. cit., pp. 66-70; Sarkar, op. cit., I, 293-94; II, p. 318. 

122. Imad-us-Saadat, pp. 49-51, 57-59, 64. Qanungo, K. R., op. cit., pp. 80-83. 

123. Sarkar, J. N., op. cit., II (1934), p. 435. 

124. Imad-us-Saadat, p. 63. 

125. Tarikh-i-Ahmad Shdhi, pp. 81b-83a. 

126- Ibid, pp. 108b-110a; 114a, 117b, 128a; S. P. D., XXVII, Nos. 79, 81, p. 94. 

Bhau Sahebdnchi Bakhar, (Ed.), S. N. Joshi (1959), pp. 2-8. 

127. Indian Antiquary , Vol. XXXVI, pp. 60-62; SPD, XXI, 107; XXVII, 152. 

128. Imad-us-Saadat, pp. 170-80. 

129 Qanungo, K. R., op. cit., pp. 129-37. 

130. Imad-us-Saadat, p. 203; Sardesai, New History of the Marathas, II, p. 443. 

131- Sarkar, Sir J.. N., op. cit., II (1934), p. 442. 

132. Nur 66a-70b; Siyar-ul-Mutakherin, tr. IV, pp. 31-32. Hindaun is a tributary 
of the Jamuna. 

133- Siyar-ul-Mutakherin, tr. IV, p. 27. 

134. Imad-us-Saadat, p. 55; Qanungo, K. R., op. cit., p. 65. 

135 Sarkar, J. N., op. cit., pp. 455-56. 

136- Siyar-ul-Mutakherin, IV, p. 28. 

137- Quoted in A Gazetteer of the Bhurtpore State by Captain Walter, p. 29. 

138 Qanungo, K. R., op. cit., pp. 159, 171-72. 

139. Sarkar, Sir J. N., op. cit., pp. 457-58. 

140- Wendel, Memoires des Jats, 59; Nur, 74b-92b. 

140a. Qanungo, K. R., op. cit., pp. 179-84. 

141. Gohad is to the north-east of Gwalior. 

142. Sarkar, Sir J. N., op. cit., II (1934), pp. 475. 

143- Ibid, pp. 478-79; Qanungo, op. cit., pp. 202-211 

144. Sarkar, Sir J. N., op. cit., Ill (1938), p. 4. 

145. Qanungo, K. R., op. cit., p. 238. 

146- Barsana is situated twenty-two miles north-west of Mathura. 

147. Kotvan is in the Mathura district and on the Delhi-Agra Trunk road. 

148- Sarkar, Sir J. N., op. cit., Ill (1938), p. 3. 

149. Ibid, 117; Ibratnama, I, pp. 317, 345-47. 

150- Col. H. Pearse, Memoir of the Life and Military Services of the Viscount 
Lake, pp. 355-89; Fortesque, A History of the British Army, V, pp. 70-137; 
Captain Walter, A Gazetteer of the Bhurtpore State, pp. 13-16; Malcolm, The 
Political History of India, Vol. I, p. 374. 

151. Masir-ul-umara, iii, pp, 129-30. 

152. Karam Singh, Banda Bahadur Kaun Tha (Urdu), p. 94; Ganda Singh, Banda 
Singh Bahadur , p. 191. 

153- Bute Shah, Tarikh-e-Panjab (Persian MS.), 255b. 

154. Shamshir Khalsa (Urdu), 93; Khazana-e-Amira (Persian), 100; Sialkot Dis¬ 
trict Gazetteer, pp. 16, 17. 

155. J A.S B., Liv. Pt. i, 63, 65. 

156- C.P.C., V, 1836. 

157- Forster, i, 286-87; Raj Khalsa (Urdu), iii, 4; Sialkot District Gazetteer, 18; 
Khushwaqt Rae (Persian MS.), 155.. 

158 Gwasha Lai Kaul, Kashmir Through the Ages, p. 68. 

159. Parmu, R. K., A History of Muslim Rule in Kashmir: 1320-1819 (1969), 

pp. 354, 358. 

160. Khazana-e-Amira, 114-16; Siyar (Persian), iii, 74; Tarikh-i-Muzaffari 122a-b. 

161. Narayan Kaul, Tarikh-i-Kashmir (1846) (Persian MS.), 185a; R. K. Parmu, 
op. cit., 356. 

162. Parmu, R. K., op. cit., 355. 


168 


DISRUPTION OF THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 


163. Khazana-e-Amira, 114-16; Siyar, iii, 74-75; Tarikh-e-Muzaffari, 122a-b.; Khush- 
waqt Rae, 155; Ahmad Shah Batalvi (Persian MS.), 886; Narayan Kaul, op. cit., 
186a-187a. 

164. Parmu, R. K., op. cit., p. 362, Gwasha Lai Kaul, p. 67 calls him Faqirullah. 

165. Parmu, R. K., op. cit., p. 369. 

166- Gwasha Lai Kaul, op. cit., p. 68. 

167- Lawrence, Walter, R., The Valley of Kashmir, London (1895), p. 198. 

168. Gwasha Lai Kaul, op. cit., pp. 68-63. 

169- Parmu, R. K. op. cit., p. 353. 

170- N A I.. Foreign Department, Miscellaneous, No. 305, Chap. 2, paras 4, 5; 
Umdal-ul-Tawarikh (Persian), Daftar, ii, pp. 134-35; Parmu, R. K., op. cit., 
p. 353. 


169 


CHAPTER VI 


BALAJI RAO (1740-1761) 

I. Balaji Rdo Peshwd’s Grand Design 

Balaji or Nana Saheb as he was called, was the third great 
Peshwa of the Maratha State during Shahu’s reign. He succeeded Baj! 
Rao I on 25 June, 1740. He was only nineteen at the time but had 
been associated with his father and uncle in the work of administra¬ 
tion and warfare. He was appointed by Shahu to the Peshwa’s post on 
account of the qualities he possessed. Peshivdship at that time was 
not a hereditary office and the Raja had full authority and freedom 
to choose a proper person on his merits. In spite of some opposition 
and adverse influences like those of RaghujI Bhosle and others, 
Balaji was chosen as the fittest person to occupy the Peshwa’s res¬ 
ponsible office. He administered the affairs of the Maratha State and 
its expanding empire from 1740 to 1761. 

His regime of 21 years is packed with events of momentous im¬ 
portance in Indian history. It saw the end of an epoch—the Mughul 
empire of India—and the beginning of another—the Maratha em¬ 
pire in India. 

BalajI’s reign saw the zenith of the expansion of the Maratha 
State in India and the success of Maratha arms in its various parts. 
But it also witnessed the appearance of four new powers in the poli¬ 
tical contest for supremacy in India, namely, the Afghans, the Sikhs, 
the French and the English. 

The Mughul empire had grown weak and corrupt. The rising 
power and aggression of the Marathas, Nadir Shah’s invasion, loot 
and massacre, the incompetency and voluptuousness of emperors, 
the selfishness of the Vazirs or chief ministers and great nobles, and 
their personal jealousies, rivalries and dissensions, had all shaken it 

to its foundations. It had practically disintegrated. The Subahdars 

\ 

and Nawabs had usurped the emperor’s powers, had risen in rebel¬ 
lion against his authority and had consolidated their own powers 
with the help of independent feudal armies and mercenary arms, 
both in the north and in the south. Such were the Nawabs of the 
Deccan and Karnatak, the Nawabs of Awadh and Allahabad, and the 

170 


BALAJ! RAO (1740-1761) 


Nawabs of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa. Similar usurpations were made 
by smaller officers and nobles in the country. 

The Marathas had invaded, conquered and occupied the provin¬ 
ces of Gujarat, Malwa, Bundelkhand, Berar and other parts of the 
empire. The emperor was compelled to grant them the rights of 
chauth and ■ sardeshmukhi over various subdhs or provinces of the 
empire as they could not be defeated and driven away. 

Balaji had to consolidate these conquests and to regularise these 
rights acquired during Baji Rao’s period, and also to expand the 
Maratha State and influence in other parts of India. His grand de¬ 
sign, like his father’s, was to bring the whole of India under Maratha 
influence and paramountcy, either by conquest and annexation or 
by levying chauth and sardeshmukhi . He was, however, not served 
well by his ministers and generals. They quarrelled amongst them¬ 
selves, took opposite sides and fought against one another for per¬ 
sonal gains and prestige. Senior Maratha ministers and generals 
were jealous of the young Peshwd’s power. 

Balaji’s first task lay in making good the territorial gains and 
claims of chauth acquired during his father’s regime. He had also 
to meet the legacy of debt of about Rs. 14 lakhs left by his father— 
incurred during the campaigns in the north. He had to wage con¬ 
stant war for these purposes. He had also to fight against oppo¬ 
nents at home and to eliminate them. Then his policy of fresh ad¬ 
vance and aggression in the north and south required fresh arms 
and resources. It was a Herculean task that he undertook. 

II. Defects in the Design 

Balaji’s Peshwdship may be divided into two periods: one from 
1740 to 1749 and the other from 1749 to 1761. During the first 
period the Peshwd was somewhat restrained by the Raja who tried 
to control the direction and policy of Maratha affairs and movements. 
Though he never took an active part in military campaigns, he 
would not allow his Peshwd to change the main principles of his 
policy. He divided the work and various spheres of Maratha activi¬ 
ties in the north and the south and allotted them to different minis¬ 
ters, generals and nobles, so as to avoid or minimise conflict amongst 
them. His aim was to bring all India under Maratha influence or 
paramountcy, while maintaining the Mughul empire in name. He 
wanted the power of Maratha arms to reach beyond Attock, but in 
alliance with, or as an agent of the Mughul empire. It was to be 
a Mughul-Maratha alliance for the governance of India as a whole. 


171 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


This could be done either by accepting governorships of provinces 
from the emperor and administering them directly, or accepting 
annual tributes in the form of chauth and sardeshmukhi, leaving the 
administration of provinces in the hands of the emperor’s nominees, 
but protecting them from foreign invasions. 

The weakness of Maratha politics lay in this policy of Shahu 
which he pursued for 42 years of his reign. It could not result in 
any outright conquests and annexations of territories. Therefore 
Maratha politics had no stability and Maratha warfare, no finality. 
It became merely a process of flow and fluctuation. 

At home Shahu would not allow the suppression of old minis¬ 
ters and sard&rs even when they acted as traitors or rebelled against 
the State, entered into conspiracies with the enemies of the State 
or opposed the policies and plans of the Chief Minister in various 
theatres of war. Moreover, Shahu was against the amalgamation of 
Kolhapur and Satara States even after his death. He had not his 
grandfather Shivaji’s vision of the unity of the Maratha State and 
the centralisation of its power and administration. BalajI had to 
work with this background and to carry out his own plans of build¬ 
ing up a great Maratha State and empire. 

During the second period BalajI became free from the control 
of the new Maratha King. Ram Raja, the successor of Shahu, was a 
posthumous son of Tara Bai’s son, Shivaji II, and had been brought 
up secretly in humble circumstances. He had not the ability and 
training of a ruler and fell a prey to the intrigues of his grand¬ 
mother Tara Bai. He was ultimately confined in his palace at Satara 
and lost all control over the political affairs of the Maratha State. 

Besides the political difficulties inherent in the feudal organisa¬ 
tion of the Maratha State, BalajI had to face great financial diffi¬ 
culties. The Maratha State had not adequate resources to finance 
its growing responsibilities and military expenses. Its armies of ex¬ 
pansion and military advance depended on the tributes and contri¬ 
butions of the defeated princes who remained in possession of their 
power and territorial administration. 

There were two main centres of Maratha political activities: 
one in the north and the other in the south. Eastern (in the north) 
and Western (in the south) theatres were of minor importance. 

The achievements in the north were primarily due to the 
Peshwd and his new generals. Sindias, Holkars, Pawars and 
Jadhavs were the most prominent amongst them. As regards the 
south, west and east, the old Maratha ministers like the Prati- 
nidhi, and sardars like Bhosles, Dabhades and Angrias had vested 
interests, influence and power, and these spheres were marked as their 


172 


BALAJ! RAO (1740-1761) 


field of operations. The Peshivfa could not fully direct and control 
the politics there nor would Shahu allow him to do so. Still it was 
the Peshwa, BajI Rao and BalajI Rao, who checked the Nizams and 
the Sldls and some rebellious sardars and jagirdars, Dabhades, Gaik- 
wars, and Angrias, in their conspiracies and aggressions against the 
Maratha State. Thus the Marathas lacked a common will and policy, 
one unified control and direction in military affairs and political ad¬ 
ministration. Hence a centrally directed and controlled Maratha 
State could not be built up. 

During Balajfs regime the first year in northern politics culmi¬ 
nated in the recognition of Maratha claims and conquests in Malwa 
by the grant of a farman of that province by the emperor in 1741. 1 
Gujarat was already conquered by Dabhades, Gaikwars and Peshwas. 
The Marathas had begun to interfere in the affairs of Bundelkhand, 
Rajputana and other parts of Hindustan as far as Delhi during BajI 
Rao’s period. BalajI’s period saw the extension of their activities 
further to the north beyond Delhi into the Punjab as far as Attock, 
and to the east into the Doab, Awadh, Allahabad, Bihar, Bengal and 
Orissa. The Peshwa and his generals worked in the north and 
Raghuji Bhosle in the east. Their policies and activities proved at 
first at cross purposes, but later on Shahu fixed their separate 
spheres of activity. Still the weakness of the Maratha power lay in 
the fact that it was not one unified power. It became an aggregate 
of powers with conflicting aims, policies and interests. They even 
conspired and fought against one another, and BalajI was not able 
to centralise the power of the Maratha State into one hand and thus 
direct all affairs according to a common policy and a common plan. 

The main problems which BalajI had to face in internal politics 
were: (1) the constant opposition of some old ministers and sar¬ 
dars; (2) the succession issue and Tara Bai’s machinations; (3) finan¬ 
cial difficulties and debts; and (4) administrative arrangements of 
old and new conquests. 

In external politics his aims were: (1) to advance and esta¬ 
blish Maratha paramountcy over the whole of India; (2) ^o control 
the Delhi emperor and to administer imperial provinces in his name 
or to secure the grant of annual chauth from them; (3) to liberate 
the Deccan province from the Nizam; (4) to establish supremacy 
over Karnatak rulers; (5) to bring Bihar, Bengal and Orissa under 
Maratha influence and to secure chauth from them; and (6) to de¬ 
liver the sacred places of the Hindus in the North from Muslim con¬ 
trol. As the chief minister of the Maratha central and supreme 
power, did BalajI succeed in solving these problems and achieving 
these aims? He seemed to make progress, but his achievements 


173 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


were often nullified by the new powers and alliances which arose in 
Indian politics, and by the internal dissensions and cross purposes 
of Maratha ministers and sarddrs. The rise of British power in 
Bengal in 1757 and the failure of Maratha arms at Panipat in 1761 
proved a great set-back to whatever Balaji had achieved. 

Balaji was not an active soldier like his father. He however 
proved to be a diplomat and a leader of no mean quality. He pos¬ 
sessed greater vision and vigour than his associates. But as he had 
neither dominant and decisive military qualities and foresight nor 
sound financial resources to support his undertakings and enter¬ 
prises, his achievements did not prove lasting. He could not meet 
his debts and the ever-increasing military expenses as his wars and 
conquests did not lead to lasting results and settlements: He had 
to meet the same problems and dangers again and again, and thus 
the energy and resources of the State were exhausted. No doubt, 
he kept the core and the central part of the Maratha State (Swa¬ 
rd jy a) independent and properly administered, and its frontiers ad¬ 
vancing and increasing. But this was not enough. The newly ac¬ 
quired provinces had to be consolidated and properly administered 
from the centre, and this he was not able to do. His energies were 
spent in undertaking constant external warfare and in settling in¬ 
ternal dissensions. 

The system of chauth and sardeshmukhi or tribute had ele¬ 
ments of political dominance and disturbance but not of political 
permanence and governance. Two powers, one in actual possession 
of territories, and the other only demanding regular chauth and sar¬ 
deshmukhi or tribute, one unwilling to pay or pay only under duress, 
and the other constantly forcing it to pay, could not create a stable 
polity or politics in the anarchic conditions of that period. It was 
a period of great anarchy. There were wars of succession and usur¬ 
pations in all parts and provinces of India. Maratha help was sought 
by the defeated and discontented parties. North of Malwa the Mara- 
thas appeared more interested in interfering and helping to gain con¬ 
trol and money. Thus they interfered in the making and unmaking 
of the rulers of Rajputana, Bundelkhand, the Doab, Awadh, Allaha¬ 
bad, Bihar, Bengal and Orissa in the north. In the Deccan and Kar- 
natak provinces in the south, however, they showed concern in ac - 
quiring territory. 

But Maratha successes were not decisive as their policy was half¬ 
hearted. They did not establish their own regular administration 
nor succeed in realising regularly their claims to chauth and sar¬ 
deshmukhi or to large jagirs. Their invasion and occupation of 


174 


BALAJi RAO (1740-1761) 

those parts did not result in any political permanence or financial 
assurance. 

III. Northern Campaigns and Politics: First Phase (1740-1749) 

The Marathas alone thought in terms of India as a whole and 
as one. They followed two policies in the north; one of conquest 
and annexation preceded by a demand for chauth as in Gujarat and 
Malwa, and the other of imposing merely chauth on territories invad¬ 
ed and conquered. The second policy proved ineffective in develop¬ 
ing their permanent influence and political power in those terri¬ 
tories. It merely resulted in a ‘fight and carry’ system, not in a 
‘conquest and stay’ system. Hence Maratha prowess in the north 
beyond Malwa did not result in achieving the permanent expansion 
of Maratha power. It left the administration in the hands of old 
rulers who were neither loyal nor completely destroyed. 

The Marathas had partitioned the Mughul empire into separate 
spheres of influence and military activities amongst their military 
captains or sarddrs. Northern India was primarily the field of the 
Peshwd and his generals, Sindias, Holkars and Pawars. 

Balaji organised four expeditions to the north between 1740 
and 1748 in which he was personally present. The first one was in 
Rajputana (1740-41) which had become a centre of succession wars 
and civil wars. There were disputes for the thrones of Jaipur, 
Jodhpur, Kota and Bundl, and the help of the Marathas was sought 
by one side or the other. The imperial authority was completely 
destroyed in Raj pu tana after 1740. Hence the Marathas as the 
stronger power came in by invitation. 

The Maratha chiefs helped one side or the other after taking 
huge subsidies or tributes. If they were not paid, they helped those 
who paid more. Thus the Maratha interference did not help to sta¬ 
bilise the politics of Rajput States. There was no final settlement. 
There were conflicting policies amongst Maratha sarddrs themselves 
and therefore there was no unity of action. These sarddrs some¬ 
times helped opposite sides. The Peshwd was not* able to check this 
completely. Thus the politics in Rajputana remained in a perpetual 
turmoil and its economic life was ruined by constant warfare and the 
pecuniary demands of the Marathas. 

The Peshwd’s main object was money, the realisation of chauth 
and tribute demanded for help given. In the first expedition he en¬ 
tered Rajputana via Bhilsa and’ met Sawai Jay Singh at Dholpur and 
tried to settle through him Maratha-Mughul relations. He received 

175 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

15 lakhs from the emperor, and was promised a jarman for chauth 
and sardeshmukhi of Malwa. This he got on 7 September, 1741. 2 
The Peshwd had demanded chauth over all the imperial provinces. 

In the second expedition (1741 to 1743), he passed through 
Bundelkhand and entered the provinces of Bihar and Bengal. These 
were considered by Raghuji Bhosle of Nagpur as his field of mili¬ 
tary activities. These Subdhs had been captured by ‘All VardI Khan 
by an act of usurpation and by defying imperial authority in 1740. 
The Peshwd wanted to establish the Maratha claims of chauth and 
sardeshmukhi over these provinces in his name. Raghuji Bhosle 
claimed the provinces as lying within his sphere of influence. This 
conflict between the Peshwd and Raghuji led to the seeking 
of help from the Peshwd against Raghuji by ‘All VardI Khan. The 
emperor granted the chauth of these provinces to Shahu on the con¬ 
dition of their being protected from any interference. From Berar 
to Bengal Raghuji had made Eastern India as his sphere of military 
activities. He carried on a number of expeditions there from June 
1741 and reduced the authority of the Nawab in Orissa and western 
Bengal. ‘All VardI Khan sought the help of the Peshwd as the pro¬ 
tector of imperial provinces, having promised to cede the chauth to 
him. The Peshwd wanted to check Raghujfs rising power and to 
establish full claim to the chauth of these provinces. While his ob¬ 
ject was money and supremacy, that of Raghuji was the acquisition 
of tribute, territory and political power for himself. 3 

BalajI proceeded towards Bengal on 8 December, 1742, entered 
Bihar in February, 1743, met ‘All VardI Khan on 8 March, 1743 and 
expelled RaghujI’s forces from the province. Raghuji appealed to 
Shahu. Shahu divided the spheres of the Peshwd and Raghuji on 
31 August, 1743. Four Subdhs of Malwa, Agra, Ajmer and Allaha¬ 
bad, and the estates of Tikari and Bhojpur in the Subdh of Bihar were 
assigned to the Peshwd , and Raghuji was given the Subdhs of Bengal, 
Orissa, Awadh and parts of Bihar. 4 They were ordered not to inter¬ 
fere in each other’s spheres. In 1745 the emperor promised to pay 
chauth to Shahu—25 lakhs for Bengal and 10 lakhs for Bihar. The 
conflict about shares in the amount between the Peshwd and Raghuji, 
however, remained. But the Peshwd did not interfere in the sphere 
of Raghuji. There were about six invasions of Bengal by Raghuji. 
The fortune of arms was not constant in favour of one or the other. 
The Marathas, however, gained Orissa. Finally in 1751 a treaty was 
made between ‘All VardI Khan and Raghuji which settled their rela¬ 
tions. The surplus revenue of Orissa was to be paid to Raghuji and 
12 lakhs of rupees were to be paid annually to him as the chauth 

176 


BALAJI KAO (1740-1)761) 


of Bengal and Bihar. On these terms the Marathas agreed not to 
enter Bihar and Bengal again. Later on, the Bhosles of Nagpur 
annexed Orissa to their kingdom of Berar and established their full 
sovereignty over it. 5 

On his return from Bengal the Peshrvd defeated the RHjas of 
Bundelkhand who had refused to accept Maratha supremacy and de¬ 
mands of chauth and tribute. He settled the affairs there by appoint¬ 
ing Naro Shankar as the commander-in-charge. 6 After the defeat of 
Bundela Rajas, Govind Pant Bundela was established at Saugor to 
realise the Maratha dues. 

The third campaign of BalajI took place again in 1744-45 to 
settle the affairs in Rajasthan and Bundelkhand. The politics there 
was in eternal flux. In this expedition Bhilsa was captured by 
Ranoji Sindia on 11 March, 1745, 7 from the Nawab of Bhopal. Hosti¬ 
lities however, continued in both areas till 1747. 

The fourth expedition was undertaken in 1747. BalajI went to 
the north on December 6, 1747. One of BalajI’s objects was to help 
the emperor against Ahmad Shah Abdali who invaded India in 1747. 
The other was to settle the affairs in Rajasthan and to realise Mara¬ 
tha claims. Abdali was defeated by the emperor’s forces on 3 March, 
1748; the Peshwd was not required to proceed further. He met 
Madho Singh of Jaipur in April, 1748, at Newai, south of Jaipur, and 
after some arrangements, returned. But he was not able to settle 
the affairs finally. 

The results of these expeditions were meagre and not decisive 
enough to establish Maratha paramountcy anywhere in northern 
India. The Marathas had to fight constantly to realise their chauth 
and the tributes promised. The Rajput princes, who had welcomed 
the Marathas to fight against the Mughuls and to settle their internal 
disputes, now became hostile to them. Maratha sardars supported 
opposite sides and increased their heavy pecuniary demands con¬ 
stantly and did not settle any matter finally. 8 

A case to the point is the mean treatment meted out to Ishwari 
Singh, Raja of Jaipur, in 1751. Sawai Jay Singh, the father of 
Ishwari Singh, was a friend of the Marathas, had facilitated their 
entry into Malwa, and had persuaded the emperor to agree to their 
demands. May be, he had his personal ambitions to be a leader of 
Rajasthan chiefs and to have a dominant position in the Mughul 
Court. BalajI Vishwanath and BajI Rao, the first two Peshwds, had 
befriended him and acted as his allies. But all this goodwill eva¬ 
porated after Sawai Jay Singh’s death in 1743. His two sons, Ish- 

177 

M.S.—12 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

warl Singh and Madho Singh, began to contest for the chiefship of the 
State. Madho Singh, though junior, staked his claim to the throne 
on the ground of his birth of a Udaipur princess. Ishwarl Singh pro¬ 
mised his brother an appanage of 24 lakhs of rupees, but Madho Singh 
wanted a half share in the kingdom. Ishwarl Singh with the help of 
his Maratha allies—Sindia and Holkar—nipped in the bud an at¬ 
tempt to seize by force Jaipur territory in 1745; but then Maharana 
Jagat Singh of Udaipur, with whom Madho Singh was residing, held 
out promises of a large subsidy to the Marathas in case Madho Singh’s , 
cause was upheld. The Peshw\d instead of evolving just principles 
for succession, now started pleading the cause of Madho Singh, be¬ 
cause his uncle, the Rana of Udaipur, promised a large subsidy. To 
Sindia who entered a protest against the proceedings, he wrote a 
mollifying letter. 9 In March, 1747, at the battle of Rajmahal, Ishwarl 
Singh routed his opponent. Madh5 Singh and his uncle, the Maha¬ 
rana of Udaipur, would not accept the defeat gracefully. They bribed 
Holkar heavily and sent their envoys to Poona to exact from Ishwarl 
Singh the fulfilment of his earlier promise, offering Shahii a tribute 
of a few lakhs of rupees. The Peshwa suggested to Malhar Rao Hol¬ 
kar and Sindia’s Diwan Ramchandra Baba to persuade Ishwarl Singh 
to cede the promised territory to his younger brother instead of 
letting this fratricidal struggle continue. 10 

When the demand for half the territory of his kingdom for 
Madho Singh was placed before Ishwarl Singh he declined to accede 
to it. He angrily replied that there was unique and hereditary 
friendship between the Peshwa and himself. Balaji Rao Peshwa 
knew well how thick was his father with him and what services he 
rendered to BajI Rao. Up till now he (Ishwarl Singh) was acting 
according to the Peshwa 3 s advice. But the question was one of in¬ 
heritance of ancestral property. They were rajas and must follow 
their hereditary usage. This dispute was in respect of territory of 
the kingdom. How could he give it away? “I had previously given 
to Madho Singh what your chiefs (Holkar and Sindia) had,asked me 
to grant by way of service to the State. How can I part with more 
without fighting? How can I bring down upon myself the name 
of a coward and an unworthy son by dividing my entire kingdom 
with a younger son? The Peshwa and his chiefs want more terri¬ 
tory to be given to Madho Singh than before, but it cannot be done. 

The chiefs have changed sides for reasons well known to therrv 
selves”. 11 

But Ishwarl Singh was humbled next year. He fled from the 
battle-field when sent against the Abdall in March, 1748. When the 

178 


BALAJI RAO (1740-1761) 


entire Maratha army converged on his kingdom two months later, 
he was in no position to refuse the Peshwa’s demands. 12 But Ishwarl 
Singh was not a willing partner to the contract and tried to wriggle 
out of it. Holkar marched against him with a force in August, 1748 
and exacted fulfilment of the terms. 13 Ishwarl Singh agreed to give 
five pargands to his brother and restore Bund! to Ummed Singh.. On 
9 August he met Holkar and his captains and swore mutual friend¬ 
ship and promised tribute. 

At the end of 1750 the Marathas once more visited Jaipur for 
exacting payment of the promised tribute. The land had been im¬ 
poverished by constant warfare and marches and countermarches of 
rival armies. The Jaipur treasury was empty. The Raja did not 
know how to meet the Maratha demands. “In utter desperation he 
ordered his servant to bring a live cobra and some arsenic needed 
to prepare a medicine. At midnight he swallowed the poison and 
caused the cobra to bite him. When the Maratha army approached 
the city, they were surprised to be greeted by a silent city. Soon 
the news of the horrible tragedy spread and Vakils came from Jai¬ 
pur to negotiate a settlement. The Maratha protege, Madho Singh, 
reached the city within a fortnight, but instead of fulfilling the finan¬ 
cial agreements, attempted to destroy his allies by treacherous at¬ 
tacks’ 7 . 14 The Jaipur invasion ended in a fiasco and permanently lost 
to the Marathas the goodwill and friendship of the Rajputs. They 
came to be hated in Jaipur, Jodhpur and Udaipur and lost their pre¬ 
stige and influence amongst them. 15 Their heavy demands of money 
alienated all. On 10 January, 1751, they wqre massacred at Jaipur 
by the Rajputs on account of their rising hatred of the Marathas. 16 

IV. Southern Campaigns and Politics: The First Phase (1740-49) 

BalajI had three main objectives in the south: (1) to liberate 
the Maratha part of the Deccan from the Mughul rule; therefore 

the Nizam’s power had to be liquidated or brought under control; 

• * _ 

(2) to bring the outlying Deccan and Karnatak provinces under con¬ 
trol; and (3) to crush rebellious poly gars and nawdbs . 

Balaji had no free field in the south as in the north. Shahu was 
not prepared to destroy the Mughul power in the south. He only 
wanted his rights to chauth and sardeshmukhi recognised and realis¬ 
ed. If the Nizam paid them regularly then there was no question 
of war with him. As against this, the Nizam wanted to free himself 
from these obligations to the Marathas. He tried to weaken the 
Marathas by fomenting quarrels and conspiracies among their sar- 
ddrs and rival claimants. He had his own army and was supported 
by a number of local Maratha sardars hostile to Raja Shahu; these 


179 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


sarddrs held jdgrrs and estates in the Maratha part of the Mughul 
Deccan. The Nizam also had an eye on the Karnatak which now 
consisted of a number of independent poly gars and nawdbs. 

Then there were a number of old sarddrs who were interested 
in controlling and conducting the politics and warfare in the south, 
and who were opposed to the Peshwd’s dominant role in it or control 
of it. Consequently the Maratha policy towards the Nizam was not 
fixed, but was vacillating, though the latter was completely opposed 
to the Maratha expansion in the south. Some of these ministers 
and sarddrs sided with the Nizam against the Peshwd. Consequently 
the Nizam’s power could not be liquidated, though he was defeated a 
number of times. Internal rivalries of Maratha politics, and dangers 
and diversions in northern India politics saved the Mughul Deccan 
from being finally conquered and annexed. All the Maratha war¬ 
fare and successes proved of no avail in the end. 

In 1741 Nizam-ul-Mulk was supported by the Peshwd in his fight 
against his own son Nasir Jang who wanted to usurp the subdhdar- 
ship of the Mughul Deccan. He defeated Nasir Jang and established 
himself again as the Subahdar of the Mughul Deccan. 17 In 1743 he 
invaded Karnatak and wrested it from Maratha hands. After this 
till his death he did not fight the Maratha forces in any theatre of 
War. 18 

Karnatak expeditions of the Peshwd were necessitated by the 
aggression of Muslim rulers on Hindu kingdoms of the south. The 
help of the Marathas was also sought in quarrels over succession 
amongst local Muslim rulers in Karnatak. In 1740 Shahu entrusted 
the task of defeating Muslim rulers to Raghuji Bhosle. He defeat¬ 
ed Dost ‘Ali, the Nawab of Arcot, in the battle of Damalcheri on 20 
May, 1740. Trichinopoly was taken on 26 March, 1741, and Chanda 
Sahib, his son-in-law, was captured and imprisoned. Thus Maratha 
supremacy was established over the Karnatak. 19 

Nizam-ul-Mulk, however, could not tolerate this. He also laid 
claims to Karnatak as part of the Mughul empire. While BalajI and 
Raghuji were engaged in the Bengal campaign in 1742-43, Nizam-ul- 
Mulk invaded Karnatak in January, 1743, with a large force and 
brought it under his control. He thus completely undid the work 
of Raghuji. 20 Shahu entrusted the task of opposing the Nizam to 
Babuji Naik and Fateh Singh Bhosle, who were defeated on 15 
February, 1745. 21 On 5 December, 1746, the Peshwd sent Sadashiv 
Rao, his nephew, to settle the affairs there. 22 Nizam-ul-Mulk, how¬ 
ever kept quiet till his death in 1748. Sadashiv Rao’s campaign was 


180 


BALAJI RAO (1740-1761) 


successful. He conquered a number of places in Karnatak and col¬ 
lected tribute from them. He returned on 13 April, 1747. But Balaji 
could not get a grip over Karnatak till Shahu’s death. Shahu did not 
want to displease even those who proved incompetent and treacher¬ 
ous, like Babuji Naik. BalajI’s progress was hampered in the south, 
owing to the conflicting interests of Shahu’s sarddrs. 

Shahu died on 15 December, 1749. Balaji was desirous of unit¬ 
ing Kolhapur and Satara States, and thus creating one Maratha 
* State. He had therefore agreed secretly to support ShambhujI’s 
(king of Kolhapur) succession to Satara. But Shahu was against 
the union. He appointed Ram Raja, Tara Bai’s grandson, as his 
successor. Tara Bai proved that he was not a pretender. Thus a 
war of succession was avoided in the Maratha kingdom, but unfor¬ 
tunately Kolhapur and Satara remained separate States. Ram Raja 
being weak and incompetent and being a puppet in the hands of 
Tara Bai, the power of the State gradually fell into the hands of the 
Peshwd. 

Shahu’s disposition was not active and military. He did not 
want to disturb the existing conditions and vested interests. His 
vision was limited. He was not able to coordinate and' control the 
work of his ministers and sarddrs, nor could he coerce them into 
submission when necessary. He never interested himelf in creating 
a strong, unitary and centralised administration in his Swaraj, much 
less in his new conquests. He would not allow the Peshwd to change 
the old order and bring in the new by way of reforms. 

Balaji became free from Sh&hu’s control at the end of 1749 and 
from succession affairs in 1751. The new ruler, Ram Raja, was a 
mere nonentity. He was confined to his palace and was not allowed 
to take any active part in state affairs, first by Tara Bai and then by 
Balcijl. 

The legacy of Balaji was, however, not a happy one. There was 
no conception of a centralised and integrated state. The Maratha 
State was merely a loose collection of feudal entities. It was only 
in the Swaraj territory that there was some centralised and unified 
administration. The outlying parts of the State were administered 
by the military sarddrs to whom they were assigned as military 
grants ( Saranjams ). 

In the second period of Balaji’s regime, his aims and problems 
remained the same. He, however, being more free to direct his 
policy, wanted to bring to a conclusion many of the old festering 
problems both in the north and in the south. The new dangers which 


181 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


developed during this period were the conquests made by Ahmad 
Shah Abdali in the Punjab, and the military interference of the 
French and the English in the politics of both north and south. 

In order to free himself from domestic troubles the Peshwd 
arrived at a settlement at Sangola in October, 1750 with Ram Raja. 
It defined the claims and spheres of various ministers and sarddrsP 
On 24 November, 1750, Ram Raja was put in confinement by his 
grand-mother Tara Bai. He thus ceased to be an active or directive 
factor in the politics of the Maratha State. 24 

V. Southern Campaigns and Politics: Second Phase (1749-1761) 

In 1748 Nasir Jang succeeded Nizam-ul-Mulk, but was challeng¬ 
ed by his nephew Muzaffar Jang. Muzaffar Jang and Chanda Saheb 
sought the help of the Marathas. But they immediately received the 
help of French forces and defeated Nasir Jang and the Nawab of 
Arcot. Then Chanda Saheb became the Nawlab of Arcot, and Mu¬ 
zaffar Jang assumed the title of the Nizam. Nasir Jang sought the 
help of the Peshwid. He defeated his opponents but was killed on 5 
December, 1750 in the battle between him and the opposite forces 
led by Bussy. Thus Muzaffar Jang became the Nizam, but he, too, 
was killed in a melee in 1751. Then Salabat Jang was installed as 
the Nizam by Bussy. In 1751 Salabat Jang arid the Peshwa entered 
into an agreement. But the agreements proved short-lived; in 
November, 1751, Ramdas, the Diwan of Salabat Jang, on the advice 
and aid of Bussy, invaded the Maratha territory. In the battle of 
Ghodnadi a number of skirmishes took place. Ramdas was not suc¬ 
cessful and concluded a treaty at Shingwa. 25 

Ghazi-ud-dln, the eldest son of Nizam-ul-Mulk, who was at Delhi 
came to the Deccan in October, 1752, with a farman of the emperor 
to take over the subdhdarship of the Mughul Deccan, but before he 
could succeed he was poisoned by one of the wives of Nizam-ul-Mulk, 
mother of Nizam ‘Ali, at a banquet on 16 October, 1752. The Peshwd 
and his sarddrs had lent support to Ghazl-ud-d!n’s claim. Then Sala¬ 
bat Jang made peace with the Peshwa at Bhalki in November, 1752. 
It was agreed that both parties were to conduct jointly the invasion 
cf Karnatak. 26 There was no warfare between the Nizam and the 
Marathas till 1756. But in 1757 again incidents occurred and there 
was the campaign of Sindkhed from 17 August, 1757 to 2 January, 
1758. It was undertaken to realise the 25 lakhs jdgir promised by 
the Nizam to the Peshwd. A peace was made at Sakharkharda, and 
the Peshwd was again promised the jdglr.v But the terms of the 
treaty were not carried out. The Nizam’s strength which lay in the 

182 


BALAJI RAO (1740-1761) 


French arms, was weakened by Bussy’s departure in 1758. He then 
took the help of the British. 

In 1759 Balaji decided to crush the Nizam finally. The campaign 
of Udgir took place from October, 1759 to February, 1760. The 
Nizam’s forces were completely defeated. The Marathas captured 
four famous places—B'urhanpur with fort Asirgarh, Daulatabad, 
Ahmadnagar and Bijapur. Final victory was gained on 3 February, 
1760. Sadashiv Rao Bhau conducted the campaign and led Maratha 
forces to victory. The Nizam proposed peace. Sixty lakhs worth 
of jdgir territory, Asirgarh and Daulatabad forts, Bijapur and Bur- 
hanpur were ceded. Ahmadnagar had already been seized. But 
the battle of Panipat and disasters in the north prevented the Peshwa 
from taking full advantage of the victory. 28 

VI. Kamdtak Campaign 

From 1753 to 1760, the Peshwa conducted a number of cam¬ 
paigns in Karnatak to establish Maratha supremacy and to secure a 
regular flow of money by way of tribute. In 1753 his forces entered 
Seringapatam (Srirangapattan). In 1754 they went to Bagalkot, 
Savanur and Harihar; in 1755 to Bidnur; in 1756 to Savanur; and in 
1757 to Srirangapattan. In the next three years the Peshwa sent 
his sarddrs. A lot of tribute and some territory was acquired. But 
matters were not finally settled. 29 

VII. TulajI Angria and the Peshwa 

It is to the eternal discredit of Balaji that he destroyed the 
naval power of TulajI Angria with the help of the British. With¬ 
out creating a new strong naval arm of the Maratha State, which 
was an absolute necessity against European powers in the western 
seas, he destroyed the old. He did not fully realise the political 
danger coming from the sea-powers of the west like the Portuguese, 
the French and the English. 

TulajI Angria did not keep on good terms with the Peshwa and 
was often arrogant and disloyal. His opposition and disloyalty be¬ 
came a thorn in the eyes of Balaji. He therefore sought the help of 
the British in the home affairs of the Maratha State. It was the 
greatest mistake committed. TulajI had defied western powers on 
the seas and checked their ambition and aggression all these years. 
Balaji did not fully weigh this fact*. The British were very glad 
of this golden opportunity to crush the Maratha naval power com¬ 
pletely, Balaji was blind to this. Thus, one of the greatest achieve- 


183 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

ments of the Marathas and a century-old unique creation of Mara¬ 
tha naval genius was destroyed by the Peshwa with the help of a 
foreign enemy. It was a suicidal act born of a short-sighted policy. 

Tulaji Angria who had succeeded SambhajI Angria in 1743, 
proved strong and daring enough not to allow the Europeans to esta¬ 
blish their naval supremacy on the western coast till 1755. But 
the Peshwa and the British entered into a treaty of aggression against 
Tulaji on 19 March, 1755. 30 Tulaji was defeated by the combined 
forces, and Suvamadurg was captured on 4 April, 1755, 31 and Vijaya- 
durg on 13 February, 1756. 32 Vijayadurg was taken possession of 
by the English against Peshwd’s desire. It was a great success for 
the British whose navy could now control the whole of the western 
coast. The Peshwa took Underi from the Sidis in 1759. But the 
English would not help the Peshwa in destroying the power and 
fort of Sidis. What a contrast between the English and the Peshwal 

VIII. Northern Campaigns and Politics: 

Second Phase (1749-1761) 

The years 1748 and 1749 are very important in the political 
history of India both in the north and in the south. Indian politics 
then was primarily personal, not institutional. The death of em¬ 
peror Muhammad Shah on 14 April, 1748, of Nizam-ul-Mulk on 21 
May, 1748, and of Shahu on 15 December, 1749, removed men of old 
traditions and great influence. Similarly, the Anglo-French wars 
and their successful interference in Indian politics, and Ahmad Shah 
Abdall’s invasions and temporary conquests created new dangers and 
introduced new forces in Indian politics. The old world of the 
Mughul supremacy practically ended, and a new world of usurping 
nawabs and nizdms, ministers and generals arose. We do not find 
one power as that of the Mughul emperor dominating over India, 
but a number of usurping powers—ministers and governors—hold¬ 
ing that power separately and using it against the unity and safety 
of the empire itself in their own dynastic and narrow feudal in¬ 
terests. The age may be called the age of Vazirs and Peshwds or 
prime ministers, both in the north and in the south, or of subdhdars 
(governors) and sarddrs. The Mughul emperor of the north, and 
the Maratha king of the south had become puppets or nonentities in 
the politics of the country. They had no character or ability or 
strength and proved mere ghosts of their famous predecessors and 
ancestors, sitting on their thrones as mere puppets. 

The Delhi emperors had asked for Maratha help against foreign 
invaders like Nadir Shah in 1739, and against Ahmad Shah Abdali 


184 


BALAJi RAO (1740-1761) 


in 1747. Baji Rao had started but could not reach in time to fight 
against Nadir Shah. Balaji reached Jaipur in 1747, but Abdall was 
defeated before he could reach Delhi. Maratha help was also sought 
by the Vazirs of the emperor against their rivals from the time of 
Baji Rao. During BalajI’s time a Maratha contingent was placed 
at Delhi according to an agreement of 1752 33 to serve the Delhi em¬ 
peror and his Vazir. Thus Maratha influence in Delhi politics went 
on increasing. Later on, their help was also sought in the Afghan 
quarrels in the Doab and in the quarrels in the Punjab against the 
Afghan aggression from beyond the Indian borders. 

The Peshwd had his sardars —Sindia, Holkar and Pawar and 
other officers, administrators and representatives, permanently 
placed in important parts of northern India. Ran5jl Sindia, the 
founder of the Sindia house, died in 1745. His sons Jayappa and 
DattajI were good soldiers and continued their father’s work in the 
north as the military generals of the Peshwd . Malhar Rao Holkar 
lived during BalajI’s regime and carried on Maratha military acti¬ 
vities in the north, specially in Malwa, Rajputana, Bundelkhand, the 
Doab and Delhi areas. Other sardars and officers were engaged in 
minor and restricted theatres of war. 

Balaji did not personally go to the north after he returned from 
Jaipur in 1748. His sardars and representatives were carrying on 
military and diplomatic activities on his behalf to secure for him 
financial and territorial gains and to advance his political interests 
and supremacy in the north. Balaji kept himself in touch with 
northern politics through correspondence. He had envoys at vari¬ 
ous courts. Hingnes were entrusted with the diplomatic work at 
Delhi as the envoys of the Peshwd. 

During the second period of Balaji’s regime four great campaigns 
were organised in the north—two under the command of Raghunath 
Rao, the third one under DattajI Sindia and the last one under SadA- 
shiv Rao Bhau. Delhi emperors and Vazirs had asked for Maratha 
support in their internal quarrels and against foreign invasions. 
Ahmad Shah Abdall invaded India a number of times. Though he 
was defeated in 1748, he was successful in later campaigns, being 
invited by discontented governors and nobles of the Punjab and the 
Doab. The emperor being weak had to cede some districts in the 
Punjab to the Abdall in his second campaign. 

The Peshwd’s chief aim in undertaking these expeditions was 
to realise the vast sums of money promised by north Indian rulers 
and governors. The first expedition to the north under Raghunath 

185 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Rao took place during 1753-55. He was the commander of the Mara- 
tha forces and was assisted by Sindia and Holkar. This campaign 
lasted till October, 1755. The Marathas arrived in Rajputana in 
October, 1753. They were promised tribute by Kota, Bundi, Jaipur 
and other States. They fought with the Jats from 16 January to 
22 May, 1754, but failed. After that they marched towards Delhi. 
They helped Ghazl-ud-din Imad-ul-Mulk in putting a new emperor 
on the throne and in making him the Vazir. Raghunath Rao 
moved round Delhi and its environments; then he entered the Doab 
and after realising some contributions from Rohillas and others, he 
returned to Poona on 10 August, 1755. Malhar Rao Holkar had ac¬ 
companied Raghunath Rao in this campaign. The subsidy of 40 
lakhs promised to the Marathas by the Vazir could not be realised. 
Only a small amount was paid. The Marathas were therefore given 
22 villages in Saharanpur and a few others from the empercfcr’s 
estate. 34 

IX. The Punjab Politics and Campaigns in the Second Period 

The Punjab politics was at the time in a confused state. 
Claimants and usurpers were quarrelling for its governorship. The 
Sikhs had risen in rebellion. In this state of affairs, Ahmad Shah 
Abdali invaded the Punjab and stayed there from December, 1747 
to March, 1748. Shah Nawaz Khan who had usurped the governor¬ 
ship of the Punjab sought his help against the emperor. An engage¬ 
ment between the Afghans and the Mughuls took place on 11 
January, 1748, and Lahore was captured by the Afghans. Then the 
Afghans took Sirhind. But they were defeated by the imperialists 
on 11 March, 1748. 35 

Their second invasion occurred in December, 1749. The subah- 
dar of Lahore granted Abdali the revenues of four Mahals and he 
retired. 

The third invasion took place in December, 1751, in order to 
realise the promised annual revenues of the four mahdls, which were 
not sent. Muin-ul-Mulk, the governor, had to surrender to Abdali 
at Lahore on 5 March, 1752. Thus the Punjab was lost to the em. 
pire and subdhs of Lahore and Multan were added to the Durrani 
empire by a treaty which was confirmed by the emperor on 13 April, 
1752. Abdali then conquered Kashmir. 

After the third invasion of Abdali, the Vazir Safdar Jang and 
Khoja Javid Khan, a favourite and confidant of the court, persuaded 
the emperor to enter into an agreement with the Marathas in May, 
1752, for undertaking the duty of defending the empire against its 


186 


BALAJ! RAO (1740-1761) 


external and internal foes. 36 Antaji Mankeshwar was placed in 
charge of the Maratha military force at Delhi for this duty. In re¬ 
turn, the Marathas were to get the chauth of the North-Western pro¬ 
vinces usurped and occupied by the Afghans. But that chauth could 
only be secured by actual conquest. The Marathas were also given 
the subahs of Ajmer and Agra which were in the ha,nds of Rajputs 
and Jats. This created antagonism between them and the Marathas. 

After the murder of Javid Khan on 27 August, 1752, by Vatfr 
Safdar Jang, Imad-ul-Mulk, Ghazi-ud-din Khan’s son, with the help 
of the Marathas drove away Safdar Jang in 1753 to Awadh, and in 
June, 1754 he deposed the emperor Ahmad Shah. Raghunath Rao, 
Malhar Rao Holkar and Najib Rohilla assisted him to become Vazir 
in place of Intizam-ud-Daulah, the son of the old Vazir Qamar-ud-din. 37 

The fourth invasion of Abdali took place in November 1756. The 
Punjab politics and life were in chaos and confusion. The Sikhs had 
risen everywhere. The Marathas were interfering in the politics of 
Delhi and harassing the governors and the governed for money. At 
this time, Ahmad Shah Abdali was invited to invade India by Mugh- 
lani Begam, the widow of the late subdhdar Muin-ul-Mulk, Najib- 
ud-Daulah, and the emperor ‘Alamglr II, all of whom promised him 
full support. 38 On this occasion there was no opposition to him till 
he reached Delhi. Delhi was looted and ravaged systematically. 
Sacred places like Mathura and Vrindavan suffered the same fate. 
There were massacres and rapes. Cholera epidemic in his army, 
however, made him return. While on his way back Ahmad Shah 
again sacked Delhi, annexed Sirhind, and laden with immense booty, 
left Delhi on 2 April, 1757. He gave the office of the Vazir to Imad- 
ul-Mulk and that of Mir Bakhshi to Najib-ud-Daulah, making the 
latter his own plenipotentiary and the real master of the Mughul 
government. 39 

The defect of Maratha politics in the north lay in the constant 
change of policy and allies. This created suspicion and distrust in 
the minds of all, against them. They thus alienated the sympathy 
of Rajputs, the Jats, the Awadh Nawabs and the Rohillas. They 
had no real and constant allies left for achieving their political ob¬ 
jectives in the north. 40 

The fourth invasion of Abdali broke the back of the Delhi power 
and also swept off Maratha influence there. After Abdall’s departure 
the Marathas again came and established their supremacy at Delhi 
and ousted Najib-ud-Daulah. They entered into a new treaty in June, 
1757, with Imad-ul-Mulk. Instead of one-fourth they were promis- 


187 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

ed one-half share of all the revenues that they might gather from 
the Mughul dominions. 41 This meant that the Marathas must use 
force on all sides to get their dues. Their main object, however, be¬ 
came the establishment of their supremacy in the Punjab province. 

After May, 1757, the condition of the Punjab politics was that 
Abdall’s son, Timur Shah, was the viceroy at Lahore and Jahan Khan, 
his general and guardian. There were two other parties who claimed 
the governorship of Lahore—one, the Mughul party led by Mughlani 
Begam, the widow of Muin-ul-Mulk, the. old governor, who died in 
1753, and the other, the party of Sikhs who had risen as a people 
against -the Mughul rule. Adina Beg Khan, one of the officers, was 
carrying on guerilla warfare with the help of the Sikhs for power. 
The Sikhs had made stable rule of the Afghans in the Punjab im¬ 
possible by defeating their generals. Adina Beg Khan invited the 
Marathas to help him. The Maratha plan was to prevent Abdall 
from crossing the Indus. They, therefore, undertook the campaign 
in the Punjab with the consent of the V&zir Imad-ul-Mulk in March, 
1758. Raghunath Rao and Malhar Rao led this campaign. 

This was the second expedition of Raghunath Rao carried on 
during 1757-58. Large Maratha armies began to move and stay in 
the north for this purpose. Raghunath first invaded Rajputana and 
then moved on to Delhi. He attacked Delhi on* 11 August, 1757 and 
took it. Najib Khan Rohilla made peace with the Marathas on 9 
September, 1757. Thus Raghunath established Maratha supremacy 
over the Delhi area. But Najib-ud-Daulah continued his secret 
alliance with the Abdall and invited him to drive away the Marathas 
from the north. 

The first Maratha invasion of the Punjab took place in 1758 
under the leadership of Raghunath. He was assisted by Malhar Rao 
Holkar. It was Adina Beg whcr had requested Raghunath, when at 
Delhi, to extend the Maratha dominions as far as the Indus. The 
invasion began in February 1758. 

The Maratha troops were about 50,000. ManajI Paygude, the 
able Maratha captain, led the Marathas to Lahore, on 20 April 1758. 
Timur Shah and Jahan Khan retreated beyond the Chirrab. Then 
Raghunath and Malhar Rao returned by the end of May, 1758, at 
the call of the Peshwd. The whole administration of the Punjab was 
left in the hands of Adina Beg who promised to pay 75 lakhs a year 
to the Marathas. 42 

The danger to the Maratha power lay in not staying in the 
Punjab in sufficient strength and consolidating their conquests. That 


BALAJi RAO (1740-1761) 


was the weakness of the whole of their northern and Deccati policy 
and politics. A small force could not meet all eventualities. How¬ 
ever, on their return, Raghunath sent Vithal Shivdeo, and Malhar 
Rao sent TukojI Holkar to the Punjab. 

Raghunath in his letter to the Peshwti from Lahore on 4 May, 

1758, describes the Maratha achievements in the Punjab as follows: 

“We have already brought Lahore, Multan, Kashmir and 
other subdhs on this side of Attock under our rule for the most 
part... Ahmad Khan Abdali’s son, Timur Sultan, and Jahan 
Khan, have been pursued by our troops, and their forces com¬ 
pletely routed. Both of them have now reached Peshawar with 
a few broken troops. .. we have decided to establish our rule up 
to Kandahar”. 43 

Adina Beg died in October 1758. After his death a great scram¬ 
ble for power began in the Punjab. Tukoji on behalf of Holkar 
marched on beyond the Jhelum and the Indus in pursuit of the 
Afghans in October, 1758, and thus carried Maratha arms and stand¬ 
ard beyond Attock to Peshawar. Sabaj I Sindia who had been sent 
by Dattaji, followed suit and joined him there. They continued 
there for four months till they returned to Lahore in March 1759, 
after new Afghan pressure. 

But the anarchy in the Punjab and the consequent injury to 
Maratha interests there compelled the Peshwa to send a fresh strong 
force to the province under the able leadership of Dattaji Sindia. 
He arrived near the Sutlej in the first week of April, 1759. Here he 
was met by Adina Beg’s son who paid a part of the tribute. Dattaji 
then sent Sabaji Sindia with an army to take over Lahore and its 
governorship directly into his own hands. Sabaji Sindia was obeyed 
as governor as Dattaji was there to help him with his large force. 
In August, 1759 Sabaji drove back the invasion of Jahan Khan coming 
from Peshawar. The Afghan general retreated across the Indus. His 
son died and many of^his troops were killed and wounded. 

But Jahan Khan again crossed the Indus in October 1759, with 
a strong Afghan force, and marched towards Lahore. At this time 
Dattaji was engaged in the siege of Shukartal. Sabaji was not 
strong enough to oppose Jahan Khan; he therefore retreated from 
Lahore and thus deserted the Punjab. 

Dattaji and Jankoji, who had gone as far as the Sutlej in April, 

1759, did not stay there long enough to. organise the Punjab con¬ 
quests. They returned, depending on Sabaji and his forces to hold 


189 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

s 

the Punjib. The Peshwd asked them to return to Delhi as he was in 
great need of money to pay his heavy debts. He wanted Dattaji to 
undertake a new campaign to Bengal to get money. 

The Marathas were in the Punjab from April, 1758, to October, 
1759. They acted as representatives of the emperor, and collected 
the revenue with the help of local Mughul officers. The Marathas 
had about 15,000 troops there to oppose the fifth invasion of Abdall. 

The whole province of the Punjab was occupied by the Afghans 
without a blow.- Maratha detachments which were dispersed 
throughout the province, lost heavily. Abdall established his govern¬ 
ment at Lahore in October, 1759, entered Sirhind on 27 November, 
1759, and annexed the Punjab. This was his fifth invasion of India. 
It was undertaken to remove the Maratha danger once for all. Najib- 
ud-Daulah, his Indian ally, invited and helped him in this task. 

X. Rdjputdna Politics and Campaigns in the Second Period 

By 1751 the claimants whom the Marathas had supported in 
Jaipur, Jodhpur and Bundi, had succeeded to their principalities. But 
the huge sums which were promised to the Marathas had not been 
paid and not even a part of them could be realised except by force. 
In ,1751 and 1752 the Marathas were helping Safdar Jang of Awadh 
against the Afghans of the Doab. In 1752 Malhar Rao Holkar was 
supporting Ghazi-ud-din, the eldest son of Nizam-ul-Mulk, to secure 
the viceroyalty of the Mdghul Deccan. 

From 1753, the Marathas again took an active part in Raj- 
putana politics. Sindia and Holkar were the chief Maratha sarddrs 
who were entrusted with preserving Maratha interests there. 
Jayappa Sindia was not successful at first at Ajmer, but invaded 
Marwar again on 23 June, 1754. At this time Raghunath Rao came 
from the south along with Malhar Rao Holkar. He gained some con¬ 
tributions, but his main object was to go to Delhi to help Imad-ul- 
Mulk. He reached there on 1 June, 1754. Jayappa Sindia complete¬ 
ly defeated Bijay Singh of Marwar on 15 September near Merta. 
Though Jayappa had early successes in Marwar in 1755 also, his un¬ 
co-operative conduct and exorbitant demands ruined the cause of 
the Marathas in Rajputana. On 25 July, 1755, he was murdered by 
a Rathor envoy in a heated discussion during negotiations for peace. 
Therefore warfare continued furiously, and with the help of Dattaji 
Sindia and other sarddrs the Marathas were successful. Jaipur and 
Jodhpur made peace with the Marathas in February, 1756. Ajmer 

190 


BALAJi RAO (1740-1761) 


ort and district were ceded to the Marathas. An indemnity of fifty 
lakhs was promised. Ram Singh, whom the Marathas supported, got 
half the territory of Marwar. 

In the year 1757, the Peshwa ordered Malhar Rao and Raghunath 
Rao to realise the promised tribute. They had first intended to 
march to Delhi against Abdali, but were not well equipped for it. 
They had neither sufficient money, nor proper fighting forces and 
materials, and were not successful in realising the total amount of 
contributions in spite of threats of force. Jaipur under Madho Singh 
resisted their exorbitant demands, and began to conspire with the 
Afghans against them. Raghunath Rao could get only eleven 
lakhs from Jaipur, but was not able to continue hostilities for want 
of more money. Nobody offered him any loan, and looting could not 
maintain an army for long. During this time, while he was engaged 
in minor conflicts, Abdali’s fourth expedition took place. The 
Shah sacked and ravaged not only Delhi, but also the holy places of 
Mathura and Vrindavan and Raghunath Rao was not able to do any¬ 
thing to check him. Raghunath returned to the south in June 1758. 
From July, 1758, Jankbji Sindia, son of Jayappa, was trying to realise 
> tribute from those Rajput States which had agreed to pay, and to 
use force against those States which were forming anti-Maratha coali¬ 
tions and alliances. 

In July, 1759, Malhar Rao Holkar was sent to Jaipur to force it 
to pay the annual tribute which had not beerl paid for long. Madho 
Singh had become pro-Abdall. The Peshwa wanted money badly, 
but Holkar, in spite of his military superiority, was not successful 
in his objectives. He had, moreover, suddenly to abandon Rajputana 
in December, 1759, at the request of Dattaji Sindia to come to his 
help. Madho Singh delayed Malhar Rao’s departure till Abdali had 
reached Sirhind on 27 November, 1759. Malhar Rao left for Delhi on 
2 January, 1760. Rajputana affairs thus remained unsettled during 
1760. 

XI. Delhi Politics and Campaigns 

The Peshwa had appointed Dattaji in 1758 to replace Malhar Rao, 
who was dilatory in diplomacy and warfare in northern India. 
Dattaji Sindia’s campaigns in the north took place during 1759-60. 
He adopted a stronger policy towards Delhi than that of Malhar Rao 
Holkar. His policy was anti-Najib as Malhar’s was pro-Najib. He 
was commissioned to realise all the tributes promised from various 
imperial provinces. Raghunath Rao’s expeditions had not been 
fruitful. Dattaji threatened the Vazir, Imad-ul-Mulk and, after a 


191 


THE MAEATHA SUPREMACY 

few skirmishes near Delhi on 29 January, 1759, there was an agree¬ 
ment about the money to be paid by the Vazir. Dattaji then 
marched towards the Punjab on 1 February, 1759 and brought it 
again under control. He returned to Delhi in May, 1759, as he want¬ 
ed to lead an expedition to Bengal as suggested by the Peshwa. He 
entered into an agreement with Najib-ud-Daulah to help him in build¬ 
ing a bridge across the Ganga. Dattaji entered the upper Doab and 
met Najib. But Najib did not like to accompany the Marathas in 
their Bengal expedition. Being suspicious of their intentions he de¬ 
feated their plan by false promises and dilatory tactics. Then mon¬ 
soon came and the bridge could not be built. Najib had invited 
Abdali and was organising a secret alliance of the Mughul nobles 
and Afghan and Rajput rulers in order to drive away the Marathas 
from the north. Dattaji, therefore, decided to crush him. But 
Najib had already taken an unassailable position at Shukartal on the 
bank of the Ganga, where he entrenched himself. At this place 
Dattaji wasted four months but failed to dislodge the Rohilla chief. 44 

Sabaji Sindia, the Maratha governor of Lahore, abandoned the 
Punjab and reached Dattaji’s camp on 8 November, 1759. Najib 
would not agree to pay an indemnity of 25 lakhs, and the war went 
on; but Dattajfs position at Shukartal became untenable. On 23 
November, a small remnant of Maratha troops of the Punjab defeated 
by the Abdali reached Dattaji’s camp. Dattaji raised the siege, as 
he had to meet the new Afghan danger. The Afghan army met 
Dattaji’s forces near Thaneswar on 24 December, 1759. Dattaji, being 
checked, fell back towards Delhi. A battle took place at Barari or 
Buradi Ghat on 10 January, 1760 in which Dattaji was killed, and the 
Maratha army retreated. 45 Jankoji Sindia fled, and Malhar Rao 
Holkar, who was called for help, joined him on 15 January, 1760. 
Both kept hovering round Delhi, and Malhar Rao was defeated at 
Sikandarbad in March, 1760. 4 * Abdali did not return to his coun¬ 
try after this, but remained in the Doab at the request of Najib to 
meet the new Maratha menace coming from the Deccan to avenge 
the disaster at Buradi Ghat 

Sadashiv Rao’s expedition to the north took place in 1760. The 
Peshwa learnt on 27 January, 1760, of Abdali’s invasion, of Maratha 
retreat from the Punjab, and of Dattaji being forced to raise the 
siege of Shukartal. Then the shocking news came on 15 February, 
1760, of the death of Dattajf and the destruction of the army under 
him. Sadashiv Rao Bhau, the victor of Udgir, was appointed to lead 
the expedition to retrieve the Maratha fortunes in the north. 47 He 
was, however, not free to decide matters on his own responsibility, as 


192 


BALAJi RAO (1740-1761) 


Vishwas Rao, the son of Balaji Rao, was made the nominal com¬ 
mander-in-chief. Bhau reached the Chambal on 8 June, 1760. Malhar 
Rao Holkar joined him there. Shuja-ud-Daulah, the Nawab of 
Awadh, joined Abdall’s side at the persuasion of Najib Khan. Bhau 
invited all chiefs in the north to join in driving out foreigners, 48 but 
there was no response from any quarter. Rajput princes were either 
hostile or neutral. Only Suraj Mai Jat helped the Marathas by pro¬ 
viding them supplies. All the Muslim rulers of the north combined 
against the Marathas. That the Hindu rulers did not join or support 
Bhau was a fact which weakened the Maratha financial resources and 
military strength. There were differences about the plan of cam¬ 
paign among the Maratha chiefs themselves. On 16 May, 1760, 
Ilafiz Rahmat came from Abdall, met Malhar Rao Holkar and Suraj 
Mai, and proposed peace. But there was no agreement as the Mara¬ 
tha terms were exorbitant. 

Another attempt at peace was made after the capture of Delhi 
by Bhau. Shujarud-Daulah proposed to bring about peace between 
Abdall and the Peshwd. The conditions proposed were that Shah 
‘Alam should be acknowledged as emperor and his eldest son Jawan 
Bakht as his heir, that Shuja should be appointed as Vazir, and that 
Abdall should then return to his own country and the Marathas to 
their own. But the opposition of Imad-ul-Mulk and Suraj Mai to 
this proposal defeated the new peace move. 

The Marathas thought in terms of India as a whole. They had 
invited all the rulers to join them against Afghan foreigners. Bhau 
aimed at fixing India’s boundary at Attock. Peshawar and beyond 
was to be left to the Afghans. The Marathas were to administer im¬ 
perial provinces in the name of the Mughul emperor. 49 

Sadashiv Rao Bhau captured Delhi on 2 August, 1760. He was 
helped by Malhar Rao, JankojI and Balwant Rao Mehendale. But 
Suraj Mai, who was on the Maratha side, left the Maratha cause be¬ 
cause peace proposals unacceptable to him, were being entertained. 
His departure was a great loss, as no ally was left to the Marathas in 
the north. Suraj Mai suspected Maratha intentions against his own 
possessions. The Marathas had now to rely solely on their own re¬ 
sources and leadership. No peace was possible as the Peshivd would 
not agree to cede the Punjab to Abdall or recognise Najib Khan’s 
possessions in the Doab, though Bhau was prepared to entertain these 

proposals. 

The capture of Delhi restored the prestige of Maratha arms 
which had been lost after the fall of Dattajl. At this point Abdall 

193 


M.S.—13 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

showed his readiness for an honourable peace between the Rohillas 
and the Marathas and then would have liked to return to his country. 
But Bhau*s success at Delhi overcame his sense of reality. He exag¬ 
gerated the differences and anxieties felt in Abdali’s camp. Najib 
and Shuja continued peace talks with Bhau during «August and 
September, 1760. They did not succeed as the Peshwd’s demands 
were exorbitant. 

After the conquest of Delhi, Bhau was drawn further north and 
his difficulties increased as regards food supplies. There was starva¬ 
tion arriongst his' soldiers. No money or loan was available. His 
financial resources were exhausted and dried up as there was no local 
tribute available. Bankers had already disappeared. 50 

XII. The Battle of Pdnipat (14 January, 1761) 

Bhau captured Kunjpura on 17 October, 1760. This was neces¬ 
sary in order to cut off Abdah’s communications and to capture his 
provisions there. But Bhau neglected to keep his own line of com¬ 
munication intact and watch the fords of the Jamuna to prevent 
Abdali’s crossing. While at Kunjpura, news reached him that Abdali 
had crossed the Jamuna near Baghpat and was striding across his 
path to the south. He then began his march towards Delhi and 
reached Fanipat on 29 October, 1760. Abdali, in the meanwhile, had 
crossed the Jamuna, arrived at Sonepat on 20 October, 1760, and 
reached Panipat on 1 November, 1760. Bhau’s communications with 
Delhi and the Deccan were consequently cut off. $ 

During March to October, 1760, Abdali had destroyed the Mara- 
tha power in the Punjab, captured Delhi, killed Dattaji Sindia and 
driven out Malhar Rao and other Marathas from the Upper Doab. 
He also had compelled Suraj Mai to promise tribute. He would have 
gone back to his country had not Najib-ud-Daulah insisted on his stay¬ 
ing on in order to destroy the Peshwd’s army coming from the south. 
So he remained in India after April, 1760, to settle issues with the 
Marathas. 

Shuja-ud-Daulah of Awadh was won over by Najib Khan on 18 
July, 1760. Abdali’s difficulties of food and fodder during his en¬ 
campment in the Doab were met both by Najib and Shuja. 

Abdali’s forces consisted roughly of 40,000 horse and 40,000 foot. 
His own army consisted of 30,000 cavalry and 10,000 infantry and 
2,000 camel-swivels. The rest of the troops—10,000 horse and 30,000 
foot—belonged to his Indian allies. Sadashiv Rao’s army roughly 
consisted of 55,000 horse and 15,000 foot. This included 9,000 dis- 


194 




BALAJi RAO (1740-1761) 


ciplined sepoys under Ibrahim Khan Gardi. AbdalTs forces were 
superior both in number and quality. There were quite a large 
number of irregulars accompanying both the sides. The odds were 
against the Marathas and AbdalTs generalship was superior. His 
cavalry was the finest in Asia, and his artillery was very mobile. 
Sadashiv Rao had a famished army, and his horses were poor and 
starved. His artillery was not equal to AbdalTs.? 1 AbdalTs. organi¬ 
sation and discipline of the army were far superior to that of Sadashiv 
Rao Bhau. The Afghan’s was a compact centralised organisation. 
As against this, Maratha organisation was feudal and individualistic. 
The Maratha army was not well-knit in spirit and movement, and 
its discipline was loose and lax. 

Both armies entrenched themselves at Panipat. Skirmishes and 
minor battles began from 1 November, 1760. The first regular battle 
was fought on 7 December, 1760, when the Rohillas penetrated sud¬ 
denly into the Maratha trenches. They were defeated, but Balwant 
Rao Mehendale, an important sardar, fell. He was the chief counsel¬ 
lor of Sadashiv Rao and an able military leader. 

The Afghan cavalry patrols were able to dominate the environs 
of the Maratha camp. They cut off Maratha communications, cor¬ 
respondence and food supplies. This weakened Bhau’s military 
strength, because he lost connection with his base. His horses and 
soldiers were starving, and his ammunition was being exhaust.ed. 
The treasure coming from the south was stopped and cut off. His 
condition in Panipat thus deteriorated. Govind Ballal Bundela fail¬ 
ed to send help and supplies. He was killed in a raid in the Upper 
Doab on 17 December, 1760. A Maratha raid in Awadh also failed 
in January, 1761. The treasure which was sent to Bhau by Govind 
Pant was also cut off near Panipat on 6 January, 1761. Thus Bhau’s 
condition became worse and full of despair. His army was belea¬ 
guered and starved and his food resources were exhausted. Under 
these conditions Bhau proposed peace at any price, but Abdali re¬ 
jected it on the advice of Qazi Idris who preached Jehad against the 
Marathas. 

Therefore on 13 January, 1761, the starving Maratha army de¬ 
cided to fight and next day marched to battle, (on 14 January). The 
rival armies had encamped close to each other for three months. 

The Afghans had received fresh reinforcements from home, and 
their discipline and morale were excellent. AbdalTs army worked 
under him as one force, and his artillery was more efficient and 
mobile. The Afghan soldiers were well-armed and well-clad and 
their military tactics were superior to those of the Marathas. 


195 


THE MARATHA SUPREMAGY 


♦With the Marathas cut off from their base, the Panipat cam¬ 
paign developed into a huge siege operation. Bhau’s superiority lay 
in his heavy artillery and trained battalions, with which he sur¬ 
rounded himself in his entrenched camp at Panipat. Having retired 
within the defences of this fortress Bhau expected the Abdali to 
attempt to take the place by assault. Abdali’s response was diffe¬ 
rent. Instead of hurling his men against Maratha cannon, he chose 
to starve out the beleaguered garrison. Bhau’s hope lay in holding 
out indefinitely and annoying the besiegers by frequent sorties and 
by calling his supporters outside to attack the Afghans. None of 
the measures he could pursue with success, as he was in a friendless 
country without outside supporters. The sorties made by the Mara¬ 
thas succeeded partially, but by themselves they could not decide the 
issue. Bhau’s primary mistake was to allow himself to be besieged 
in a foreign land. This view of the event explains why Abdali de¬ 
layed the attack for such a long time, and forced the Marathas to 
abandon their defences and come out in the open. When the be¬ 
sieging party is unable to carry a place by assault it seeks to reduce 
the defence by starvation. The explanation given by some writers 
that Abdali feared to close with the Marathas and was doubtful of 
the ultimate issue till the last moment, misses the real issue.** 

Bhau did not get any additional reinforcements from the south. 
He made a great mistake in not guarding adequately the fords at 
the Jamuna and maintain his connection with the south. In this 
battle of Panipat the Marathas were routed and defeated completely. 
It was a great disaster to them. Vishwas Rao and Sadashiv Rao 
BhaU were killed. Most of the officers fell. A large part of the 
forces were massacred and annihilated. The remnants were pur¬ 
sued and slaughtered. A large amount of booty was captured by the 
victors. The total loss of the Marathas is estimated at 50,000 horses, 
2,00,000 cattle, thousands of camels, hundreds of elephants and a 
large amount of cash and jewellery. 52 

The Marathas lost heavily in men, money, military power and 
political prestige by this defeat at Panipat, and lost the empire of 
India. It proved a great set-back to their political ambitions, and 
they had to re-establish their position in the north. 

Ahmad Shah Abdali left India in March, 1761. He gained very 
little except booty and prestige, and was prepared to make peace 
with the Marathas in April 1761. But the attempt proved a failure. 

Morally, the defeat of Panipat was a disaster to the Marathas. 
They lost their support and prestige in the north, their help was no 
more sought in quarrels by local potentates and rulers. 


196 


BALAJI RAO (1740-1761) 

Shortly after hearing the result of the battle of Panipat BalajI 
Rao Peshwa died on 23 June, 1761. It came as a great shock to him, 
as all his life’s work lay in ruins. His mistake lay in not keeping 
open a line of constant communication with Sadashiv Rao Bhau, in 
not properly estimating the needs of his army, in not watching con¬ 
stantly the position of Bhau’s forces, and in not keeping a constant 
flow of reinforcements and supplies to his army. He was not near 
the field of battle where the fate of his empire was being decided. 

Sadashiv Rao Bhau’s ideal was India for the Indians. 53 The 
country up to Attock or the Indus was to bqv governed by Indians 
themselves, not by Turks, Persians or Afghans. He failed because 
his captains did not understand his strategy and tactics of warfare. 
Representing the Peshwa, he wanted to defend the Mughul empire 
from the internal and external enemies from 1752. He received 
authority from the emperors and Vazirs for this purpose throughout 
India. 

But Maratha habits and character and their own equipment in 
men, money, resources and knowledge were not adequate for such a 
huge task in face of foreign military powers and internal selfish and 
aggrandising rulers and officers. 


197 



APPENDIX 

(By the Editor) 

The description of the Battle of Panipat, given above, in the 
text, seems to be not only meagre and therefore somewhat mislead¬ 
ing, but also inaccurate in some details. The author being dead long 
ago it could not be revised by him. Though there is some difference 
of opinion even among modern scholars, the best available accounts 
are those given by Sarkar, Fall of the Mughal Empire, Vol. II, Sar- 
desai in his New History of the Marathas, (Yol. II, pp. 435-44) and 
Shejwalkar in his monograph Panipat, 1761. 

Sardesai’s estimate of the strength of the two hostile armies is 
a little different from that given in the text. He estimates Abdali’s 
army as sixty thousand Strong, nearly half of which was foreign 
and half Indian, of which the major portion was cavalry with a small 
admixture of infantry; the strength of the fighting Maratha force 
was f6rty-five thousand Marathas “who were certainly weakened by 
starvation and the loss of animals.” Shejwalkar calculates the 
strength of the Maratha army in the final action at 50,000. The 
Marathas’had a powerful artillery of more than two hundred pieces 
commanded by Ibrahim Khan. AbdalT, on the other hand, “had no 
heavy guns of the Maratha type; he had, instead, an efficient fire-arm 
of about two thousand light guns, camel-borne swivels, which could 
inflict severe havoc upon the dense mass of the Maratha ranks at 
short range” (Sardesai’s New History, Vol. II, p. 440). 

So far as the actual combat is concerned the following account 
seems to be nearest to truth from available sources of information: 
The battle lasted from about 9 A. M. to 3 P. M. The Marathas fought 
vigorously for a few hours at the beginning, creating great havoc 
in the enemy’s ranks. AbdalT was “for a moment nervous about the 
issue” (p. 441) and called the select reserve force of six thousand 
Kazalbash cavalry corps who retrieved the position. The Maratha 
Commander and the Peshwa’s son made such a fierce onslaught up¬ 
on the enemy’s centre commanded by the Vazir of AbdalT that KashT- 
raj (who has written an account of the battle) saw him “sitting on 
the ground, beating his forehead in agony and trying to rally his 
fleeing followers piteously crying, ‘where are you running away my 
friends; Kabul is far off; you can’t reach it by running away’ ” 
(p. 441). AbdalT who had been constantly on the move watching 
the situation in different parts of the battle-field, realized his 
(Va&r’s) dangerous position. “He immediately detached fresh 
troops for his relief and had all the fleeing soldiers called back on 
pain of cutting them down. Until about two o’clock in the after¬ 
noon the Marathas continued their furious offensive. The enemy 
was yielding .ground and the Marathas appeared almost within an 
inch of winning” (p. 442). At this moment the thirteen thousand 
soldiers who had withdrawn from the battle but returned on pain 
of death, joined the combat. The Maratha troops who had been 

198 


APPENDIX 


strenuously fighting “for over five hours without food and water, 
now showed signs of exhaustion”. Abdall who had been watching 
the situation now called in his reserve of ten thousand men and they 
turned the scale decisively against the Marathas. The destruction 
of the Maratha army was completed by the Afghan squadron of 1500 
camel swivels firing from a close range, and a stray bullet killed 
Vishwas Rao a little before three in the afternoon. Then com¬ 
menced a general flight of the Maratha troops followed by a terrible 
carnage. About seventy-five thousand Maratha soldiers and camp 
followers were killed and twenty-two thousand saved their lives by 
paying ransom (p. 443). 

This account of the battle is corroborated in a general manner 
by the victor himself, as will appear from the following extracts of 
a letter written by Abdall to Raja Madho Singh. This letter was 

published by Sir Jadunath Sarkar in the Modem Review (May, 
1946). 

“The enemy distinguished themselves and fought so well that 
it was beyond the capacity of other races. Gradually the fighting 
passed from the exchange of cannon and rocket-fire to the discharge 
of muskets, from which it proceeded to the stage of combat with 
swords, daggers and knives. They grasped each other by neck; 
These dauntless bloodshedders (the Marathas.) did not fall short in 
fighting and doing glorious deeds. Suddenly the breeze of victory 
began to blow and as willed by the Divine Lord the wretched Dec- 
canis suffered utter defeat. .... Forty to fifty thousand troopers and* 
infantry men of the enemy became as grass before our pitiless swords. 

All the enemy’s artillery, elephants and property have been 
seized by my men”. 

The letter adds that both Vishwas Rao and Bhau were killed, 
and removes all doubts of the death of the latter. 54 


NOTES 

1. Selections from Peshwd Daftar, Vol. XV, pp. 97-98, hereafter referred to aa 
S.P.D.; Purandare Daftar, I, 149, Raj wade, VI, 151; also Sardesai, New History , 
II, pp. 202-3. 

2. Ibid, also Rajwade, II, 95; Malcolm, Memoir of Central India, I, 1880 edn., 
pp. 75-77. 

3 For ^Maratha conquests of Bengal, see S.P.D., XX, 24-28, 29, 48-49; Aitih&sik 
Patravywahar, 35-36; Rajwade, III, 184, 217, 535, VI, 169r71; Vad, PeshwA 

Diaries, Balaji Bdji Rdo, Vol. ii, pp. 242-43; Siyar-ul-Mutakherin (Eng. Trans¬ 
lation), II, p. 117-130 and Maharashtra Purana, ed. by Edward C. Dimock and 
P. C. Gupta (1961). 

4. Aitihasik Patravyawahar, 35-36. 

5- See note No. 3; also Sarkar, Jadunath, Fall of the Mughal Empire, I, p. 166. 

6- Sardesai, New History of the Marathas, Vol. II, p. 230; S.P.D. XXVII, 7; Bharat 

Varsha, I. 

7. Sardesai, op. cit., p. 232; Rajwade, VI, 166-67; S.P.D. XXI, 7. 

8- S P D. II, 9 and Sardesai, op. cit., pp. 237-40; Rajwade, VI, 190-1, 581. 

9 Aitihasik Patravyawahar (1933)) ,68. 

10. S.P.D. XXVII, 18, 19, 26. 

11. S.P.D. II, 11, XXVII, 18, 19, 26, 38. 

12. S.P D. XXVII, 30. 


199 


THE MABATHA SUPREMACY 


13. Raj wade, M.I.S. VI, 190-91, 581. 

14. S.P.D. H, 31. 

15- Marathd History Seminar (Kolhapur, 1971), Dr. Raghubir Sinh’s paper. 

16. S.P.D. II, 31 and XXVII, 64-65. 

17. Hingne Daftar, I, 20 and Brahmendra Swami Charitra, 20; also see Yusuf 
Husain, The First Nizam (1963), p. 208. 

18- Yusuf Husain, op. cit., pp. 212-14. 

19. S.P.D. XX, 21-22, Rajwade, M.I.S. VI, 149. Purandare Diary in Raj wade, 
M.I.S. VI gives details of this episode; Aitihasik Patravyawahar, 26. 

20. Yusuf Husain, op. cit. , 

21. S P.D. XXV, 10-72, XXVI, 13, 16, 20-29, XXVIII, 34-35, 52-53; KSPY., 45, 
48, 52-54. 

22 S.P.D. XXV, 29, 46-72, Purandare Daftar, I, 59, Aitihasik Patravyawahar, 73-78. 

23 Itihasa Sangraha , Peshwa Daftarantil Mahiti, pp. 321-51^ Grant Duff, op. cit.,-I, 
p. 448. 

24. Dhakta Ramaraja Charitra, p. 11; S.P.D. VI, 119, 124, 127, 139, 141, 147. 

25. Rajwade, M.I.S. VI, pp. 71-73, 110, 232, M I S. Ill, 390, 400, Purandare Daftar, 
I. 372. Itihasa Sangraha, Ait. Sankirna Sahitya, 145-53. 

26. S.P.D. XXV, 144-49, XXVI, 202, Rajwade, M.I.S. Ill, 415, K S P Y, 114. 

27. S.P.D. XXV, 179-84 and Rajwade, M.I.S. I, 73-119. 

28 S.P.D. I, and Rajwade, M.I.S. I, 166. 

29. \S.P.D. XXVIII, 140, 182-83, 185, Rajwade, M.I.S. Ill, 472-73, 479-81. 

30 Secret & Political Deptt. Diary, Vol. I, pp. 1-35. 

31. Ibid, p. 14. 

32. Ibid, Vol. II, pp. 34-36. 

33 Rajwade, M I S. I, No. 1. 

34. Bhau Sahebdnchi Bakhar (1959 ed.), pp. 2-8, K.S.P.Y. 122-31, S P D. II, 36, 
39, 42, XXI, 58, XXVII, 79-83. 

35- S.P.D. II, 9,'K-S.P.Y. 65, Jadunath Sarkar, Fall of the Mughal Empire , Vol. I, 
pp. 215-32. 

36 Rajwade, M I S. I, No. 1, VI, 82. 

37. S.P.D. XXI, 60, XXVn, 90. 

38- Nur-ud-dln 146; for emperor’s invitation to Abdali, see Francklin’s Shah Aulum, 
pp. 4-5. 

39- Ahmad Shah Abdali in Delhi, 1757: the most detailed and authentic sources are 
Delhi Chronicle, an anonymous Persian MS., described by Jadunath Sarkar in 
the Proceedings of the Ind. Hist. Records Commission, Vol. II (1921) and 
Tarikh-i-Alamgiri Sani in Elliot and Dowson’s History, Vol. VIII; also S.P.D . 
XXI, 95-111; Hingne Daftar, Vol. I, 193. 

40. S.P.D. XXI, 117. 

41. S.P.D. II, 84. 

42. S.P.D. XXVII, 218. 

43. Parasnis, Itihasa Sangraha, Aitihasik Sphuta Lekha, IV, 11. 

44. Rajwade, M.I.S. Vol. I, 138-46, Bhau Sahebdnchi Bakhar (1959 ed.), pp. 47-53. 

45. S.P.D. n, 114, Rajwade, M I S. I, 165. 

46. S.P.D. II, 121; XXI, 187-88. 

47. Rajwade, M.IJS. I, 168, 204, Shejwalkar, T. S. Panipat, p. 37. 

48 Rajwade, Ibid., 174, Purandare Daftar, I, 287. 

49. Rajwade, Ibid, 179-80, 226. 

50. S.P.D. II, 130-31. 

51. Sarkar, Fall of the Mughal Empire, Vol. II, 285-89; Rajwade, Vol. I, 168-69. 

* Editor’s addition. 

52. Kashiraj, Battle of Panipat (1926 ed.), pp. 40-45; A. Macdonald, Memoir of Nana 
Farnavis (1851), (1927 ed.), p. 17. Macdonald says, “...of the fighting men 
only one-fourth are supposed to have escaped, and of the followers about an 
equal proportion; so that nearly two hundred thousand Marathas perished in 
the campaign.” 

53- Shejwalkar, T. S., Panipat 1761, p. 123. 

54. Bhau’s death is corroborated by letters of Nana Phadnis, published in Sangli 
Publication (1965) Pdnipatcha Sangrdm in Nana’s words, pp. 1-10. 


200 


CHAPTER VII 


PESHWA MADHAV RAO I 

I. Raghunath Rao as Regent and Rebel: 

In the graphic words of Kashiraj Pandit, the third battle of 
Panipat ( January 14, 1761) was ‘verily Doomsday for the Maratha 
people’. The victims included the Peshwd’s eldest son, Vishwas Rao, 
his cousin, Sadashiv Rao Bhau, and leading generals like Jankoji 
Sindia, and TukojI Sindia. The field of battle as well as the ditch 
round the Maratha camp were full of dead bodies, and more than 
twenty thousand prisoners were captured by the Afghans. Peshwa 
Balaji Baji Rao received the news of this terrible disaster at Bhilsa 
on January 24. He retreated to Poona, where he died on June 23. 
‘It was a dismal sunset to the glorious noon of his father’s and his 
own reign.’ 1 

Raghunath RaO) the eldest surviving member of the Peshwa 
family and the leader of the great Punjab expedition of 1758, was 
the natural pilot of the Maratha State in this unprecedented crisis. 
Madhav Rao. the second son of Balaji BajI Rao, was placed on the 
Peshwa’s gadi in his seventeenth year; Raghunath became Regent 
and the de facto ruler of the State. 

The minor Peshwa and his vacillating but ambitious uncle had 
to deal, first of all, with the Nizam of Hyderabad. Anxious to re¬ 
verse the terms of the treaty imposed by the Marathas after the 
battle of Udgir, Salabat Jang (under the guidance of his brother 
and Diwan, Nizam ‘All) invaded Maratha territories soon after 
Balaji BajI Rao’s death. Skirmishes extending over several months 
were followed by a decisive battle in January, 1762, in which the 
Nizam’s army suffered a clear defeat. Although several Maratha 
chiefs (like Gopal Rao Patwardhan of Miraj and JandjI Bhosle of 
Berar) asked Raghunath to take this opportunity of crushing the 
power of the Nizam, the Regent, led by his crafty adviser, Sakharam 
Bapu, conciliated the defeated enemy by granting him very favour¬ 
able terms. 2 It is clear that Raghunath was already anticipating a 
struggle for power with the minor Peshwa —a struggle in which the 
goodwill of the Nizam was likely to be of great value. 

Towards the close of Balaji Baji Rao’s life the relations between 
Poona and Bombay were not at all cordial. Victories in the Kar* 


201 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


nafcak and in Bengal strengthened the position of the English, and 
they began to exploit the difficulties of the Marathas. When the 
Nizam’s invasion was imminent Raghunath concluded an agreement 
with the Bombay Government (September 14, 1761); the Marathas 
made substantial concessions, but received nothing in return. Soon 
afterwards the Marathas opened negotiations for military assistance, 
in return for which the Bombay Government demanded the ceding 
of Salsette and Bassein. Fortunately the Marathas were able to re¬ 
pulse the Nizam’s invasion without the assistance of English troops 
and guns. 3 

The conclusion of peace with the Nizam was followed by 
Madhav Rao’s first Karnatak expedition, which will be described 
below. Dissensions broke out between Raghunath and the Peshwa 
even before the Karnatak campaign was over. The Peshwa’s 
mother, Gopika Bai, wanted to secure for her son an increasing 
share of political power; moreover, her personal relations with 
Raghunath and his wife, Anandi Bai, were very unhappy. In the 
open contest which followed, the Peshwa was supported by power¬ 
ful chiefs like Gopal Rao Patwardhan and Malhar Rao Holkar, while 
Raghunath, guided by Sakharam Bapu, received active assistance 
from Nizam ‘All and JandjI Bhosle. In November, 1762, the 
Peshwd’s army was defeated in two battles. 4 A reconciliation be¬ 
tween the uncle and the nephew followed, and once more Raghu¬ 
nath became the de facto ruler of the Maratha. State. He surrender¬ 
ed to Nizam ‘All several districts including the forts of Daulatabad, 
Shivneri, Asirgarh and Ahmadnagar. His supporters, like Sakha¬ 
ram Bapu, were appointed to high offices, and some of the Peshwa’s 
prominent supporters, like Babu Rao Phadnis, were dismissed. Gopal 
Rao Patwardhan’s jagtr was seized. 5 

The victims of Raghunath’s wrath invoked the assistance of 
Nizam ‘All, who was also joined by Janoji Bhosle, lured by the 
prospect of being made Regent for the phantom King of Satara. In 
May, 1763, Nizam ‘All plundered Poona. The Peshwa had already 
decided to avoid open engagements to plunder the territories of the 
Nizam and Bhosle, and thus to compel them to turn back. Enter¬ 
ing Berar in February, 1763, the Peshwa plundered the suburbs of 
Hyderabad, burnt Bidar and ravaged several districts. The Mara¬ 
tha allies of Nizam ‘All, including Janoji Bhosle and Gopal Rao 
Patwardhan, were won over. On August 10, 1763, a portion of 
Nizam ‘All’s army under the command of Vithal Sundar was de¬ 
feated by the Peshwa in the battle of Rakshasbhuvan. Peace was 
concluded on September 25, 1763, Nizam ‘All agreeing to surrender 


202 


PESHWA MADHAV RAO I 


territories worth 82 lakhs. Janoji Bhosle was given territories 
worth 32 lakhs, and Miraj was restored to Gopal Rao Patwardhan. 
This treaty proclaimed the recovery of Maratha power after the dis¬ 
aster of Panipat. In domestic politics it marked the end of Raghu- 
nath’s regency. 6 

Two years later the Peshwd concluded an alliance with Nizam 
‘All, promising to restore to him the territories given to Janoji 
Bhosle after the battle of Rakshasbhuvan. The purpose of this 
alliance was to crush Jandji Bhosle who was then intriguing with 
Haidar ‘All and encouraging Raghunath’s ambitious project of cap¬ 
turing power. Threatened simultaneously by the Peshwd and the 
Nizam, Janoji Bhosle concluded peace and surrendered territories 
worth 24 lakhs, of which a portion worth 9 lakhs was taken by the 
Peshwd, and the remainder was to be given to the Nizam. In this 
expedition Raghunath co-operated with the Peshwd. 1 After the 
conclusion of peace he led an inconclusive campaign to Northern 
India, which will be described below. 

On his return from Northern India in 1767 Raghunath stationed 
himself at Anandavalli near Nasik and began to make preparations 
for an open contest with the Peshwd . In 1765 he had demanded the 
partition of the Maratha State betWeen himself and the Peshwd. He 
had instigated the Peshwa’s officers to defy his orders. Madhav Rao 
was anxious for conciliation. He met Raghunath in September, 
1767, and concluded an agreement; but as soon as he returned to 
Poona, Raghunath opened negotiations with Ni^am ‘All, Haidar ‘All, 
Janoji Bhosle and DamajI Gaikwar. Mostyn, who came to Poona 
in November, 1767, as the envoy of the Bombay Government to ask 
for the Peshwd’s assistance in the First Anglo-Mysore War, tried to 
secure Raghunath’s friendship. Raghunath himself expressed his 
desire ‘to engage the English bn his side and receive help from them 
v/hen he might take up arms’ against the Peshwd. Although the 
Company was not yet strong enough to interfere openly in the in¬ 
ternal affairs of the Maratha State, Raghunath’s impending re¬ 
bellion dislocated the Peshwa’s plan in all directions. He could not 
take advantage of the Anglo-Mysore War to increase his influence in 
the Karnatak. He had to cancel his programme of sending an ex¬ 
pedition to Northern India. He had to conciliate the Nizam. He 
had to give up his project of attacking the Sidis of Janjira. All his 
resources had to be mobilised for civil war. 

As Raghunath counted upon the support of Janoji Bhosle he 
marched to Dhodap, a fort in the Chandore range. There a decisive 


203 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

battle was fought and won by the Peshwd on June 10, 1768. The 
fort was captured. Raghunath was taken to Poona and confined in 
the Shaniwar Wada. 8 

After punishing Raghunatji’s accomplices, Gangadhar Yashwant 
Chandrachud (the former Diwdn of the Holkar State) and Govlnd 
Rao Gaikwar (the eldest son of DamajI Gaikwar), the Peshwd 
marched against JanojI. Bhosle. Once again Nizam ‘All co-opera¬ 
ted with the Peshwd against his northern neighbour. Unable to 
face the combined armies of the Peshwd and the Nizam, JanojI 
Bhosle embarrassed them by adopting the old Maratha system oi 

a 

guerilla war. The Peshwd plundered Nagpur, captured several 
forts and ravaged Berar. Peace was ^concluded at Kanakapur (at 
the confluence of the Manjra and the Godavari) on 23 March, 
1769. JanojI Bhosle surrendered territories worth 8 lakhs and 
agreed to perform the duties of a loyal vassal. 9 He faithfully ob¬ 
served the terms of this agreement till his death (May, 1772). 

Raghunath could not reconcile himself to his lot even after the 
final submission of all his supporters. He carried on secret negotia¬ 
tions with the Nizam and Haidar ‘All. He was released from con¬ 
finement in March, 1772. 

II. The Karnatak Expeditions: 

In 1759 the Marathas got an excellent opportunity for the con¬ 
quest of Mysore; that opportunity was, however, neglected because 
troops were badly needed for the grand Northern expedition and 
the campaign against the Nizam. Haidar ‘All got rid of the Mara¬ 
tha army assisting Mysore Diwd/n Khande Rao by promising to sur¬ 
render Baramahal to the Peshwa; but this inconvenient promise was 
forgotten aS soon as the news of the disaster of Panipat reached 
Mysore. Emboldened by the temporary eclipse of the Marathas, 
Haidar ‘All openly adopted an aggressive policy and began to push 
hik frontier towards the Krishna. He found an ally in Basalat Jang, 
Nizam ‘All’s disappointed brother, whose ambition was to establish 
an independent principality in the Karnatak. In 1761 Haidar and 
Basalat captured Hoskote, Dod Ballapur, and Sira. Haidar gave no¬ 
thing to his foolish ally. Early in 1762 he occupied Chik Ballapur, 
Kodikonda, Penukonda, Madakasira, Raidurg, Harpanahalli, and Chi- 
taldurg. His aggressions in the Karnatak deprived Poona of tribute 
amounting to about 50 lakhs of rupees. 10 

After the conclusion of peace with Nizam ‘All in January, 1762, 
the Peshwd led an expedition to the Karnatak. He was accompanied 
by his uncle Raghunath and Trimbak Rao Pethe. Tribute was rea- 


204 


PESHWA MADHAV RAO I 


lised from several districts, including Kittur and Bidnur. .Instead 
of confronting the Marathas Haidar retreated to a forest. Scarcity 
of provisions, want of money and dissensions at home forced the 
Peshwa to return to Poona without achieving any definite result. 11 

While the Mariathas were paralysed by internal strife and 
Nizam ‘All’s second invasion, Haidar ‘All occupied Bidnur, Sonda, 
Ratehalli, Bankapur, Shirhati, and Dharwar in 1763. The Nawab 
of Savanur, whose territory lay between the rivers Tungabhadra and 
Malaprabha in the direct line of all Maratha armies proceeding to 
Mysore, was defeated and compelled to recognise Haidar’s suze¬ 
rainty. The frontier of Mysore was pushed nearly to the banks of 
the Krishna. 

After the battle of Rakshasbhuvan, Madhav Rao found himself 
free to attend to the affairs of the Karnatak. Instead of returning 
to Poona after the conclusion of the hostilities against Nizam ‘All, 
this energetic young Peshwa at once proceeded towards the Tunga¬ 
bhadra. He crossed the Krishna in February, 1764. Haidar tried 
to form an alliance with Nizam ‘All, who promised help but did no¬ 
thing. The Peshwa occupied Manoli and Hubli, secured the allegi¬ 
ance of the Nawab of Savanur, who was glad to escape from Haidar’s 
yoke, and crossed the Tungabhadra. Haidar took shelter in the 
forests near Ratehalli, but in May, 1764, he was drawn out. of his 
retreat and defeated by the Marathas. This defeat cost him more 
than 1,000 dead and about the same number wounded (very few of 
whom survived). On the Maratha side not more than 50 soldiers 
and 100 horses were killed and 200 soldiers wounded. The Peshwa 
wrote in exultation to his mother that from that battle Haidar took; 
a terror of the Maratha name. 12 

Haidar could not forget the lesson of this battle. He decided to 
avoid another open contest with the Marathas. So he marched with 
his army to the entrenched fort at Anavati. The Marathas could 
not dislodge him from this position, for the road was bad and the* 
rainy season was near. Unwilling to return to Poona after so in¬ 
conclusive a campaign, the Peshwa cantoned his troops near Dhar¬ 
war. In June, 1764, Haidar sent a detachment to ravage the Savanur 
territory, but the Peshwa’s timely arrival saved it. Gopal Rao Pat- 

wardhan was entrusted with the difficult task of defending Savanur. 

# 

Haidar tried to draw his isolated force to a pitched battle, but he 
skilfully avoided the trap. The Marathas occupied Haveri in Sep¬ 
tember, 1764, and began the siege of Dharwar, which capitulated 
early in November. Twice Haidar made overtures for peace, but 


205 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

nothing came out of them. He opened negotiations with Nizam ‘All 
and JanojI Bhosle. The Government of Bombay sent him some 
cannon, gun powder and fire-arms. Wilks is, therefore, hardly cor¬ 
rect in saying that during the rains Haidar’s army “wretched* spirit¬ 
less, and sickly.. .looked with apathy or aversion to the renewal of 
active operations”. 13 

In November, 1764, the Peshwa encamped near Anavati, and on 
December 1, took place the decisive battle of Jadi Anavati, in which 
the Peshwa personally took the leading part. Haidar lost about 
2,000 men and was himself wounded. 14 

Meanwhile the Peshwa had asked his uncle Raghunath Rao to 
come to the Kamatak and to assume the command of the expedition. 
Probably the Peshwd’s motive was to keep his unsteady uncle under 
observation, so that he might create no trouble during his absence 
from Poona. Anyhow, Raghunath Rao came to the Kamatak with 
a fresh army. 

In February, 1765, the Peshwa marched towards Bidnur, where 
Haidar had in the meanwhile shut himself up. Honnali, Kumsi, 
Anantapur, and Chitaldurg were occupied by the Marathas. Haidar 
was certainly in a desperate position, but the Peshwa also had his 
difficulties. The road to Bidnur ‘led through woods difficult for 
cavalry’. Nizam ‘All was plundering Maratha territory, and the 
English merchants of Bombay were creating troubles on the Kon- 
kan coast. Both sides were, therefore, ready for peace, and an 
agreement was concluded in March, 1765. Haidar surrendered 
several Maratha districts, including Bankapur, gave up all claims on 
the Nawab of Savanur, and agreed to pay 30 lakhs of rupees tri¬ 
bute. 15 Wilks rightly says that tlp$|was “an adjustment of extreme 
moderation, considering the desperate circumstances in. which Hyder 
was placed”. 16 The responsibility foreshowing so much leniency to 
so powerful and determined an enemy lies wholly on Raghunath. 
Wilks also says that among the terms “were without question some 
secret articles which were the foundation of that good understand¬ 
ing which ever afterwards subsisted” between Haidar and Raghu¬ 
nath. 17 Whether the Peshwa was aware of these ‘secret articles’, 
we do not know; but he was not in a position to protest against the 
selfish policy of his uncle, who could obtain the aid either of Nizam 
‘Ala or of Janoji Bhosle, and perhaps of both. So the Peshwa re¬ 
turned to Poona, leaving Gopal Rao Patwardhan and Murar Rao (of 
Gooty) to protect Maratha territories in the Karnatak against Haidar 
‘All’s encroachments. 


206 


PESHWA MADHAV RAO 1 


Madhav Rao was anxious to resume his unfinished operations 
against Haidar ‘AIL In order to secure the safety of his rear he con¬ 
ciliated Nizam ‘All and gave him territories worth 15 lakhs. The re¬ 
sult was a general understanding about co-operation against Haidar 
‘AIL 18 

Anticipating a renewal of struggle with the Marat has, Haidar 
‘All tried to secure the active alliance of the English. In July, 1766, 
the Bombay Government proposed a treaty of peace and friendship. 
But the Court of Directors were then unwilling to become ‘involved 
in hostilities, especially as principals, in any case short of absolute 
defence/ Moreover, the Company was very anxious to secure con¬ 
trol over the Northern Sarkars, and for this purpose an alliance with 
the Nizam was necessary. On 12 November, 1766, General Caillaud 
concluded a treaty with the Nizam, which indirectly provided for the 
employment of English auxiliary troops in the Nizam’s impending war 
against Haidar ‘All. 19 

Meanwhile Haidar’s troops were ravaging Maratha territory in 
the Karnatak and demanding tribute from important posts like Rai- 
durg, Bellary, Harpanahalli and Chitaldurg. The Peshwd completed 
his preparations and crossed the Krishna in January, 1767. Jetgi, 
Kittoor, Kenchangudd, Gadwal, Bellary, Shidnoor, Adoni and Dev- 
durg were occupied. 20 Haidar fortified Bangalore, Sira and Bidnur, 
and shut himself up with his army at Seringapatam. Unwilling 
to engage in pitched battles, he devastated his own territory, so that 
the Marathas suffered from the scarcity of food and water. “Such a 
plan”, says Wilks, “may distress but cannot stop such an army.” 21 

In February, 1767, the Peshwd went to Sira, which was defend¬ 
ed by Haidar’s General, Mir Reza. After some resistance Mir Reza 
surrendered the fort and accepted service under the PeshwdP 2 The 
capture of Sira was a great political and personal triumph for 
Madhav Rao. In March he captured the fort of Madgiri, where he 
found the former Raja and Queen-Mother of Bidnur, imprisoned by 
Haidar in 1763. He took them under his protection. Several im¬ 
portant posts—Chennarayadurg, Dod Ballapur, Chik Ballapur, 
Devanhalli, Hoskote, Nandigarh, Kolar—fell to the Marathas. The 
Nizam began to advance to join the Peshwd. Haidar was thoroughly 
alarmed, and pressed for peace. The Peshwd also found it difficult 
to advance further, for he had no money to meet the expenses of the 
camp, and no boats to cross the river in the impending rainy season. 
Moreover, he did not like to give the Nizam a share of victories to 
which he had contributed nothing. 23 


207 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Peace was concluded at the beginning of May, 1767. The 
Peshvcd retained Chennarayadurg, Madgiri, Dod Ballapur, Hoskote 
and Sira. Kolar, Chik Ballapur and Nandigarh were to be returned 
to Haidar. Kadappa and Gurrumkonda were to be left to Mir Reza. 
Haidar agreed to pay 31 lakhs to the Peshwd and 18 lakhs to the 
Nizam. 24 The Peshwd started for Poona in May, 1767, leaving 
Murar Rao to protect the newly annexed districts. The Nizam was 
not satisfied with the terms offered to him,, and it seems that the 
money promised by Haidar was never paid. 

The outbreak of the First Anglo-Mysore War soon afterwards 
(August, 1767) made the Marathas the decisive factor in South 
Indian politics. The Peshwd was courted by the English and 
Muhammad ‘All (Nawab of the Karnatak) on the one side and by 
Nizam ‘All and Haidar on the other. 25 The Madras Government was 
anxious to purchase the Peshu)d 9 s support by allowing him to annex 
Bidnur; Mysore was to be restored to the Hindu Raja under the 
British protection and subject to the payment of chauth to the Mara¬ 
thas. 26 But the Peshwd demanded ‘the entire extirpation of Nizam 
‘All and the whole family of Nizam-ul-Mulk from the subdhship of 
the Deccan’ and the establishment of one of Shah ‘Alam’s sons at 
Hyderabad. The Madras Government considered that such a step 
would increase the power of the Marathas and ‘make them dange¬ 
rous neighbours to the Company’s possessions both in Bengal and on 
this coast’. The Bengal Government discouraged the proposal foi 
Maratha alliance. 27 

In November, 1767, the Bombay Government sent to, Poona an 
envoy named Thomas Mostyn for the purpose of preventing the 
Peshwd from joining Haidar and Nizam ‘All. The English required 
the military assistance of the Marathas when they would attack 
Haidar ‘All’s possessions on the western coast. In return for such 
assistance Mostyn was instructed to offer Bidnur and Sonda, provid¬ 
ed the Peshwd agreed , to assign to the Company Bassein and Sal- 
sette, as well as the Maratha 'share of the revenues of Surat 28 in addi¬ 
tion to some commercial privileges. The envoy was also advised to 
take full advantage of the quarrel between the Peshw\d and his uncle, 
and to ‘encourage any advances’ which might be made by the latter. 23 

Mostyn remained at Poona for about three months (November 
29, 1767 to February 27, 1768). He had several interviews with the 
Peshwd. Early in December the Peshwd received an agent Nagoji 
Rao from the Nawab of Arcot. NagojI Rao was instructed by the 
Madras Government to secure the Peshwd’s military assistance, or 


208 


PESHWA MADHAV RAO I 


if that was not possible, at least his neutrality. If the Maratha court 
appeared hostile, it was to be informed that Jandji Bhosle was soli¬ 
citing the friendship of the English in Bengal. 

In his negotiations with the Peshw\a Mostyn did not clearly 
show his cards, for he felt that there was ‘no appearance at present’ 
of the Peshwa’s taking part with the Nizam and Haidar ‘All. As 
Haidar ‘All was the declared enemy of the Marathas, it would not 
be wise for them to contribute to his safety or prosperity. More¬ 
over, the Peshwa’s hands were not free. The Jats and the Rajputs 
were creating troubles in Northern India, and, nearer home, Raghu- 
nath was preparing for civil war. The state of the Peshwa’s finances 
was also very unsatisfactory. Under these circumstances Mostyn 
shrewdly suspected that the Peshwa had no other course open to 
him except neutrality. He sent Brome to negotiate with Raghu- 
nath, who demanded British assistance against his nephew. 

On 17 January, 1768, Mostyn heard that the Nizam had con¬ 
cluded peace with the Nawab of Arcot. Haidar ‘All was now left 
alone; therefore, said Mostyn, “the forming a junction with the Mara¬ 
thas appeared the less necessary, more especially as the jealousies 
and disputes between Madhav Rao and his uncle Raghoba would... . 
prevent their joining Hyder ‘All or giving us any material assist¬ 
ance. .. ” 30 

In February, 1768, the Bombay Government sent an expedition 
against Haidar ‘All’s fleet and possessions on the western coast. 
Mostyn was instructed to secure the Peshwa’s neutrality. Madhav 
Rao “had no objections to... .punishing Hyder ‘All, but he claimed 
Bidnur and Sonda, and wanted the English to surrender any part of 
them which they might take. The former Raja of Bidnur was then 
at Poona under the Peshwa’s protection. He wanted to recover his 
territory with the assistance of the Company, but Mostyn refused 
to entertain his proposal because it was not acceptable to the Peshwa. 
After Mostyn’s departure from Poona, a Maratha agent went to Bom¬ 
bay and demanded Mysore, Bidnur, and Sonda. This demand was 
peremptorily refused.” 31 

Some months later it was reported that the Nizam was repentant 
for making a hasty peace, and the despatches of Brome, the envoy 
of the Bombay Government at Poona, gave enough cause to appre¬ 
hend that the Peshwa was ready to join Haidar ‘All. The latter’s 
vakil promised payment of arrears of tribute in return for military 
assistance. An agreement was concluded between the Peshwa and 
the Nizam. A joint expedition was to be sent against the Nawab of 

209 

M.S.— 14 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Arcot; of the territories taken from him, one-fourth would be retain¬ 
ed by the Peshwa, and the rest would go to the Nizam. 

Early in 1769 the position of the Madras Government was so des¬ 
perate that it was anxious for peace ‘on almost any terms’. A des¬ 
patch to the Government of Bengal, dated January 28, 1769, contains 
the following statement: “there being no room to doubt of Madhav 
Rao’s intentions of hostilities, and considering the state of our trea¬ 
sury and resources, it appears evident almost to demonstration that in 
a x very little time, far from being able to maintain an army in the 
field, we should not even have the means of paying our forces in 
garrison’. The old theory of utilising Haidar ‘All as a ‘barrier’ 
against Maratha expansion was revived: “Haidar is the best bar¬ 
rier to the Carnatic against the Marathas with whom he ever has 
been and ever must be at variance and probably never will pay the 
chauth but when they can demand it at the head of a superior 
force.” 32 

All speculations came to an end when Haidar ‘All dictated the 
terms of peace (April 2, 1769). The second article of the treaty 
laid down “that in case either of the contracting parties shall be 
attacked, they shall from their respective countries mutually assist 
each other to drive the enemy out.” Haidar wanted to be sure of 
British assistance against the Marathas; so he was anxious that the 
alliance should be defensive as well as offensive. But the Madras 
Government refused to make an offensive alliance. 33 

It is quite clear that Madhav Rao failed to exploit the First 
Anglo-Mysore War for his own advantage. He could neither get 
money from Haidar ‘All by helping him, nor acquire territory by 
joining his enemies. The responsibility for this failure to utilise an 
advantageous situation lies not on the Peshwa but on Raghunath 
Rao and Janoji Bhosle, whose unpatriotic ambitions crippled the 
Maratha State. 

On the conclusion of peace with Janoji Bhosle in 1769 Madhav 
Rao decided to lead another expedition against Haidar ‘All, who, in¬ 
stead of paying the arrears of tribute, levied contributions upon 
some of the Poligars tributary to the Peshwa. Mir Reza, who had 
entered the Peshwa 9 s service in 1767, rejoined Haidar and occupied 
Bagepalli and Talpula. Murar Rao of Gooty had to purchase peace 
by promising to pay tribute to Haidar ‘All. Tribute was realised 
from Chitaldurg, Harpanahalli, and some other places, and even the 
Nawab of Savanur placated Haidar by secretly paying him a large 
sum of money. Although Haidar was thus encroaching upon the 


210 


PESHWA MADHAV RAO I 


Maratha sphere on all sides, he tried at the same time to prevent by 
negotiations another Maratha expedition to the Karnatak. He also 
tried to create troubles for the Peshwa by instigating Raghunath and 
JanojI Bhosle to revolt against him. 

Madhav Rao was determined to take strong measures for the 
complete subjugation of the Karnatak. Gopal Rao Patwardhan and 
Anand Rao Raste were sent to watch Haidar’s movements. In 
October, 1769, the Peshwa left Poona and marched directly towards 
Seringapatam. The Maratha army proceeding to the Karnatak con¬ 
sisted of about 75,000 troops and had 50 guns. 34 The Peshwa, says 
Wilks, “seemed to abandon the ordinary routine of Maratha plunder, 
and to point to the fixed conquest of the whole country. Among 
other arrangements he was accompanied by garrisons regularly 
organised and independent of his field force, for the occupation of 
the principal posts.’ ,35 The English authorities wrote on March 10, 
1771: “From the present conduct of the Marathas both in the North 
and the South, and from the genius, spirit, and ambition of Madhav 
Rao, we are inclined to suspect that their designs are not confined 
to the mere collection of chauth but to extend to the subjection of 
the whole peninsula.’’ 36 

Within two months (January and February, 1770) the Peshwa 
occupied several important posts—Budihal, Kandikere, Handikere, 
Chiknayakanhalli, Bhairavdurg, Nagamangala* Balapur, Nandigarh, 
and others. Even after the loss of so many posts Haidar remained 
apparently undisturbed. Wilks observes that he ‘did homage’ to the 
‘military talents’ of Madhav Rao by refusing to confront him in the 
open field. Haidar deliberately followed his old plan of devastating 
his own territory. He took shelter in the forest of Udagani. His 
son Tipu was sent to Seringapatam “to collect all the straw and wood 
that was possible and to burn all that could not be removed, to fill 
up the wells and ponds and to give notice to the people to retire from 
the villages into the larger towns.” 37 

In January, 1770, Haidar left Udagani, went to Turuvekere, and 
then marched towards Seringapatam under Cover of darkness. His 
real intention was to deliver a night attack on the Marathas. An 
engagement took place between Haidar and a Maratha detachment 
led by Gopal Rao, Murar Rao, and Anand Rao Raste. Haidar’s artil¬ 
lery proved too strong for the Marathas. They were compelled to 
retreat, and their camp was plundered. But the victor hurriedly 
marched to Seringapatam; he was not prepared to be caught in be¬ 
tween the two Maratha armies, led by the Peshwa and Gopal Rao 


211 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

respectively. He was joined by Mir Reza and Tipu, who had been 
creating diversions for the Marathas. 38 

At Seringapatam Haidar collected all his treasures from other 
forts. His Portuguese officer Peixoto says: “No other fort in Haidar’s 
dominions has a neighbourhood so fit as this for the encampment 
of a powerful army that requires many necessities for its subsist¬ 
ence, particularly the three essential ones—provisions, water, forage. 
Provisions for 12 years are laid up here. There is no lack of 
water, for the Kaveri runs close by the walls, and the fort is in an 
island!” 

In April, 1770, the Peshwa captured the strong forts of Devaraya- 
durg and Nijgal. 39 Then he started for Poona, for his health was 
gradually giving way. Trimbak Rao was left in charge of the ope¬ 
rations in the Karnatak. The Peshwa might have concluded the 
campaign by taking tribute from Haidar, but he was determined to 
crush his enemy. Trimbak Rao was left at the head of a large army, 
and he had an able lieutenant in Gopal Rao. 

Peixoto gives us a good idea about the relative positions of the 
two powers in 1770: “The Marathas have not only the greatest force 
on their side, but the prayers of all the people, who everywhere 
without exception are robbed and harassed (by Haidar) and under 
a weight of contribution that it is not possible for them to bear. 
The Nabob (i.e., Haidar) has a large force but not to be compared 
with that of the Marathas.... In artillery the Nabob has not, as 
yet, the advantage, for the Marathas have much more. The Nabob’s 
advantage is that all his troops are better disciplined. But if he re¬ 
solves to give battle in the plains or to retire into any stronghold, he 
is ruined.” 40 

For two years Trimbak Rao, ably assisted by Gopal Rao till his 
death, carried on operations against Haidar ‘All with conspicuous 
bravery and success. After the departure of the Peshwa the Mara¬ 
thas captured Chik Ballapur, Gurrumkonda and some important 
places in the Kolar district. Towards the close of the year 1770 the 
Peshwa again proceeded to the Karnatak but ill health compelled 
him to return to Poona, where he reached on January 20, 1771. 
Haidar was still at Seringapatam, surrounded by the Marathas on 
two sides. He desperately sued for peace, but his terms were re¬ 
jected by the Marathas. His position was somewhat improved by 
the death of Gopal Rao on January 17, 1771. Murar Rao was ill, 
and Trimbak Rao became very unpopular owing to his irritable 
temper. 


212 


PESHWA MADHAV RAO I 


Towards the close of February or early in March Trimbak Rao 
appeared near Seringapatam. Haidar now left the protection of the 
fort, probably in order to prevent the Maratha invasion of Bidnur, 
and met the Maratha army at Moti Talav, about 10 miles north-west 
of Seringapatam city, on March 7, 1771. The Mar&thas secured a 
decisive victory. Trimbak Rao claimed that 75 guns, about 8,000 
horses, 20 or 25 elephants, treasure and jewellery were captured. 
Some of Haidar’s principal officers were captured and he himself 
fled to his capital in the guise of a monk or beggar. 41 But the Mara¬ 
thas failed to gain any permanent advantage from this victory. They 
foolishly allowed the remnant of Haidar’s army to reach Seringa¬ 
patam and gave Haidar the long interval of ten days to complete 
his arrangements for the defence of the capital. When Haidar had 
partly recovered from the shock and losses of the defeat, Trimbak 
Rao came to Seringapatam and tried in vain to capture the fort by 
a half-hearted siege. Weakened by the scarcity of provisions he 
gave up the siege towards the close of April and sent some detach¬ 
ments to occupy other forts and ravage Haidar’s territory. These 
indecisive operations and fruitless negotiations for peace occupied 
the rainy season, at the end of which Trimbak Rao advanced towards 
Tanj ore in response to an appeal for help against the Nawab of 
Arcot from the Maratha ruler of that principality. This expedition 
(September, 1771-February, 1772) yielded some money, but Haidar 
got the breathing time which he so badly required. 

The Peshwa had urged Trimbak Rao to proceed against Bidnur 
instead of wasting time at Seringapatam. On his return from the 
east he made preparations for invading Bidnur, but it was already 
too late. The Peshwa s illness had become serious, and the Poona 
treasury was exhausted. In April 1772, the Peshwa asked Trimbak 
Rao to conclude peace by whatever means possible. Haidar shrewd¬ 
ly exploited the weakness of the Marathas. He paid 31 lakhs in 
cash and jewellery and promised io pay 19 lakhs more in three years. 
The Marathas retained Sira, Madgiri, Gurrumkonda, Dod Ballapur, 
Kolar and Hoskote with their dependencies; but important posts like 
Nandigarh, Chick Ballapur and Devarayadurg had to be surrendered 
to Haidar. The Maratha army began its march to Poona in June 
1772. Althqugh this expedition cannot be described as wholly suc¬ 
cessful, yet Haidar’s northern boundary was reduced within narrower 
limits than those which had been possessed by the Hindu ruler of 
Mysore at the beginning of the eighteenth century. Still, greater 
success could have been won if Trimbak Rao had not failed to ex¬ 
ploit the situation arising out of the battle of Moti Talav. The 


213 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Peshwa’s fatal illness and the chronic financial difficulties of the 
Maratha State furthered Haidar’s cause no less than his ingenuity 
and his disciplined troops. 42 

The East India Company played an indecisive part in this war. 
At the beginning of the hostilities both parties appealed for assistance 
to the Madras Government. Haidar naturally cited the second arti¬ 
cle of the treaty of 1769. But the Madras authorities decided to re¬ 
main neutral, for they were anxious to maintain the balance of power 
in the Karnatak. It was thought best to follow the policy of ‘keep¬ 
ing alive the hopes and fears of both parties by not determining in 
favour of either and without assuring assistance to the one or the 
other’. But it was difficult to explain away the treaty of 1769. Haidar 
was told that he was the aggressor; it was also argued that the treaty 
was ‘an act of necessity’. Neutrality might have some pretence of 
justification, but the Madras authorities were aware that they could 
not help the Marathas ‘without a certain manifest violation of the 
treaty’. The cause of the Marathas was, however, strongly urged 
by the Nawab of Arcot, who had a strong personal antipathy to 
Haidar ‘Ali. When Haidar’s position became critical, the Madras 
Government drifted to the conclusion that he should be assisted, but 
nothing could be done ‘without the revenues and resources of the 
Carnatic’, which the Nawab plainly refused to employ in the service 
of his rival. Towards the close of 1771 it was suspected that the 
Marathas would invade the east coast, and precautionary measures 
v/ere taken by the Madras Government; but the Marathas were wise 
enough not to throw the English in the arms of Haidar ‘All. The 
shifting diplomacy of the Madras Government in 1769-1772 alienated 
Haidar without conciliating the Marathas. 43 

III. Revival of Maratha Power in Northern India: 

The destruction of the Maratha army at Panipat was naturally 
followed by a revolt against Maratha domination everywhere in Hin¬ 
dustan—in the Gangetic Doab, Bundelkhand, Rajputana, and Malwa. 
Although Madhav Rao was fully busy with the consolidation and 
expansion of his power in the South, he was not at all indifferent to 
Maratha interests in the North. For some years after Panipat the 
Marathas found it impossible to resume seriously their activities in 
Hindustan. The premature death of BalajI Baji Rao, the invasions 
of Ni?am ‘All, the question of succession to JankojI Sindia, the intri¬ 
gues and rebellions of Raghunath Rao, the revolts of JanojI Bhosle, 
and the long struggle with Haidar ‘Ali naturally kept them away 
from the stormy North. It was only towards the close of his brief 


214 


PESHWA MADHAV RAO I 


but glorious administration that Madhav Rao found it possible to 
make a serious and successful attempt to recover Maratha authority 
in Hindustan. 

The task of restoring Maratha authority in Rajputana and Malwa 
immediately after Panipat, fell upon Malhar Rao Holkar. After the 
capture of Rampura and Gagroni in May-June, 1761, he turned his 
attention to Madho Singh of Jaipur, who had been trying to set up 
an anti-Maratha coalition consisting of Najib Khan, Yaqub ‘All 
(Ahmad Shah Abdall's agent in Delhi) and the exiled emperor Shah 
‘Alam II. He was also joined, or was likely to be joined, by some 
petty Rajput chiefs of Malwa and Rajputana. Unable to deal with 
this menace during the rainy season of 1761, Malhar returned to 
Indore. He resumed the operations after the rains and defeated the 
Jaipur army in the battle of Mangrol on 29 November, 1761. 44 This 
decisive victory destroyed Madho Singh’s fond hope of uprooting 
Maratha power from the North and restored Maratha prestige 
throughout Hindustan. Holkar advanced as far as Manoharpur (40 
miles north of Jaipur); but Jaipur was saved from invasion as 
Holkar’s attention was diverted due to the invasion of Bundelkhand 
by Shah ‘Alam II and Shuja-ud-daulah. 

Shah ‘Alam was at this time living as a protege of Shuja-ud- 
daulah, who had undertaken to escort him to Delhi. After the rainy 
season of 1761, they started for the expulsion of the Marathas from 
Bundelkhand. The general weakness of the Marathas, the disobe¬ 
dience of the local chiefs and the treason of Maratha officers like 
Ganesh Sambhaji (who joined the imperial army) made it easy for 
Shah ‘Alam and Shuja to establish their authority over a portion of 
Bundelkhand. Crossing the Jamuna at Kalpi in January, 1762, 
Shuja captured Kalpi, Mot (Jhansi district) and Jhansi and realised 
tribute from the chiefs of Orchha and Datia. After an unsuccessful 
attempt to subjugate the ruler of Mahoba he re-crossed the Jamuna 
and returned to his own dominions. 45 

From Rajputana Holkar had to go to Indore, for he was tem¬ 
porarily incapacitated by a serious wound which he had received 
at Mangrol. This left the enemies of the Marathas free to work out 
their plans in Malwa, Rajputana and Bundelkhand. Some energetic 
officers, however, tried to consolidate Maratha authority in Gohad 
and Ahirwada. Even after his recovery Holkar could not venture 
into the scene of his former triumphs; he was gradually sinking due 
to old age and ill health. Mahadji Sindia was busy with the question 
of succession, and the Poona Government as yet showed no desire 


215 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


to profit by his abilities. During the years 1762-64 the Marathas did 
not pursue a vigorous policy in Northern India, and no systematic 
attempt was made to recover the lost ground. 

But the triumph of the Marathas in the South was not without 
its influence on their position in the North. In 1764 Ahmad Shah 
Abdali ratified a formal peace with them. This was a much-needed 
relief, and at the same time an indirect recognition of their still sur¬ 
viving power. In 1765 the East India Company considered it neces¬ 
sary to support Shuja-ud-daulah’s restoration, for his removal ‘would 
have destroyed the strongest barrier against the Marathas’. If a 
strong barrier against the Marathas was a necessity to the Company 
even after the battle of Buxar, the Peshwas prospects in Hindustan 
could not have been very unfavourable. 

In October 1764, Malhar Holkar came to Jobner (13 miles east 
of Sambhar) in order to compel Madho Singh of Jaipur to clear his 
dues. Then he proceeded, in response to advice from Poona, to assist 
the Jat Raja, Jawahir Singh, against Najib Khan. 46 But Malhar had 
no intention of seriously weakening his ‘foster son’, and his luke¬ 
warmness compelled the Jat Raja to make peace with Najib in Feb¬ 
ruary, 1765. Malhar’s next adventure was directed against the East 
India Company. He met the English at Kora on 3 May, 1765, but he 
was defeated by Sir Robert Fletcher. Then he recovered Jhansi 
(December, 1765), resumed his operations against the Rana of Gohad 
and hastened a rupture with Jawahir Singh. Before bringing these 
operations to a satisfactory conclusion he died on 20 May, 1766. His 
alliance with the Jat Raja had one good effect for the Marathas, for 
it intimidated Madho Singh, who agreed to make a satisfactory 
arrangement for the payment of His tribute. Mahadji Sindia, who 
had in the meanwhile come to Northern India, adopted a less conci¬ 
liatory policy than Holkar and pressed Madho Singh for arrears. 47 

The annual subsidy promised by the Rana of Udaipur to Peshwd 
Baji Rao in 1736 was never regularly paid. During the years 1761- 
1764 complications in the Deccan, Malwa and Jaipur prevented the 
Marathas from making any attempt to put pressure on that prince. 
In July 1765, Mahadji Sindia settled the tribute of Kota at 15 lakhs, 
and left his Diwan Achyut Rao to collect tribute from Udaipur, Shah- 
pura and Rupnagar. Rana Ari Singh II of Udaipur agreed in 1766 
to pay a total sum of Rs. 26,30,221 in four years. 45 

We have already referred to Malhar Holkar’s rupture with 
Jawahir Singh. The Jat Raja had become so angry at Malhar’s col¬ 
lusion with Najib Khan that on the conclusion of peace he refused 


216 


PESHWA MADHAV RAO I 

to pay the balance of 12 lakhs still due out of the promised 22 lakhs. 49 
The outbreak of a civil war in the Jat State provided a welcome op¬ 
portunity to the Marathas. Nahar Singh, Suraj Mai’s beloved son 
and Jawahir’s disappointed rival for the throne, renewed his claim 
to succession under Malhar’s protection. The Marathas knew that 
there was in India no other place for money like Bharatpur, 50 and 
they gladly prepared themselves to play the same mercenary part 
in this fratricidal struggle as they had previously played in the case 
of Jaipur. A detachment of 15,000 horse was sent by Malhar (who 
was then fighting against the Jat Rana of Gohad) to plunder Jat 
villages on the other side of the Chambal. Jawahir came to an un¬ 
derstanding with the Sikhs. He paid them seven lakhs in cash in 
order to bring their plundering activities to an end, and hired 25,000 
Sikh horsemen to fight against the Marathas. 51 

Jawahir Singh at first tried to divert the attention of the Mara¬ 
thas by plundering the territory of their vassal Madhd Singh of 
Jaipur. Madh5 Singh appealed to the Marathas for immediate re¬ 
lief, promising to pay them a daily allowance of Rs. 5,000 by way 
of expenses. Mahadji Sindia’s troops were at once sent against the 
Jats, while the Sikhs were bought off by Madhd Singh. Jawahir was 
thus compelled to conclude a hasty peace with Jaipur. 52 

In the meanwhile Malhar Rao had established his camp at Dhol- 
pur, the appanage of Nahar Singh. His troops frequently ravaged 
Jawahir’s territory. The Sikhs also grew restless at the irregularity 
of payment, and sometimes plundered the districts of their ally. 
Jawahir decided to put an end to his trouble with a bold step. He 
conciliated the Sikhs, left his camp at Shahgarh, and attacked the 
Marathas near Dholpur (13-14 March, 1766). The combined Jat- 
Sikh army defeated the Marathas, captured some Maratha generals 
and occupied Dholpur. 53 The captured Maratha generals were re¬ 
leased in December next in accordance with a treaty concluded by 
Naro Shankar. Jawahir Singh could have crossed the Chambal and 
defeated Malhar Rao himself—then a dying man—but for the re¬ 
fusal of his Sikh horsemen to follow him in the terrible summer heat 
through a grassless and waterless tract. The Sikhs returned to the 
Punjab. Nahar Singh was abandoned by the Marathas and commit¬ 
ted suicide (December, 1766). 

Towards the close of 1765 Raghunath Rao made preparations 
for leading an expedition to the North. He advanced to Malwa, took 
tribute from Bhopal, and was joined by Malh§r Rao Holkar and Ma¬ 
hadji Sindia near Bhander in April, 1766. Holkar died a month later. 


217 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Raghunath tried to finish the contest begun by him against Gohad. 
The misunderstanding which had arisen between Raghunath and 
Mahadji Sindia over the question of succession to the Sindia State 
rendered it impossible for them to work in sincere co-operation. More¬ 
over, the Rana of Gohad was being assisted openly by the victorious 
Jawahir Singh. After a long siege the Rana made peace through 
Sindia’s mediation (December 1766), agreeing to pay 15 lakhs. 
Raghunath then intended to proceed against Jawahir Singh, who. 
however, concluded peace by surrendering the Maratha commanders 
captured in March, 1766. 54 

It seems after the settlement with Jawahir Singh, Raghunath 
intended to proceed towards Rajputana. He captured Bhilsa and 
marched towards Kota. We are told that Madho Singh collected 
troops and made preparations to resist the Marathas. The Jaipur 
ruler was probably alarmed at the report that Raghuath would in¬ 
sist on strict payment from the Rajput princes. But Raghunath’s 
plan remained unexecuted. Ahmad Shah Abdali had, in the mean¬ 
while, appeared in the Punjab and “written to Raghunath in a proud 
and haughty manner threatening him with war and rapine.” 55 The 
Peshicu’s uncle considered it imprudent to meet him and hurriedly 
left Hindustan. In vain did Shuja-ud-daulah and the English ask 
him to remain where he was. The Governor of Bengal wrote to 
Raghunath that he was prepared, in alliance with the Nawab of 
Awadh, to support the Marathas against Ahmad Shah Abdali, and 
asked him to return to the North ‘lest Abdali should think he was 
running away to the Deccan in fear’. Nothing, however, could bring 
Raghunath back to the North. Within a short time Ahmad Shah re¬ 
turned to Lahore to punish the Sikhs, leaving the Marathas free to 
prosecute their operations—an opportunity which Raghunath did not 
utilise. 

Raghunath’s departure provided an excellent opportunity for 
Jawahir Singh. Strengthened by the death of his rival, Nahar Singh, 
and the subjugation of his disloyal Gosain troops, he occupied Mara¬ 
tha domains from Bhind to Kalpi. Only Gwalior and Jhansi remain¬ 
ed under Maratha control. The Jat Raja established his authority 
in the Kalpi district, levied tribute from Datia and Seondha, advan¬ 
ced up to the bridge of Narwar, and formed ah alliance with the 
rulers of Picchor and Gohad. 56 In December 1767, Jawahir won a 
‘pyrrhic victory’ over Jaipur troops in the battle of Maonda. 57 While 
the Jat Raja was pursuing a policy of aggrandisement, the ambitious 
Nawab of Awadh had' not been sitting idle. He wanted to occupy 
Bundelkhand and asked the Governor of Bengal to exercise British 


218 


PESHWA MADHAV RAO I 


influence in his favour. The Governor recommended a policy of 
caution. 

The temporary eclipse of Maratha influence due to Raghunath’s 
hasty retreat did not last long. Maratha officers in Bundelkhand 
succeeded in recapturing many posts occupied by the Jats. 58 Their 
position was further improved by internal dissensions in the Jat 
kingdom. Jawahir Singh was assassinated in July, 1768, 59 and his 
successor, Ratan Singh, was murdered in April, 1769. A civil war 
then weakened the Jat kingdom. Meanwhile the Marathas had re 
appeared in the North. Jawahir Singh’s aggressions had led the 
Peshwa to decide that an army under Mahadji Sindia and Tukoji 
Holkar should be sent to Hindustan in order to deal with the grow¬ 
ing menace of the Jats. These two chiefs accordingly proceeded to 
the North, but before dealing with the Jats they invaded Mewar. 
Rana Ari Singh II had offended many powerful nobles of his court, 
who had thereupon set up a rival for the throne in the person of 
Ratan Singh, falsely reported to be a son of Rana Raj Singh II. In 
May, 1769, Mahadji Sindia and Tukoji Holkar appeared near Udaipur 
to support the cause of Ratan Singh. Differences, however, soon 
arose between the two chiefs, as a result of which Tukoji Holkar re¬ 
turned to Kota in June. Mahadji remained idle and took no steps 
to deliver an assault on Udaipur. He found that it was better to 
give up the cause of Ratan Singh, who had no money, and to support 
Ari Singh, who was prepared to pay. Ari Singh agreed to pay 64 
lakhs as present to Sindia, and to alienate 1£ lakhs worth of jagir in 
favour of Ratan Singh. 60 With these favourable terms Sindia left 
Mewar and joined Holkar in September, 1769. Then they advanced 
to Karauli in order to put pressure for tribute on Jaipur. Before 
this purpose could be accomplished, they were lured away by the 
envoys of Ranjit Singh, Ratan Singh’s ambitious brother, to take part 
in the civil war which was then desolating the Jat kingdom. Mean¬ 
while a great Maratha army had already arrived in the North to 
strengthen the force acting under Sindia and Holkar. Its leader was 
Ramchandra Ganesh, a distinguished soldier. He was assisted by 
another commander, Visaji Krishna. 

Early in March 1770, about 30,000 Maratha troops encamped out¬ 
side the fort of Kumbher and began negotiations with Ranjit Singh. 
When they found that the Jat Chief was unable or unwilling to pay 
the stipulated sum of money, they ravaged the territories of both 
Jat rulers, Ranjit Singh and Nawal Bingh, without distinction. An 
alliance was concluded with Najib-ud-daulah, with the expectation 
that his support would enable the Marathas to induce Shah ‘Alam 


219 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


to get rid of the protection of the English. Najib’s death in October 
1770, frustrated this project; but his adherence to the Maratha cause 
alarmed the Jats. Nawal Singh was severely defeated near Sonkh 
(a place midway between Kumbher and Mathura) on April 6, 1770. 61 
He took shelter in the fort of Dig, which was then barricaded by the 
Marathas. Najib-ud-daulah occupied several Jat parganas which he 
refused to make over to the Marathas. 

The Marathas halted at Mathura, and dissensions at once arose 
regarding the policy to be pursued. It was a very favourable oppor¬ 
tunity for restoration of Maratha influence in the North, for ‘no 
strong enemy was left in the region west of British-protected Oudh’; 
but personal jealousy and lack of statesmanship once more stood in 
the way of success. Ramchandra Ganesh and Visaji Krishna were so 
jealous of each other that they could never act in sincere co-opera¬ 
tion. Holkar was surrounded by ministers who continued Malhar’s 
tradition of hostility to the Sindia family. Naturally, therefore, the 
four chiefs failed to agree about their course of action after the vic¬ 
tory of Sonkh. Mahadji Sindia wanted to make peace with Nawal 
Singh in return for a moderate sum of money, to conquer the terri- | 
tories of the Rohilla and Bangash Chiefs in the Doab, and to punish 
Najib, the bitterest enemy of the Marathas in Hindustan. Ramchan¬ 
dra Ganesh, on the other hand, wanted to squeeze as much money 
as possible from Nawal Singh and to conquer his territories in the 
Doab with Najib’s assistance. He was unwilling to offend Najib, 
lest he should oppose the Marathas at the head of a powerful Muslim 
confederacy consisting of the Rohilla and Bangash Chiefs as well as 
the Nawab of Awadh. The Peshvxi supported Ramchandra Ganesh. 62 

An open breach with Najib-ud-daulah was followed by the con¬ 
clusion of peace with the Jats. Nawal Singh agreed to pay 65 lakhs 
in three years and an annual tribute of 11 lakhs. 63 After Najib’s 
death the Marathas proceeded against the Bangash and Rohilla Chiefs. 
The districts of Etawa, Shukohabad, and Kanauj were ravaged, and 
some important posts were occupied from the Afghans. By this time 
the quarrel between the Maratha Chiefs had reached its climax. 
Ramchandra Ganesh left the camp in disgust. Under the joint leader¬ 
ship of Visaji Krishna and Mahadji Sindia the Marathas now decided 
to occupy Delhi. 

As a prisoner of the Company at Allahabad Shah ‘Alam could 
not cease hankering for return to Delhi. The English and the Nawab 
of Awadh never gave him anything but sweet promises. In 1766 
Raghunath Rao made certain definite proposals which the emperor 


220 


PESHWA MADHAV RAO I 


could not accept owing to the hostility of his English protectors. The 
growing weariness of the fugitive, as also his anxiety that some other 
Mughul Prince might be put on the imperial throne either by the 
Marathas or by the Sikhs, threw him into the arms of Mahadji Sindia 
in December 1770. In January 1771, Mahadji Sindia and Visaji 
Krishna occupied Delhi. Shah ‘Alam started from Allahabad in April 
1771 and reached the imperial city on January 6, 1772. 64 The Peshwa 
recalled Ramchandra Ganesh and entrusted the supreme command 
to Visaji Krishna. 

Unfortunately neither victory nor unity of command could pre¬ 
vent dissensions in the Maratha camp. Visaji Krishna found it im¬ 
possible to control Sindia and Holkar, each of whom pursued the 
policy that suited him best. None cared for the interests of the 
Maratha State. Zablta Khan, Najib-ud-daulah’s son and successor, 
was defeated, but at the intercession of the Nawab of Awadh he was 
given back his father’s estates in Najibabad and Saharanpur. A vio¬ 
lent quarrel broke out between Visaji Krishna and Mahadji Sindia 
on this issue, and all the political arrangements of the Marathas were 
thrown into confusion. 65 Yet the growing strength of the Marathas 
alarmed the Rohillas, and on June 17, 1772, they concluded their 
famous treaty with Shuja-ud-daulah, a treaty which soon afterwards 
led to their ruin. Towards the middle of 1772 the Nawab of Awadh 
requested the Bengal Government to be ready to send a large force 
to his assistance at the beginning of the winter, for he was afraid 
that the Marathas would invade Awadh after the rainy season. In 
December 1772, Holkar and Visaji Krishna compelled the helpless 
emperor to confer the office of Mir Bakshi on Zablta Khan and to 
grant Kora and Allahabad to the Marathas. 

It is impossible in this brief survey to refer to all the complica¬ 
tions of North Indian politics during the eventful period covered by 
this chapter. We have naturally concentrated our attention on the 
efforts made by the Marathas to recover that authority and influence 
over Malwa, Bundelkhand, Rajputana, and the Doab which they had 
lost as a result of their rout at Panipat. In estimating the extent of 
their successes in this difficult enterprise we must not forget either 
the dangers which they had to confront in the Deccan or the number 
of enemies they had to deal with in the North. In spite of these 
difficulties they succeeded in re-occupying Malwa and Bundelkhand, 
in exacting tribute from the leading Rajput Princes, in almost crush¬ 
ing the Jats and the Rohillas, and, finally, in occupying Delhi and 
establishing the fugitive emperor on his ancestral throne. Their suc¬ 
cess would certainly have been more spectacular had their leaders 


221 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

not been pre-occupied with personal interests and mutual jealousy. 
The great Peshwd was not present in the field to restore unity in a 
house divided against itself. Even after his death his generals lin¬ 
gered on in the North with a view to consolidate their position by 
fresh victories, but domestic troubles, culminating in the murder of 
Narayan Rao, compelled them to return to the Deccan in 1773. 

IV. Peshwd’s Character: 

Madhav Rao died a premature death on 18 November, 1772. 
He was very much devoted to his mother. His devotion to religious 
observances was so great that on one occasion the venerable Ram 
Shastri had to direct his attention to his duties as the ruler of the 
State. His sincere faith in rituals was quite in keeping with his 
aversion to luxury. “While Raghunath Rao writes for a supply of 
pretty and well-trained dancing girls, his puritanical nephew refuses 
to wear gaily coloured clothes”. 66 Probably he had “an irritable tem¬ 
per, not always under command, which was his greatest defect”. 67 

All authorities agree in describing Madhav Rao as a great admi¬ 
nistrator. He did not introduce any institutional changes; for this 
failure, however, he deserves no blame. His reign was too brief 
and too tempestuous to provide that leisure and calm which ad¬ 
ministrative reforms demand. Moreover, as Grant Duff justly points 
out, ‘he had to contend with violent prejudices, 68 and with general 
corruption’. So the Peshwd tried to make the existing machinery 
work well, and for the accomplishment of this purpose he was pre¬ 
pared to take infinite pains. His attention to details excites the ad¬ 
miration of all readers of contemporary Marathi documents. 

In this brief survey we have tried to review the character and 
activities of Peshwa Madhav Rao from many points of view, ancl 
not unoften have we looked at him from his enemies’ eyes. An 
eighteenth century ruler whose reputation can survive so close a 
scrutiny was no ordinary man. A bare enumeration of his exploits 
in war is a great testimony to his capacity for leadership. It is re¬ 
markable that Haidar ‘All, whose military genius was a terror to 
British generals, was defeated in all the campaigns led against him 
by the Peshwa. Within a brief period of less than eleven years 
Madhav Rao succeeded in extending his authority from Delhi to 
Seringapatam. And these exploits were accompanied by the sup¬ 
pression of serious internal revolts and a minute supervision of ad¬ 
ministrative affairs. The Peshwa’s private life was blameless, and 
offers a striking contrast to that of his contemporaries. He was never 


222 


PESHWA MADHAV RAO I 


guilty of treachery even towards his enemies. It is interesting to 
speculate whether such a ruler, had he been blessed with a longer 
life, could have averted the downfall of the Maratha State. 


NOTES 

1 Sarkar, Jadunath, Fall of the Mughal Empire, Vol. II, p. 360. 

2 Aitihasik Patravyawahar, Ed. Sardesai, Kale etc. (1930), No. 103; S P D., 
XXXVIII, pp. 30-50. 

3 Aitchison, Treaties , Engagements and Sanads (1863), Vol. Ill, pp. 22-24; Bombay 
Pub. Deptt. Diary, Vol. 37, pp. 720-21. 

4. Khare, ALS, Vol. I, 89, 91, 105; Purandare Daftar, III, 3, &, 17-19, 73. 

5 Grant Duff. History of the Mahrattas, (1921 ed.), Vol. I, pp. 538-39. 

6 Khare, ALS, I, 320-365; Aitihasik Patravyawahar, 105, S P D. XXXVIII, 93-106. 

7 Ibid , XX, 165-73; Aitihasik Patravyawahar, 107. 

8. S.P.D. XIX, 52-92. 

9 Ibid, XX, pp. 200-215, 224, 241, 246-58, 261-70: Aitihasik Patravyawahar, 116-20. 

10 Khare. Aitihasik Lekha Sangraha, II, p. 696. 

11 Khare. Vol. II. 67: S.P.D. XXXVII, 5-9. 

12. Khare, ALS, II, 509-10; S.P.D. XXXVII, 53-55. 

13. Wilks, Historical Sketches of the South of India, Vol. I, pp. 464-65. 

14. S.P.D. XXXVII. 55; Khare, ALS, II, p. 747; Peixoto III, pp. 22-23. 

15. Khare, op. cit., II, Nos. 420-565; SP.D. XXXVII, 60-63. 

16. Wilks, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 466. 

17. Ibid. 

18. S.P.D., XX, 159, 168. 

19 Wilson, History of the Madras Army, Vol. I, p. 11; Aitchison, C. U., Treaties. 
Engagements and Sanads, Vol. V (1864), pp. 14-18. 

20. Khare, op. cit., Ill, 644-80; S.P.D., XXXVII, 122-35. 

21. Wilks, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 302. 

22. S.P.D, XXXVII, 122, 133-42; Khare, op. cit., Ill, 680-90. 

23. S.PD. XXXVII, 148-52; Khare, op. cit., Ill, 680-91. 

24. S.P.D. XXXVII, 158-61; Khare, op. cit., Ill, 721. 

25 Grant Duff, op. cit., I, p. 557 and footnote 3. 

26 Bengal Select Committee Proceedings, 21 September, 1767. 

27. Ibid, 3rd Oct. 1767. 

28. Grant Duff, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 557. 

29. Forrest, Selections, Maratha Series, Vol. I, pp. 141-43. 

30. Ibid, Vol. I, p. 169. 

31. Ibid, Vol. I, pp. 157-75; Madras Military Consultations, Vol. 30A, p. 633. 

32. Bengal Select Committee Proceedings, 1 March, 1769. 

33. Madras Military Consultations, Vol. 33, p. 231. 

34. Khare, op. cit., Ill, p. 1383. 

35. Wilks, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 135. 

36 Bengal Select Committee Proceedings, 10 March, 1771. 

37. Peixoto, History of Hyder Ali Khan, V, 163. 

38. Khare, op. cit., Vol. IV, Introduction. 

39. S.P.D. XXXVII, p. 203-7; Khare, op. cit., Ill, pp. 1402-04; Wilks, op. cit, Vol. II, 
pp. 136-37. 

40. Peixoto, History of Hyder Ali Khan, VI, p. 101. 

41. S.P.D. XXXVII, No. 226; Khare, ALS, 1102-1121; Pethe Daftar, Vol. I, p. 60. 

42. S.P.D. XXXVII, p. 233; Khare, AL,S, 1165-75; Wilks, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 149. 

43. Madras Military Consultations, Vol. 36, p. 49. 

44. S.P.D. XXI, 93 , 94; Sarkar, Fall of the Mughal Empire, II, pp. 506-09. 

45. Sarkar, op. cit., Vol. II, pp^543-44. 

46. S.P.D. XXIX, 72. 

47. S.P.D. XXIX, 99, 102-08. 

48. Vad, Madhav Rao Peshwd I Diaries, pp. 266-69. 

49. Sarkar, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 468. 

50. Ibid, p. 471. 

51. S.P.D, XXIX, 102, 105, 121, 197; Wendel, Memoirs de origin des Jats. 

52. S.P.D. XXIX, 105. 


223 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


53- S.P.D. XXIX, 117, 126-7, 204; Wendel, Memoirs, etc., pp. 105-6. 

54. Khare, ALS, III, 634-44, S.PD. XXIX, 160, 164; Sarkar, op. cit., II, pp. 471-74. 

55. Calendar of Persian Papers, H, 207. 

56- S.P.D. XXIX, 185, 149, 169, 196, 207-08, 215. 

57- Sarkar, op. cit., II, pp. 476-79. 

58 SJP.D. XXIX, 75. 

59. Qanungo, K. R., History of the Jats , p. 2171. 

60 S.P.D., XXIX, 87, 233-45; also Sarkar, op. cit., II, p. 521. 

61 For details see, Sarkar op. cit., EU, pp. 8-12. 

62 S.P.D. XXIX, p. 238, 242-46, 255, K S P., pp. 222-24. 

63 Calendar of Persian Papers, III, 323, 445. 

64 C P C. HI, 693-810; Sarkar, Fall of the Mughal Empire, II, pp. 550-55. 

65. S.P.D. XXIX, 276. 

66. S.P.D. XXXII, Introduction. 

67 Grant Duff, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 577. 

68 Grant Duff, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 564. 



CHAPTER VIII 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES 

PART I 

I. Feudalization of Mar&tha. State: 

Shivaji established a strong well-knit monarchy of a unitary 
type. The king was the leader of his military forces as well as 
the head of the civil departments of his government. The Raja’s 
vast forces—two hundred thousand strong—were commanded either 
by the Raja in person or by his officers. The plans of campaigns 
were drawn up by him and when he was elsewhere, he supervised 
and kept himself informed of the movements of his armies. His 
officers were paid directly from State treasury and had to account 
for any levy made on enemy territory. The same procedure obtain¬ 
ed in respect of the civil departments—revenue, customs, excise, 
mints and justice. The Raja took interest and supervised the details 
of the working of the several departments and paid his officers in 
cash or kind. It was only at the village level that the old village 
servants like the Patel, Kulkarni, Chaugula and the different artisans 
who served the needs of village communities were permitted to 
hold on to their watans —small pieces of land in lieu of the services 
they performed. They also received some other perquisites. The 
village officers collected land revenue and other cesses for govern¬ 
ment, sent the amount to the tdluka officers and managed local 
affairs. They had little voice in shaping State policies and politics. 
Where was the Raja to find officers with intimate knowledge of the 
numerous rural communes, who had daily contacts with the pea¬ 
sants and artisans of the villages and who could manage local affairs, 
if not in the hereditary village servants? Hence the old practice 
continued: land-gifts (Dhcvrmccday inams) were also made towards 
the maintenance of temples and other charitable institutions. There 
were no intermediaries and the Raja’s writ ran throughout his king¬ 
dom. 1 

But from the eighteenth century, direct rule gave place to in¬ 
direct rule. The villages continued to function as before, but other¬ 
wise the State administration underwent a change. The Raja divid¬ 
ed his patrimony among his ministers and commanders of military 

225 

M. S.-15 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


forces. He expected them not only to raise forces and maintain them 
to manage their territory but also make fresh conquests, obtaining 
in return a small share of the revenues, a kind of pension known as 
Raj Babti. Assignments of revenues to captains of troops became 
the order of the day. In the Swaraj territory, though many grants 
of revenue were made, regular administration continued to function 
as before (described in Elphinstone’s Report on Territories Con¬ 
quered from the Peshwa (1822), for which further evidence may be 
obtained from Vad’s Peshwa Diaries ). 

Initially the assignments ( Saranjdms) were made for short 
periods; the subordinate position of the assignee (who was called 
Saranjamdar in Marathi) was clearly defined. But after the pas¬ 
sage of time, the Saranjdms became hereditary and the terms of 
agreement were evaded as much as possible. The Maratha power 
that spread over India thus became a feudal State with its feuda¬ 
tories affecting independence in everything but name. It was from 
such feudatories that most of the eminent Maratha dynasties arose. 
It will not be out of place to give a more detailed description of the 
working of the Saranjdmdari sysltem before w T e go on to give ac¬ 
counts of a few prominent Maratha houses. 

The term Saranjdm is of Persian origin. It means apparatus, 
provisions, furniture, materials or what is essential to any under¬ 
taking. The term acquired a somewhat technical sense, meaning a 
kind of land tenure. Amongst the Marathas the expression was ap¬ 
plied especially to temporary assignment of revenue from villages or 
lands for the support of troops or for personal military service. The 
expression was also applied to grants made to persons appointed to 
civil offices of the State to enable them to maintain their dignity, 
and to grants for charitable purposes. It was the practice with 
Muhammadan dynasties to maintain a species of feudal aristocracy 
for State purposes by temporary assignments of revenue ( Jagir) 
either for the support of troops or for personal service or for main¬ 
tenance of official dignity or other specific reason. Circumstances 
obliged the Maratha King Rajaram (1689-1700) to fall in line with 
the Jagirddri system and to assign districts and provinces in Saranjdm. 
What was then known under Muslim rulers as Jagirddri system came 
to be known under the Marathas as Saranjdmdari system. 

The defence given by the protagonists of the system is, that it 
enabled the ruler to administer far-off provinces by creating centres 
of power when means of communication were not developed. The 
defence in itself contains the fallacy of the argument. The chief in 


226 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—I 


the distant province is a law unto himself, caring little for the re¬ 
straints placed on him and even eager to break from the weak bonds 
that bind him to the superior power. The jdgir or saranjtimi system 
is, therefore, incompatible with a strong monarchy. The jdgirdar at 
the slightest sign of weakness in the central government is apt to 
assume independence. Shivaji, the founder of the Maratha State, 
had a clear conception of the needs of an efficient government and 
would not countenance the jdgir system. He insisted that his officers 
be paid directly from government treasury and not by assignments 
of revenue. He did his utmost to undo the evils of feudalism by 
depriving the old collectors of land revenue—Deshmukhs and Desh- 
pandes—of some of their obnoxious rights and prerogatives. He 
pulled down the fortified places of the petty local tyrants and he 
was determined not to create new fiefs and renew the evils of military 
tyranny and feudal anarchy. 

Shivaji died in 1680. The Mughul emperor Aurangzib deployed 
large forces and moved personally southward to direct a campaign to 
crush the nascent Maratha State. Shivajfs successor Shambhuji was 
unable to keep up the unequal struggle. His army was defeated and 

a 

dispersed; the Maratha King was taken prisoner and beheaded. The 
brutal jnurder of their King roused the ardour of the maratha people. 
They took up the Mughul challenge and renewed their struggle for 
ousting the Mughuls from their territory. This war of independence 
lasted over twenty-five years at the end of which the Maratha people 
emerged triumphant. But during the interregnum the well-knit 
state organisation built by Shivaji disintegrated and disappeared. 

Rajaram, who succeeded Shambhuji in 1689, did not possess 
the magnetic personality of his father. He delegated his authority 
to his Brahmin officers—the Pratinidhi and the Amdtycv —thus lower¬ 
ing the prestige of the royal office in an age when the ruler was 
either the supreme war-lord of the State or a mere cypher. The 
task which the King delegated to his Brahmin officers was arduous; 
they were expected to repel the onslaughts of the Mughul empire, 
suppress internal rebellions, if any, and run the administration. The 
majority of the Marathas were disposed to support their King; the 
inability of the ministers to command the same loyalty that was 
shown to the King, obliged them to purchase it for a price, by 
promising their adherents large concessions and by reviving the 
jdgir system; many times jdglrs were granted in districts still in 
possession of the enemy and the jdglrdars were expected to wrest 
the territory from their opponents before they could realise revenues 
from them. Only a soldier of fortune would accept such a gift and 

227 





THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

would have little respect for the grantor. The decline of the mon¬ 
archy continued after Rajaram’s death. For a small revenue share, 
the King gave away large tracts and became a pensioner living on 
the charity, or even at the mercy of his military captains. 

Shahu who became King in 1708 was rescued and enabled to 
hold his position with the support he obtained from his able Peshiva , 
Balaji Vishwanath. Balaji Vishwanath, to win over the great captains 
like Parsoji Bhosle, Khandoji Dabhade, DhanajI Jadhav and KanhojI 
Angria, allowed them to hold territories they had wrested from the 
enemy as their hereditary fiefs on condition that they recognized 
Shahu as their sovereign, served the King with their forces and made 
stipulated contributions to the royal treasury. In the initial stages, 
there were certain other checks on these feudal chiefs; their DTwans 
and Accountants and other officers were sent from the centre; they 
were supposed to render annual accounts of their income and ex¬ 
penditure and there was a regular check on the troops maintained 
by them. The jaglrdars chafed at the restraints placed on their 
powers, ignored them when they could, and in course of time, came 
to eclipse the royal authority in their domains. The feudali- 
zation of the State was complete when Raja Shahu died (December 
1749). 

Raja Shahu must himself be held responsible for the growth and 
encouragement of this feudal mentality. He was released from 
Mughul custody in 1707 on condition that he ruled his father’s patri¬ 
mony as a Mughul vassal and rendered tribute. Shahu not only 
acknowledged himself to be a vassal of the empire, but to the end of 
his career, affected to consider himself merely as a zamlndar of the 
empire in all his transactions with it, (all Rajput and Bundela Rajas 
were called Zamlndars in Mughul documents) and he insisted that 
all old watans, inams and saranjdms be continued to their holders. 
The jagirdari or Saranjdmddri way of thinking thus came to per¬ 
meate the entire Maratha State, and it is, therefore, not surprising 
to find the Peshiva accepting the system and working through it. As 
the Raja’s chief executive officer, he, on one side, claimed precedence 
over other ministers, seized parts of their jdgirs whenever he could, 
and expected them to accept his direction; on the other, he went 
on expanding his own sphere of activities, assigned his conquests to 
his military captains—Sindia, Holkar, Pawars, Patwardhans and 
others. He enlarged his own resources and retained his conquests 
in north India and on the west coast as his jdgirs. The armies that 
he raised owed their first allegiance to him; the provinces he ac¬ 
quired were managed by his agents. The Peshwd, the de facto ruler 


228 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—I 


of the Maratha State, thus became the biggest jagirdar or feudatory 
of the State. 

In 1750, on the death of Shahu, the Peshwa’s position became 
supreme and the Saranjami system came into full operation. A 
number of agreements between the Peshwa and his feudatories 
could be found recorded in the Peshwa’s archives, which bring out 
the essential relationship between the two parties. Saranjams were 
granted to military chiefs, civil officers, and for maintenance of forts 
and Deosthans. The Sindias, the Holkars, the Gaikwars, the Pat- 
wardhans and a host of smaller Saravrfdfndars were allowed to ad¬ 
minister their fiefs and collect revenue 6n condition of military ser¬ 
vices when required. A nazar was paid by the chief on his appoint¬ 
ment to the Saranjam. Three conditions were exacted. The first 
was the grant of a document by the Sarkar in the form of a sanad, 
memorandum or agreement conferring the saranjam. The second 
condition was that of faithful service. The number of troops with 
which service was to be rendered was laid down. The party was 
also to avoid on their own all hostile or offensive entanglements with 
neighbouring powers. Payment of nazar on succession and also on 
special occasions was the third requisite. In case of dispute over 
Saranjam property, the final word lay with the Sarkar. The succes¬ 
sion to the Saranjam was not automatic but required the Sarkar’s 
consent. Once the Saranjam was granted, its management rested 
with the grantee. He could not touch other Huqdars and Dumala 
grants in his Saranjam but could appropriate the rest of the revenue. 
The civil and criminal jurisdiction remained with the Saranjamdar 
and there was little interference in his jurisdiction so long as he con¬ 
tinued to perform the service expected of him and retained the 
sovereign’s favour. 

Malet, the British Resident at Poona, pointed out the defect of 
this arrangement as early as 1788. He observed, “the feudal nature 
of the tenures of the great Maratha chieftains leads them to a desire 
for an affection of independence of the Brahmin or civil power.” 1 * 

Elphinstone, who was Resident at the Peshwa’s Court from 1811 
to 1817, was called upon to decide the disputes between the Peshwa 
and the southern jdglrdars. The terms he set down are in no way 
different from those mentioned above. According to Elphinstone, 
the following were the terms for the settlement of dispute brought 
about at Pandharpur in 1812: 

* 

“1st.: A body of troops, the number, description and pay of 

which is fixed, to be maintained by the jdgirdars. The personal 


229 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

allowance to the jagirdar is fixed; allowances are also granted in 
some cases to his relations and to some of his ministerial officers. 

2nd.: The jagirdar 1 s troops may be mustered as often as 
the Peshwa pleases. No men are to pass muster that are not of 
a certain description and mounted on horses of certain value. 

3rd.: All the expenses of the Saranjam troops without ex¬ 
ception are to be paid from the assigned revenue. 

4th.: The expenses of collecting the revenue and protect¬ 
ing the jagir in ordinary times are to be paid from the assigned 
revenue.” 

The Peshwa also hal other claims such as appointment of Dwr- 
rukdars or officers employed for inspecting the management of the 
Saranjam lands and payment of troops. 2 

Not all the Saranjamdars were the Peshwa’s creatures. Some 
of them were relations of the Raja of Satara, his ministers and com¬ 
manders sent out to conquer territories and afterwards allowed to 
retain them. Of this description were the Rajas of Kolhapur and 
the chiefs of Nagpur who considered tnemselves rather as confede¬ 
rates than as vassals. Then there were the members of the Raja’s 
cabinet—the Pratinidhi , Sendpati, Amatya, Mantri, etc. After these, 
came the large number of jagirdars created by the Peshwa in the pro¬ 
vinces held by him. It is not possible to trace the accounts of all the 
Maratha families; we shall merely give brief accounts of the 
families of the two Bhosle families— Chhatrapatis of Kolhapur and 
Rajas of Nagpur. Sindia, Holkar, and Gaikwar, who spearheaded 
Maratha advance in Malwa and Gujarat need our special attention, 
as also the house of Angria, who for a time were a terror to the wes¬ 
tern powers. 23 


II. The Chhatrapatis of Kolhapur: 

The House of Kolhapur must be looked on as the junior branch 
of the Maratha State. It owes its rise to Tara Bai, who acted as 
Regent for the Maratha State after her husband’s (Rajaram’s) demise 
in 1700. She ruled as Regent for seven years, in the name of her 
child ShivajI till 1707. In that year Shahu was released from 
Mughul captivity and allowed to claim his father’s kingdom as a 
vassal of the empire. When Tara Bai’s specious argument that 
Shahu was a pretender failed, she put another ingenious one to keep 
him out. She argued that ShambhujI had lost the Maratha kingdom 


230 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—I 

to the Mughuls, her husband regained it by his efforts, thus creat¬ 
ing by his efforts an altogether new State; Shahu thus could have no 
claim and legal title to inherit the Maratha State. 3 Her argument 
carried little conviction and the main part of the army under its 
Senapati DhanajI Jadhav, joined Shahu. Shahu defeated the rem¬ 
nant of Tara Bai’s army led by the Pratinidhi, occupied the capital 
Satara and had himself crowned. Tara Bai with her son ShivajI 
sought shelter in fort Panhala. 

Raja Shahu suggested that the districts marked off by the con¬ 
fluence of the Warna and the Krishna rivers up to the Tungabhadra 
should be held by his cousin while he ruled the rest of the king¬ 
dom. 4 Tara Bai was too ambitious to remain content with a small 
part. She claimed royal authority over the entire Maratha State 
for her son. Shahu was thus forced to fight to a finish. He march¬ 
ed into Kolhapur territory, occupied the town and laid siege to the 
hill-fort of Panhala. Tara Bai escaped to another remote hill-fort, 
Rangna, where the pursuers had to abandon the siege and fall back 
upon Satara. 5 

The struggle went on intermittently for another two decades. 
In l7l4 a revolution occurred in Kolhapur which swept away Tara 
Bai and her son, ShivajI, and put the second son of Rajaram—Sham¬ 
bhujI—on the throne. But the old policy of confrontation con¬ 
tinued. ShambhujI found a welcome ally in the new Mughul 
Subahdar of the Deccan, Nizam-ul-Mulk. The Viceroy of the Deccan 
was unwilling to recognise Maratha claims of chauth and sardesh - 
mukhi over his provinces and asked the two cousins to submit their 
claims to his arbitration. Raja Shahu was confounded by the move 
of the Nizam, but he had a very capable Peshwd who soundly de¬ 
feated'the Mughul Viceroy at Palkhed in February 1728 and forced 
him to recognize Shahu’s sovereignty over Maratha dominions and 
grant him the rights of chauth and sardeshmukhi over the six 
subahs of the Deccan. After the defeat of the Nizam, the Kolhapur 
prince was isolated; his army- was routed at Shirole in March, 1730; 
after negotiations and a personal meeting of the two cousins, the 
treaty of Warna was concluded in April, 1731. The treaty defined 
the spheres of the two parties—the territory extending from the 
south of the Warna to the Tungabhadra was recognized as belonging 
to the Raja of Kolhapur. The country beyond this point up to 
Rameshwar was to be shared between the two parties. Both parties 
were to be of one accord and not to harbour the servants or enemies 
of the other. There was an exchange of territory, the fort of 
Koppal going to Raja ShambhujI and fort Ratnagiri to Shahu. The 


231 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


southern Konkan districts were assigned to the Kolhapur Raja; in 
exchange Shahu was to take possession of fortified places like Miraj, 
Athani, and Tasgaon which the Kolhapur feudatories refused to sur¬ 
render and which were later seized by the Peshwa by force. 6 “In¬ 
cluded among the possessions of the great Shivaji, Kolhapur remain¬ 
ed an integral part of the Mailatha empire until the treaty of Warna 
(in 1731) formed it into an independent principality. The princi¬ 
pality contained about 4,000 sq. miles and yielded a revenue of Rs. 28 
lakhs. The treaty of Warna was offensive and defensive and pro¬ 
vided for the divisions of such conquests as might be conjointly 
made. But there never was any great cordiality between the Kolha¬ 
pur and Satara chiefs; and from the first a decided animosity existed 
between the former and the usurper of the authority of the latter 
(the Peshwa)”. 1 This animosity was to be a deciding factor in the 
later history of Kolhapur. 

“The mass of the people—mostly Maratha peasants—entertain¬ 
ed an enthusiastic veneration for the reigning dynasty. The details 
of government were conducted by the Rani and the Karbharis. The 
formation of the country helped greatly its independence. There 
were no great towns which would attract the invader. The whole 
tract was well-watered by a number of rivers that passed through 
it and received good rainfall. The frontier forests were exceedingly 
difficult of approach and the summits of the ghats were formed into 
natural strongholds. 

“Besides these protective forts every village contained its dis¬ 
tinct party of able-bodied militia who held small lots of land on a 
service tenure and crowds of these military ryots, trained from youth 
in the use of arms, eagerly assembled to support the regular stand¬ 
ing army of the State when called upon for the defence of their 
land, or for a marauding foray in the enemy’s territory; and from the 
earliest times an army of 20,000 could be brought into the field at 
a very short notice.” 73 

But with all these advantages Raja ShambhujI showed little 
talent either for administration or war. In imitation of his cousin 
at Satara he appointed a council of eight ministers but except for 
the Pratinidhi, the Amdtya and the Senapafi, little is heard of the 
rest. Even these three were at loggerheads amongst themselves 
and with the Prince. The Raja divided his principality among his 
ministers and his military chieftains like UdajI Chavan, Ghatge, 
Patankar, Sindia, who were not always amenable to royal autho¬ 
rity, and the Raja often, turned to his cousin at Satara to bring them 


232 




MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—I 


round. Shambhuji visited Satara in 1732, 1734, 1735, 1736 and 1740. 
He not only discussed boundary disputes but expected Raja Shahu 
to effect the conquest of the southern region for him. Shahu ex¬ 
tended his cousin every hospitality but he was in no position to grant 
or to promise military aid. 

The visit of the Kolhapur Prince to Satara in 1740 is rather 
memorable. The great Peshwa Baji Rao died in April, 1740, and his 
son Balaj I Rao came to Satara to receive the robes of Peshw&ship. 
Balaji Rao (or N'ana Saheb as he was called) during the visit met 
the Kolhapur Prince. The Peshwa by then had become practically 
the chief executive officer of the senior branch of the Maratha State, 
and thought it a good idea to unite the two branches under one 
sovereign, with himself as the chief minister after the demise of the 
ageing Raja Shahu. He entered into a secret pact with the Kolha¬ 
pur Prince, that after Shahu’s death he (Shambhuji) should succeed 
to the Satara throne, the two States should be united and the 
Peshwa should serve the new sovereign loyally. 8 

The pact never came into effect. It had been concluded by the 
Peshwa behind the back of his lawful sovereign, without ascertain¬ 
ing his wishes. Shahu was a man of kindly disposition and a for¬ 
giving nature. But he could not forget that his cousin had joined 
hands with the Mughul Subahdar of the Deccan to oust him and 
had on another occasion sent assassins to get him out of the way\ 9 
He nursed feelings of repugnance towards his cousin and on his 
death-bed gave an injunction that on no account should the Kolha¬ 
pur prince be adopted and allowed to succeed him. 10 The Kolhapur 
party in the meanwhile went on reminding the Peshwa of his secret 
engagement and sought his help to seize territory in the Karnatak. n 
On hearing of Shahu’s death (December, 1749) Shambhuji prepared 
to march on Satara, but his path was barred by a strong force of 
the Peshwa. 12 Secure in the possession of supreme power, the 
Peshwa was no longer anxious to stand by a pact by which he would 
have to share authority with somebody else. He therefore kept 
silent over the agreement, but four years later (1754) paid a per¬ 
sonal visit to the Kolhapur Prince to mollify him. In February 
1759, he was again at Kolhapur and concluded two agreements with 
the Prince to help him out of his financial straits and gave him mili¬ 
tary aid to bring his feudatories to book. The State of Kolhapur 
looked to the Peshwa to prop up its collapsing foundations—a deve¬ 
lopment which the Peshwa heartily welcomed. 

During the last ten years of his life Shambhuji left the admi- 


233 



THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


nistration to Rani Jija Bai and “spent most of his leisure hours with 
dancing girls and dissipated his revenue in drinking and debau¬ 
chery.” 13 He died on 18 December, 1760 without a male issue. 

On the death of the Kolhapur Raja, the Peshwd made one more 
attempt to unite the two kingdoms under his authority. His troops 
were to march into Kolhapur territory, seize the two strategic hill- 
forts of Panhala and Rangna and place on the throne his nominee, 
UmajI Bhosle of the Mungikar family. Rani Jija Bai, under the 
scheme was to be given a pension and allowed to look after the 
palace administration, but was to have no hand in the management 
of the State, which was to be supervised by the Peshwd ’s officers. 
JIja Bai was too spirited to accept the Peshwd*s scheme and become 
his pensioner. She sent letters of protest to the Peshwd, his chief 
feudatories and other neighbouring powers informing them that one 
of the queens was pregnant and it was the wish of the dying mon¬ 
arch that the infant should succeed him. The Peshwd then faced 
a very grave situation in Hindustan and had little energy left to de¬ 
vote his attention to the succession issue at Kolhapur. He failed to 
support his troops that had advanced into Kolhapur territory. Jija 
Bai defeated the small force and adopted a young boy from the 
Khanwat Bhosles in the Indapur taluk. The boy was renamed 
Shivaji (II) and as he was barely five years, Rani Jlya Bai became 
the Regent. The Rani thus became the saviour of the State of 
Kolhapur and the second founder of the State. r- 

In the meanwhile the Peshwd’s army had suffered a crushing de¬ 
feat at Panipat in January, 1761 and he himself died of a broken 
heart in June of that year. In this atmosphere of gloom and des¬ 
pair of defeat and discord in the Peshwd’s family, it was easy for 
Jija Bai to obtain recognition of her nominee as the ruler and her¬ 
self as the Regent. For the next ten years Jija Bai ruled Kolhapur 
with an iron hand. 

The reign of Shivaji II of Kolhapur (1762-1812) proved to be 
one of great turbulence—especially in its later stages. Kolhapur 
State had so far shown little interest in schemes of conquest, either 
on its own or in co-operation with the Peshwd. The result had been 
that the Peshwd’s armies had marched east and south and had occu¬ 
pied much of the northern Karnatak region. The principality of 
Kolhapur thus came to be ringed round by the jdgrirs of the Peshrvd’s 
feudatories—the Patwardhans, Hastes and Gokhales. 

Though Kolhapur State could not effect any conquest and re¬ 
mained quiescent while the Peshwd’s armies were overrunning the 

234 



MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—I 

Karnatak region, it made a grievance of the Peshwd’s success in the 
southern region, felt itself defrauded of its share, and had no qualms 
in joining the Peshwd’s enemies—the Nizam and Haidar ‘All in the 
former’s hour of adversity. The districts east and south of Kolha¬ 
pur had come to be held in jagir by the Peshwd’s feudatories—Pat- 
wardhans, Rastes and Gokhales—and with them Kolhapur remained 
locked in strife for more than a quarter of a century till the British 
intervened in 1812, and put an end to the independence of the jdcfir- 
dars and of the Kolhapur chief. 

But this was a later development. Immediately after she ob¬ 
tained the Peshwd’s consent to the succession of her nominee, Rani 
Jija Bai begged the Peshwa’s help to recover her southern outposts— 
Hukeri, Raibag, Kagal and the taluks of Chikodi and Manoli where 
her authority was being defied by her feudatories. Peshwd MSdhav 
Rao obliged her in 1764 when he was leading an army against Haidar 
‘All; in lieu of seven hundred thousand rupees to meet his military 
expenses, he put down the rebels. But the Rani unable to pay cash 
from Kolhapur treasury, mortgaged the two districts to Sdhulcars 
who made them over to the Patwardhans for realizing their reve¬ 
nues. The temporary possession of Chikodi and Manoli thus be¬ 
came another cause of friction which embittered the relations be¬ 
tween the two parties. 

The beginning of the civil war in Poona was the signal for 
Kolhapur to send its troops across the Peshwd’s territory. It attack¬ 
ed Ichalkaranji, but the Jagirdar was a relation of the Peshwd and 
invoked the aid of the Patwardhans for his protection. In 1775 
Konher Rao Trimbak attacked Kolhapur troops and inflicted defeat 
on them. In 1776 there was fighting between the two parties; the 
Patwardhan troops arrived within the precincts of Kolhapur and 
showing little regard for the monastery of Shankariacharya, plunder¬ 
ed it (9 March, 1776). 14 But Kolhapur was saved when the Patwar¬ 
dhan forces were diverted to meet Haidar ‘All’s advance towards the 
Krishna. Haidar ‘All sent money to the Kolhapur Raja and pro¬ 
mised him further military aid to keep up hostilities wjth the 
Peshwd’s troops. 

Haidar ‘All’s advance into North Karnatak and the possibility 
of his joining hands with Kolhapur aggravated the situation. The 
Poona Government despatched a strong force under Mahadji Sindia 
to put an end to the activities of the Kolhapur party. Mahladji in¬ 
vested Kolhapur for three months (February-April* 1778) and beat 


235 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

back sortie after sortie of the besieged. The Kolhapur party agreed 
to pay Sindia the sum of Rs. 15 lakhs for abandoning the .siege. 

Kolhapur showed little regard for the agreement and im¬ 
prisoned all those who stood guarantee for the tribute of Rs. 15 lakhs 
to be paid to Sindia. It practically repudiated the agreement and 
invested Kagal in 1779. Parashuram Bhau, who was in Kamatak 
now advanced on Akewat and took the place by assault in June, 

1779. The Poona Kdrbharis were busy quelling Raghoba’s rising 
and meeting the English challenge. They came to an understand¬ 
ing with Haidar ‘All and the Nizam, thus isolating Kolhapur. Its 
outpost at Shirole from which Kolhapur troops often descended into 
Patwardhan territory was invested and taken with great loss in May, 

1780. Gokak fell in June and the Kolhapur troops that were plun¬ 
dering Waive, Islampur and Karhad, were defeated at Waghapur. 
By the agreement concluded on 22 January, 1781, peace came to the 
harried land. The Patwardhans were asked to abandon the out¬ 
posts and districts belonging to Kolhapur which they had seized 
during the last five years’ struggle/especially Chikodi, Manoli, 
Hukeri and Raibag taluks. The dignity of the Kolhapur Prince was 
to be respected and his Kdrbhari or Ditvdn Yashwant Rao Sindia 
to be trusted. From 1781 to’1793 there was peace on the eastern" 
frontier of Kolhapur. 

But the State was not altogether free from internal troubles 
and other disputes. In 1781 the garrison of Bhudargarh revolted 
and the stronghold passed into the hands of Parashuram Bhau Pat¬ 
wardhan. In 1784 the Bawda garrison rose up against the legiti¬ 
mate authority. The revolt was somehow quelled. In 1787 Kolha¬ 
pur made war on the Sawant of Wadi, because the latter was assum¬ 
ing superior airs and flaunting the honours received from the 
Mughul emperor through Mahadji Sindia’s agency. The war put a 
great strain on the ruler of Wadi; to enable him to push back the 
Kolhapur troops he obtained aid from the Portuguese Government of 
Goa by surrendering to it the districts of Dicholi, Pedne, Sankhli 
and Sange. The English had, in 1765, inflicted punishment on the 
State for piracies committed against their ships. In 1792 the E.I. 
Co. sent another maritime expedition against Kolhapur and obtain¬ 
ed not only reparations for losses suffered by its ships, but also per¬ 
mission to open factories at Malwan and Kolhapur. 

In 1793 the Kolhapur State found itself again at war with the 
Patwardhans. Mahadji Sindia had arrived in Poona a year before 
and now insisted that the Poona Court should move its Karnatak 


236 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—I 


forces against Kolhapur which was holding on to the coastal dis¬ 
tricts of his relation, the Sawant of Wadi. The Patwardhan force 
under Ramchandra Parashuram advanced to Alte in Kolhapur State, 
but was dispersed with great loss. Then the great Bhau himself 
marched on Kolhapur with a larger force and cannon and laid siege 
to the capital. After a month’s siege, and much privations suffered 
by the garrison, an agreement was concluded by which the ,State 
agreed to pay the Bhau an indemnity of ten lakhs of rupees; so long 
as the sum remained unpaid the districts of Chikodi and Manoli 
were to remain in the possession of Parashuram Bhau. The Bhau 
had to pay soon a heavy price for this arrangement. 

The death of Peshwd Sawai Madhav Rao in October, 1795 shook 
the Maratha State violently. Nana Phadnls who wielded the 
Peshwd's authority as his guardian, was openly challenged by Daulat 
Rao Sindia and his ministers. In the tortuous struggle that ensued, 
Parashuram Bhau was made a prisoner and the entire Karnatak pro¬ 
vince including Bhau’s jdgtr lay open to the march of Kolhapur 
troops. Nana who had fled to Mahad suggested to the neighbour¬ 
ing powers, including the Raja of Kolhapur, to attack the Patwar¬ 
dhan districts. The Raja needed no such encouragement. He first 
occupied the stronghold of Bhudargarh v recovered Chikodi and 
Manoli, captured Hubli and then turning to Bhau’s jagir, seized 
Tasgaon and burnt down the Patwardhan mansions and established 
outposts upto the Krishna. In 1798 the British Resident at Poona 
reported, “the Raja of Kolhapur (the head of the Malwans) was 
creating disturbances in the quarter of Merritch, Tasgaum, Darwar 
and Shahnoor. It is reported that the Raja of Satara, the nominal 
head of the Maratha empire, has seized the persons placed over him 
by Nana Furnavees, that he is in complete possession of the fort 
of Sattara and forming connection with the Raja of Kolapore, who 
is also of the ancient Bhonsla family, he is raising troops. . . .Raste 
was yesterday appointed to proceed with a force of about 3,000 men, 
ostensibly for the settlement of affairs in the Satara quarter.” 15 In 
June the Kolhapur Raja was recommending it to Tipu Sultan to 
avail himself of the distractions in the Poona State. 16 

Raste proved himself unable to quell the disturbances of the 
two Chhatrapatis , and the Peshwd in alarm set Parashuram Bhau 
free and sent him against the royal insurgents. Bhau defeated the 
Satara force on 4 August, 1798, placed outposts round the city on 
9 August and occupied the fort on 31 August. After that he left 
for his jdglr and for chastising the Kolhapur forces which had en¬ 
croached on Peshwd’s districts in Karnatak. 


237 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Parashuram Bhau’s health was in a declining state, but he kept 
the field throughout the rains and recovered the posts between the 
rivers—Ghataprabha and Malaprabha. In the month of September 
he advanced from Gokak towards Kolhapur, but near the village 
of Pattankudi he encountered the Kolhapur forces headed by the 
Raja himself when he suffered a total defeat and was mortally 
wounded (16 September, 1799). Nana Phadnis despatched fresh 
troops from Poona and five of Sindia’s battalions to support Bhau’s son 
Ramchandra Appa and reduce the Raja to submission. 17 The Raja 
retired to the protection of Panhala before the new army and the 
city of Kolhapur was invested by the Poona troops. But on the 
death of Nana Phadnis in March, 1800, the Poona force was recall¬ 
ed and Kolhapur State was saved, which would otherwise, in all pro¬ 
bability, have been subverted. 

The death of Parashuram Bhau Patwardhan did not bring any 
relief to the State of Kolhapur. The British took the Peshwa under 
protection by the treaty of Bassein (December, 1802) and warned 
Kolhapur against disturbing the Peshwa s districts in Karnatak, 
The Raja of Kolhapur “pretended authority over the chief of Sawant- 
Warree, made war on the Wadi chief and wrested from him the forts 
of Bharatgarh and Narsingagarh and territory attached to the two 
forts. The Wadi party called in the help of Sidhoji Rao Nimbalkar 
or Appa Desai of Nipani”. 1 * Appa Desai occupied Chikodi and 
Manoli taluks, and advanced against the Kolhapur force and de¬ 
feated it with great loss near Savgaon (1808). Kolhapur sought to 
bring about peace by entering into a matrimonial alliance with 
Appa Desai. But the Desai suspected treachery and departed im¬ 
mediately after the marriage. He renewed attacks against- Kolha¬ 
pur in 1811. Kolhapur had suffered heavy losses; it readily agreed to 
British arbitration. 19 “By the terms accepted by the Raja of Kolha¬ 
pur (8 October, 1812) he renounced all rights to Chickoree and 
Menowlee, which were ceded to the Peshwa; but all other places 
taken from the Raja were restored. To the British government, the 
Raja ceded the harbour of v Malwan, which included the forts and 
island of Malwan or Sindhudurg and its dependencies; he also agreed 
to renounce piracy, to permit no armed vessels to be fitted out and 
to restore wrecks as well as to assist vessels in distress. He also be¬ 
came bound to pursue no manner of hostility against any other 
State, without the consent of the British Government. The British 
guaranteed the\ Raja’s possessions against the aggression of all 
foreign powers and States.” 20 

The condition of Kolhapur during the reign of Shivaji II (1762- 


238 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—I 


1812) is thus described by Major Graham: “The long reign of 
ShivajI had been from the commencement one of almost incessant 
hostility and continued suspense between the prospects of ruin and 
of conquest; and to support the fierce struggle for independence, 
every effort to provide means had been resorted to—piracy at sea, 
plunder at the Court and oppression in the collection of the re¬ 
venue, and all frequently without avail.” 

“Grants of lands were unsparingly made to the impoverish¬ 
ment of the crown estate; two-thirds of the entire country were 
thus transferred to partisans for military services, and a swarm of 
reckless characters were left behind who rejoiced in anarchy and 
whose livelihood was to be gathered among the troubled waters. 
All the evils of the feudal system prevailed in full force; continued 
warfare was allowed between the petty authorities; -the rayats were 
oppressed and the entire rent forcibly seized during the harvest 
season; fines increased as commutation for all other punishment; 
justice was one-sided and only meted out to favoured followers; 
merchants and way-farers were despoiled during the journey; the 
labour of the cultivator was exacted without remuneration; and a 
multiplicity of monopolies existed to the destruction of all trade.” 21 
The result of the anarchy was that the total revenue of the State 
had come down to Rs. 10 lakhs of which Rs. 4 lakhs was given away 
in jagtr 22 The area of. the State had dwindled to 3,184 sq. miles 
and the estimated population in 1853 was 5,56,156. 23 

The State of Kolhapur saved itself from total extinction by ac¬ 
cepting British protection. Raja ShivajI died early in 1813. His suc¬ 
cessors were not very competent persons—one of them was mur¬ 
dered by one of his feudatories. There was so much confusion in 
the State that the British had to appoint a Diwan from outside the 
state in 1844. Kolhapur was said to be involved in the rising of 
1857. But about the end of the 19th century the State of Kolhapur 
woke up to the needs of the modern age. Schools and libraries were 
started; the city affairs came to be managed by a municipality. 
Kolhapur had now turned its back on mediaevalism and was march¬ 
ing into the modern age. 

III. The Bhosle Rajas of Nagpur: 

The Bhosle Rajas of Nagpur claim close kinship with the 
Chhatrapatis of Satara. They are known as Hingnikar Bhosle, be¬ 
ing Patels of Hingni in the Poona district. The founder of the family 


239 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


was Mudhoji, father of the famous ParsojI Bhosle. ParsojI and 
Mudhojl’s biother RupajI are mentioned among the eminent captains 
of the great ShivajI in Sabhasad and Chitnis Bakhars. ParsojI led 
expeditions in Berar and Gondwana and rendered material assistance 
to Chhatrapati Rajaram. In 1699 he was rewarded with the title 
of Send Sdheb Subdh, was granted Saranjam and was asked to col¬ 
lect chauth in Berar and Gondwana. ParsojI made Bham in Berar 
his headquarters and was active in Khandesh, Berar and Gondwana. 

When Shahu returned home in 1707 under Mughul auspices, 
ParsojI Bhosle was one of the first chieftains who hastened to join 
his standard. 1 Doubts expressed by the Regent Tara Bai about 
Shahu’s identity were dispelled by ParsojI eating from the same plate 
with Shahu. Shahu in return confirmed his title of Send Sdheb 
Subdh and issued a sanad granting to ParsojI six sarkars and one 
hundred forty-seven mahals(?) in Berar. ParsojI died in 1709 and 
was succeeded by his son KanhojI. 

KanhojI Bhosle got involved in disputes with his sovereign and 
with his relatives. He appears to have mismanaged his saranjam 
and could neither pay the Raja’s contribution nor give proper 
allowances to his uncle and nephew, RanojI and RaghujI. The Raja 
consequently ordered a division of the saranjam 2 which displeased 
KanhojI Bhosle. He opened negotiations with Nizam-ul-Mulk and 
offered to take service with him. 3 When the Raja came to know 
this, he sent the nephew against the uncle KanhojI and had him im¬ 
prisoned. 

RaghujI Bhosle now succeeded to the title and the Saranjam 
of the family. He was the most capable of the Bhosle family and 
expanded its conquests right up to Bengal. In return for the right 
of collecting chauth from Berar, Gondwana, Allahabad, Patna 
(Bihar) and Maksudabad (Bengal), RaghujI “gave a bond to main¬ 
tain a band of five thousand horse for the service of the State, to pay 
an annual sum of nine lakhs of rupees to government; and, exclusive 
of ghasdana (of Berar), the half only of all other tribute, prize 
property and contributions, was to be accounted for to the head of 
the State. He also bound himself to raise ten thousand horse when 
required and to accompany the Peshwa or to proceed to any quarter 
where he might be ordered.” 4 Very few of these conditions were 
fulfilled by the Bhosles. 

ParsojI and KanhojI had established themselves in Berar and 
Gondwana. Raghujfs earliest activities naturally extended in that 
direction. The Raja Chand Sultan of Deogarh died in 1735 and the 


240 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—I 


Gond State was usurped by his illegitimate son Vali Shah. The 
mother of the legitimate successor, Ratan Kuvar, called in the help 
of RaghujI Bhosle. In two years’ campaign RaghujI Bhosle de¬ 
feated Vali Shah’s party and acquired a third of the Gond kingdom. 
In 1748 there was an uprising when the Diwan Raghunath Singh tried 
to throw off Maratha yoke. The attempt failed and the two sons of 
Chand Sultan—Akbar Shah and Burhan Shah—were brought to 
Nagpur. RaghujI took over the administration of the entire State 
of Deogarh in the name of the Gond king. The arrangement con¬ 
tinued right up to the end of the Bhosle rule of Nagpur. The 
Bhosles considered themselves as ruling on behalf of the Gond 
rulers. 

Far off Karnatak was to be the scene of the next exploit of 
RaghujI Bhosle. Pratap Singh, Raja of Tanjore, was in distress 
and implored Raja Shahu to send an army to save him from the 
harassment of the Nawab of Karnatak. Raja Shahu despatched an 
army 50,000 strong, nominally under the command of Fateh Singh 

o 

Bhosle, with RaghujI as his chief aid. The allies met the Nawab 
of Karnatak, Dost ‘All, at the head of his troops at Damalcherry pass 
on 19 May, 1740, killed the Nawab and put his force to rout. RaghujI 
temporarily returned to Satara to support BabujI Naik’s claim to the 
Peshwdship. But his design failed and RaghujI once more invaded 
the Karnatak, took Trichinopoly by storm, made Chanda Sahib, the 
commander of the fort, a prisoner and overran Karnafak, demanding 
tribute from the petty Rajas and polygars. A force of 15,000 Mara- 
thas approached Pondicherry and under RaghujI’s instructions, de¬ 
manded reparations from the French for supporting their enemy. 
The French Governor Dumas prepared the place to stand a siege and 
sent a spirited reply declining any demand for tribute, but to mark 
his goodwill he sent a dozen bottles of French liquor as a present to 
the Maratha General. The General, already informed of the military 
preparedness, was impressed by the valour of the French and won 
over “by the golden produce of France’s vineyards.” 5 He had ful¬ 
filled his mission of chastising the Nawab and returned with prestige 
enhanced. 

For the next ten years RaghujI Bhosle was embroiled in the 
struggle for power in the eastern region. ‘All VardI Khan, the gover¬ 
nor of Bihar had rebelled against his master Nawab Sarfaraz Khan, 
killed him (10 April, 1740) and usurped the Subahdari of Bengal 
(which then included Bihar and Orissa). But the dead man’s rela¬ 
tions and followers, among whom was Mir Habib, a prominent officer 
in Orissa, would not acquiesce in the usurpation. They invited the 

241 


M. S.-16 



THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Marathas to their aid and continued to resist the new governor. 
While ‘All VardI Khan was in Orissa dealing with the rebels, a Mara¬ 
tha army under Raghujl’s minister, Bhaskar Ram Kolhatkar, entered 
Bihar by way of Pachet and reached Burdwan (April 1742). ‘Ali 
VardS Khan abandoned his Orissa campaign and came on the heels 
of the Marathas. Bhaskar Ram invested the Nawab’s camp and cul 
off its food supplies. A part of the Maratha army roamed over the 
country, plundering the villages far and wide and making it im¬ 
possible for the Nawab’s army to get any foodgrains. The Nawab 
tried to fight his way back to Katwa, but his flight was discovered. 
The encircling Maratha horse cut down stragglers and the rear¬ 
guard, but somehow the Khan succeeded in reaching Katwa with a 
small detachment. 

The campaigning season was almost over as the rains would now 
set in any moment and swell the Bengal rivers, making movement 
of troops well nigh impossible. Bhaskar Ram wanted to return to 
Nagpur, but Mir Habib, his ally, pointed out that Murshidabad, the 
rich and defenceless capital of Bengal, would prove an easy prey 
if the Marathas attacked it during the absence of the Nawab. He 
himself led the attack at the head of a small column, crossed over 
into the city on 6 May, 1742 and plundered rich men’s houses and 
disappeared before the Nawab arrived on the scene. On the advice 
of Mir Habib, Bhaskar Ram abandoned his plan of retiring to Nagpur, 
and continued to remain in camp at Katwa. His troops spread over 
western Bengal and the Nawab’s rule ceased to exist in that region. 
Gangaram, the author of Maharashtra Purdna speaks of atrocities 
committed by Maratha troops, but he himself says in the beginning 
that the Badshah wrote to Shahu that “he (‘All VardI) who was a 
servant has killed the governor; he has become very powerful and 
does not pay me the tax. I have no army. Therefore, you should 
send men there to take the chauth.” 6 What was wrong in the whole 
episode was the way the Maratha army made war on the civil 
population. 

‘All VardI Khan in the meanwhile collected troops and surprised 
Bhaskar Ram’s camp at Katwa on 27 September, 1742. The Mara¬ 
tha army fled in great confusion. 7 The next two attempts by 
Raghujl to secure the chauth of Bengal were foiled by the Nawab. 
In 1743 he obtained the aid of the Peshwa’s army and drove out the 
Bhosle troops from the province. 8 

Raghujl visited Shahu’s Court and complained against the 
Peshwa’s interference in his sphere. The Raja marked out the 


242 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—I 

spheres of the two parties by agreements made in August, 1743. 9 
Raghuji was now free to pursue his conquests in the eastern region. 
He sent Bhaskar Ram once more to Bengal. The Nawab in despera¬ 
tion resorted to a base design to destroy his enemy. He invited 
Bhaskar Ram to a personal meeting to discuss the payment of chauth. 
Bhaskar Ram had been given solemn promises of safe conduct, but 
as soon as he, with his party, reached the tent where the meeting 
was to take place, the Nawab gave orders to kill his visitors. Soldiers 
rushed in from all sides on the unsuspecting visitors and cut down 
all of them (30 March, 1744). In 1745 there was mutiny in the 
Nawab’s army. Raghuji taking advantage of the mutiny, took pos¬ 
session of Orissa and invaded Bihar. Once more Raghuji dashed 
to the capital of Bengal (21 December, 1745) only to be driven back. 
In 1747 there was severe fighting at Medinipur and Burdwan be¬ 
tween the two armies. The Marathas kept on the pressure; they 
harassed the Nawab by avoiding open contests but seeking his troops 
in out of the way places. ‘All Vardi Khan was now a weary man of 
75 without energy to keep up the funning flight. At last in May, 
1751, a treaty was concluded between the two parties. The follow¬ 
ing were the terms of the settlement: 

“ (1) Mir Habib would now become a servant of ‘All Vardi Khan 
and act as naib-nazim on his behalf. He should pay the 
surplus revenue of the province to Raghuji's army as their 
salary. 

(2) From the Bengal revenue twelve lakhs of rupees a year 
would be paid to Raghuji as chauth for that province. 

(3) The Maratha Government agreed not to set foot in ‘All 
Vardi’s dominions again. 

(4) The frontier of Bengal was fixed at and including the river 
Suvarnarekha. Thus the district of Medinipur which the 
Marathas had overrun, was restored to Bengal.” 10 

Raghuji Bhosle had thus succeeded in winning for himself a 
kingdom extending from Berar in the west to Orissa in the east and 
from Garha-Mandla on the north to Chandrapur in the south. In 
Berar he shared the revenue with the Nizam, but in other regions his 
rule was supreme. The large and compact territory of Raghuji 
Bhosle roused the jealousy of the PeshvM. After RaghujTs death in 
1755 the Peshwa took advantage of the succession dispute to reduce 
the power of the Bhosle family and persuade it to accept the 
Peshwa’s primacy. 


243 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


RaghujI died on 14 February, 1755 at the age of 60. He had 
four sons—Janoji, MudhdjX, BimbajI and Sabajl. Janoji was the 
eldest son, but born of a junior wife. MudhojI therefore claimed 
the patrimony. When the dispute was submitted to the Peshwd for 
decision, he demanded a big nazar, claiming himself to be the sup¬ 
reme law-giver of the Maratha State, and divided the Nagpur prin¬ 
cipality in two or three parts. Janoji was to retain the title of Send 
Sdheb Subah and to administer the Bhosle. territory except Chan¬ 
drapur and Chattisgarh districts, which were to be placed respec¬ 
tively in charge of Mudhdji and BimbajI Bhosle. The decision was 
given in 1757 but the actual sanads were granted in 1761. The 
Peshwd’s decision of dividing the estate among the brothers weak¬ 
ened the chiefship and was not liked by Janoji or his Karbhdris . 
There were endless disputes among the four brothers often leading 
to civil strife. The Bhosles, engrossed in their domestic feuds, took 
little part in the common affairs of the Maratha State and even fail¬ 
ed to assert their claim to the chauth of Bengal. The Peshwd’s as¬ 
sumption of the leadership of the Maratha State and his decision in 
respect of the Bhosle principality so antagonised the Bhosle brothers 
that they lent a willing ear to the intrigues of the enemies of the 
Maratha State. 

Janoji Bhosle, though he had agreed to pay a nazar of ten lakhs 
Of rupees on his accession and pay a part of the revenue into the 
central treasury, never made any payments. On the contrary, in 
1762, he joined Raghunath Rao in his plot to oust Jus nephew. 
Janoji was to be rewarded with the kingship of Satara. Nothing 
came out of this sordid intrigue. 

Janoji then made common cause with the Nizam in yet another 
bid to challenge the Peshwd’s authority. The combined army of 
the Nizam and the Bhosle entered the heart of the Maratha coun¬ 
try and burnt suburbs of the Peshwd’s capital, desecrating many 
temples in their march. The Peshwd used threats and diplomacy to 
divide his opponents ana defeated the Nizam signally at Rakshas- 
bhuvan in August, 1763. Janoji, as the price for abandoning the 
enemy, was given in jagir territory worth 32 lakhs of rupees. 

Janoji was not destined to enjoy the additional jdgtr long. 
Though he had agreed to send a contingent to operate in the Kama- 
tak campaign against Haidar ‘All, he evaded his promises. In Berar 
again where he shared the revenue with the Nizam, his officers 
would not allow any collection by the Nizam. The Nizam who had 
entered into an offensive and defensive alliance with the Peshwd 


244 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—I 

after the battle of Rakshasbhuvan, now called on the Peshwd to 
fulfil the terms of the agreement. The Peshwd was keen to punish 
Janojl Bhosle for his duplicity and decided to help the Nizam. The 
Peshwd , in October, 1765 at the head of a large force entered Berar 
by way of Khandesh. He was joined by the Nizam’s Diwdn Rukn-* 
ud-daulah with a force of eight thousand. Balapur amd Akola were 
laid uhder contribution. The Bhosle brothers abandoned the 
capital and with their families sought shelter in the fort of Amner. 
Not feeling safe, they sent their families to Chandrapur and joined 
their army. Janojl realized the weakness of his position and 
through the Peshwd’s envoy Vyankat Moreshwar, sought for terms. 
He 'pleaded that he was not responsible for the destruction of the 
Peshwd’s capital and the Peshwa’s present proposal of transferring 
his new jagir to the Nizam was ‘like giving milk to the serpent’. The 
Peshwd relented in order to keep the Bhosle within the confede¬ 
racy; he allowed him to keep a small part of the jdcfir, transferred 
fifteen lakhs worth territory to the Nizam and himself took over dis¬ 
tricts worth nine lakhs. The treaty was concluded at Kholapur near 
Daryapur in January 1766. The Bhosle was supposed to send a con¬ 
tingent to work with the Peshwd’s army going to Hindustan. But 
no Bhosle contingent joined the Peshwd’s army and Janojl soon re¬ 
verted to his bad ways and provoked the wrath of the Peshwd . n 

In 1768 differences arose between the Peshwd and his uncle 
Raghunath. The uncle aspired for the Peshwdship. When he could 
not get it, he asked for a partition of the Peshwa’s estate. Such a 
proposal the Peshwd would never entertain and Raghunath went on 
scheming against the nephew, seeking aid from the Nizam, Haidar 
‘Aff, the English at Bombay, and even Maratha members of the con¬ 
federacy like the Gaikwar and Bhosle. Raghunath was defeated in 
jAne, 1768 and then the Peshwd marched into Bhosle territory. 
Janojl sent his Diwdn Divakar Pant to conciliate the Peshwd . But 
the Peshwd, suspecting the bonafides of the Diwdn , had him imprison¬ 
ed and continued the march. He had mobilized a strong army to 
settle the affairs of Hindustan and that army took the field against 
Janojl Bhosle. The Bhosle territory west of the Wardha, ‘ includ¬ 
ing his capital was occupied. While a part of the army laid siege to 
Chanda, the rest started in pursuit of Janojl Bhosle, who kept up a 
running flight. Bhandara near Nagpur was reduced by RSmachandra 
Ganesh. In another action on IQ January, 1769, at Panchgaon, 
Narahar Ballal, a Bhosle Sardar, was defeated with heavy losses. 
After a month’s fighting Janojl Bhosle was brought to bay near 
Kanakapur on the south frontier of his territory. A treaty was con- 

245 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

eluded on 23 March, 1769. The agreement contains 19 articles 
written in the form of demands and replies “and amounting in sub¬ 
stance to an agreement by Janoji that he and his house would ever 
implicitly obey the Peshwa as the head of the Maratha State; that 
he would not increase the prescribed number of his army; that he 
would serve the Peshwa with five thousand troops whenever called 
upon to do so; that he would pay a tribute of five lakhs of rupees 
annually; and that he would conduct no negotiations with any 
foreign power without the express permission of the Peshwa” 12 

According to Sardesai, “this short war marks the signal triumph 
of the Peshwd’s policy. An attempt was for the first time made to 
define clearly the relations between the central power and its feuda¬ 
tory members.” 13 

Janoji Bhosle did not survive long after the conclusion of the 
treaty. He died on 16 May, 1772. During his seventeen years’ re¬ 
gime he could neither govern his principality well, nor establish 
cordial relations with his brothers or the Peshwd > the chief execu¬ 
tive authority of the State. The four brothers quarrelled among 
themselves; the army was ever ready to break out in mutiny and 
there was chaos in the general administration. In consequence the 
Bhosles became ineffective as a military power. The English rea¬ 
lized their weakness, refused them the chauth of Bengal and often 
bribed them to act on their pleasure. 

Janoji died without an issue’and the question of succession to 
the Nagpur estate became complicated. Before his death, however, 
he had informed the Peshwa that he desired to adopt Raghujl, (born 
1757), the son of his brother, MudhojI. The formal adoption how¬ 
ever did not take place immediately. Therefore not only the father 
of Raghujl (Jr.), but Baka Bai the favourite wife of Janoji, and his 
brother Sabaji, came forward with some kind of claims to be put in 
charge of the management of the estate. The Peshwa went back 
on his word and suspecting the loyalty of MudhojI, who was a par¬ 
tisan of Raghunath Rao, sent the robes of the post to his brother, 
SabajI. The result was open outbreak of hostilities between the 
two brothers, MudhojI and SabajI. The issye became complicated 
by civil war in the Peshwa’s house after the murder of Narayan Rao 
Peshwa. Raghunath Rao supported MudhojI, while the Bdrbhdis or 
the party of the Poona Court supported SabajI. Fighting between 
the two brothers went on intermittently for two years till Sabaji 
died in the battle of Panchgaon on 26 January, 1775. MudhdjI was 
left without a rival; his son became Send Saheb Subdh on 24 June, 


246 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—I 

1775. MudhdjI gave a written agreement that he would have no 
truck with the party of Raghunath Rao, but would loyally support 
the young Peshwd and the Karbharis. 14 

But MudhdjI had no strong loyalties, no feeling of patriotism. 
He followed the rule of expediency. In 1777 the British encouraged 
him to claim the Satara Gadi. As a price for the British goodwill 
Mudhoji gave facilities to General Goddard’s force to march through 
his territory to Surat, though it was known that Goddard was going 
to the west coast to reinforce the Bombay army in its struggle 
against the Marathas. 

The Bengal Government had in 1767 made advances to Janoji 
Bhosle to transfer Orissa to the E.I. Company on condition of pay¬ 
ment of Bengal chauth, but Janoji had the wisdom to reject them. 
Warren Hastings made another unsuccessful attempt to rent a tract 
of country on the Orissa coast from MudhdjI. In 1780 when Nania 
Phadnis, the great Maratha Machiavelli, formed the quadruple 
alliance against the British, MudhdjI Bhosle as a member of the 
alliance was asked to despatch a strong force to attack Bengal, while 
the Nizam, Haidar ‘All and the Poona Government would exert pres¬ 
sure against British possessions in the South and the West respec¬ 
tively. Mudhoji carried the information of the alliance to the Bri¬ 
tish, assured them that he would feign compliance and that his force 
in Orissa would in no way hinder British movements. 15 The Bri¬ 
tish were more than glad to buy the Bhosle with the paltry sum 
of two million rupees. Not only did the Bhosle army not attack 
the province of Bengal but it heartily co-operated with a Bengal 
force marching southward through Orissa under Col. Pearse. 16 The 
short-sighted diplomacy of the Bhosle shattered the strength ojf 
the alliance. 

MudhdjI died in 1788 and from that time Raghujl II began to 
exert his authority uncontrolled by anybody. He sent his force to 
fight in the battle of Kharda against the Nizam in 1795. By 1800 
Raghujfs kingdom extended over a vast territory yielding revenue 
worth a crore of rupees. 17 But the kingdom of Nagpur was ill- 
managed and its resources were frittered away on a second-rate 
Court and a second-rate army. The Bhosle realized very late that 
the Peshwa's acceptance of British paramountcy (1802) meant a 
death-blow to the independence of the whole Maratha State. He 
attempted to bring about a conciliation between Sindia and Holkar 
and fought with Sindia’s battalions at the battle of Assaye. He was, 
however, soundly beaten at the battle of Argaon and made peace 


247 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


by the treaty of Deogaon concluded on 17 December, 1803. By the 
treaty the Raja was stripped of the province of Orissa and of the 
Country west of the Wardha and south of the Narnalla and Gawil- 
garh hills. The treaty was confirmed by the treaty of 1804 made 
with the Peshwd . 18 Its effect was to reduce the revenue of the 
Nagpur State from - about a crore of rupees to sixty lakhs. The 
Bhosle also agreed to accept British arbitration in any dispute with 
the Nizam or with the Peshwd, not to engage any European in his 
service without the consent of the British, and renounced adherence 
to the confederacy formed with Daulat Rao Sindia. He agreed to 
the residence of a permanent British Resident at his Court. 

Raghuji died in 1816 and soon his nephew Appa Saheb con¬ 
cluded a treaty of subsidiary alliance with the British “agreeing to 
receive one regiment of Native cavalry, six battalions of Native in¬ 
fantry, one complete company of European artillery and one com¬ 
pany of pioneers with the usual proportion of field pieces .attached 
and with the proper equipment of warlike stores and ammunition, 
which force shall be stationed in perpetuity in the Raja’s terri¬ 
tory.” 19 The benumbed existence of Nagpur State was terminated 
next year when Appa Saheb tried to get out of the meshes of the sub¬ 
sidiary alliance. Appa Saheb went into exile and a puppet occu¬ 
pied the throne till 1853 when the Nagpur State was annexed to the 
British empire for want of a legitimate issue. 

Jenkins in his report on Nagpur (1827) has described the state 
of affairs at the Court in the following words: 20 

“From the Rajah downwards to the lowest Mootsuddee, no 
means of making money, by traffick, was deemed disgraceful, and 
the revenues of Government, as well as the interests of the indus¬ 
trious classes of the population, were sacrificed to give them mono¬ 
polies in the various articles which they chose to deal in. Whole 
bazars in the city were the property of the Rajah himself, his ladies, 
and his ministers, with various privileges, and remissions of duties, 
totally subversive of free trade. Rughojee made every advantage 
of the necessities of his troops and subjects, caused by his own mea¬ 
sures. He withheld the pay of the former, and, in the mean time, 
through his various banking establishments, he lent them money for 
their immediate subsistence at enormous interest, and when he paid 
them the arrears, he gave a third in clothes from his own Dookans, 
at enhanced values. He exacted advances of revenue from his col¬ 
lectors, and was frequently himself the lender of the money 
to the ryots, like other Sahookars, at high rates of interest, 


248 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—I 


and frequently forced the grain in his stores on the Bunneas of the 
city, at his own prices. Grass and wood for building, and fuel, were 
publicly sold by him, and other sales frequently stopped, until his 
own stock was disposed of; thus taking the bread from the poorest 
classes of people by competing with them, in their traffick in these 
articles. In short, no source of gain, however trifling, escaped him, 
or the members of his family and court. 

“From this spirit of meanness and rapacity, as well as from his 
unwarlike character, Rughojee was not unfrequently called, in deri¬ 
sion, the great Bunneah; and it must be confessed, that in public as 
well as in private concerns, the love of money has, for the last 
twenty years, appeared to be the predominating passion in the court 
of Nagpore, to the exclusion of everything great, liberal, or even 
respectable.” 


NOTES 

SECTIONS I & II, pp. 225-239: FEUDALIZATION OF MARATHA STATE & THE 
CHHATRAPATIS OF KOLHAPUR 

1. Sabhasad, Shiva Chhatrapatiche Charitra, ed. by Sane (4th edition, 1923), 
pp. 27-28. Sarkar, Shivdji (1948), pp. 350-51. 

la. P.R.C. II, p. 132. 

2. P.R.C. XII, pp. 87-88. 

2a. See Francklin’s Shah Aulum, pp. 29-30. 

3- Letter in Vividh Dnyan Vistar, Feb. 1924, cited by Sardesai in Peshwd Balaji 
Vishwanath, p. 36. 

4. Raj wade, MIS, XX,- 282. 

5- Rajwade, MIS, XV, 59; Parasnis, Itihas Sangraha, Peshwa Daftar, p. 12. 

6- Kavyetihas Sangraha Patren Yadi, (1930 ed.), 19. 

7. Graham, D. C., Statistical Report of the Principality of Kolhapur (1854), p. 492. 
7a. Graham, Ibid. 

8. Kavyetihas Sangraha Patren Yadi (1930), No. 246, pp. 218-220. Cited by S. M. 
Garge, Karweer Riyasat, p. 151. 

9. Sane, K. N., ed. Thorle Shahu Maharaj i Charitra (3rd Edn.), (1924), pp. 74-75, 82. 

10. Parasnis, Itihas Sangraha, Vol. VII; Nos. 4-6; also cited in Chitnis Shahu 
Charitra, pp. 134-35, Pratinidhi Gharanyacha Itihas, Vol. IV, ab. pp. 213-14. 

11. SPD. VT, 1, 2, & XXVI, 17, 28. 

12. K.S.P.Y. 71 and S.P.D., XXVI, 163. 

13. Graham, D. C., op. cit., p. 496. 

14. Sardesai, Mardthd Riyasat, (Uttar Vibhag), I, p. 459. 

15. P.R.C. VI, p. 123. 

16- P.R.C VI, p. 182. 

17. P R C. VI, pp. 517-21; Kavyetihas Sangraha Patren Yadi , No. 467 gives a de¬ 
tailed account of the battle of Pattankudi and of Bhau’s death. 

18. P R C. VII, p. 36. 

19. For British arbitration in the Kolhapur dispute, see P R, C. XII, p. 80, 159-62 
225-27, 228-29. 

20- Grant Duff, History of the Mahrdttas, Vol. II (1921 Edn.), pp. 422-23. 

21. Graham, op. cit., p. 513. 

22. Graham, op. cit., p. 537. 

23. Graham, op. cit, p. 127. 


249 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


SECTION m, pp. 239-249: THE BHOSLE RAJAS OF NAGPUR 

1. Grant Duff, History of the Mahrattas, Vol. I, (1921 ed.), p. 314; Sabhasad, Shahu 
Charitra, p. 12. 

2. Vad, Shahu Roznishi, p. 80. 

3- S.P.D. X, p. 73. 

4. Grant Duff, op. cit., p. 384. 

5. Hatalkar, V. G., The Mardthds and the French, p. 69. 

6- Mah&rashtrd Parana, ed. by Dimock and P. C. Gupta (1961), pp. 6-8. 

7- Sarkar, Jadunath, Fall of the Mughal Empire, Vol. I, p. 92. 

8. Sarkar, op. cit., p. 99. 

9- Ait; Patravyawahar , 35-6. 

10 Sarkar, Fall of the Mughal Empire, I, p. 166. 

11. Kale, Y- M., Nagpur Prantacha Itihas, pp. 163-65; Sardesai, Riyasat, Madhya 
Vibhdg, IV, p. 152-53. 

12 Sardesai and Kale, Aitihasik Patravyawahar, 117-19. 

13- Sardesai, New History of the Mardthds, II, p. 530. 

14. Nagpurkar Bhosle, Letters, 7, 48; Itihas Sangraha, Aitihasik Vividh Vishay II, 32. 

15. Calendar of Persian Correspondence, Vol. V, 1957. 

16- Aitchison, C. U., Treaties, Engagements & Sanads (1863), Vol. Ill, pp. 95-96. 

17- Kale, Nagpur Prantacha Itihas, p. 382. 

18 Aitchison, C U., Treaties, Engagements & Sanads , Vol. Ill (1863 ed.) pp. 91-97 
and pp. 76-78. 

19, Ibid, pp. 101-7. 

20 Jenkins, Richard, Report on the territories of the Raja of Nagpur (1827) 


250 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES 


PART II 

IV. The Sindias of Gwalior: 

The name Sindia, it is said, is derived from Sendrak, an ancient 
Kshatriya clan. Many Sindia families rose to eminence in the 
Bahmani kingdom. One Nemaji Sindia, invaded Malwa in 1704, 
reaching as far as Kalabagh. Nemaji was an important chieftain and 
his early adherence to Shahu’s cause, strengthened Shahu’s position. 
History does not record the further career of this soldier. The 
Patels of Kanherkhed in Satara district, were Sindias who had one 
of their daughters married to Raja Shahu while he was in Mughul 
captivity. RanojI Sindia was, therefore, not the first in the family 
who rose to fame, but he was the founder of the family which had left 
its impress on the course of Maratha history. Three generations of 
Sindias served the Peshwds loyally and sacrificed their lives in the 
cause of their master and their country. 

RanojI Sindia was perhaps a junior member of the Patel family 
of Kanherkhed. To seek his fortune he entered the personal service 
of Peshwd BalajI Viswanath. As Malcolm remarks, “it is probable 
that ambition, not indigence, influenced a member of the Patel family 
to become, in the first instance, the menial servant of BalajI Vishwa- 
nath.” 1 He was soon promoted as a captain of cavalry under the 
Peshwd’s able son, BajI Rao. 2 In 1720 when BalajI Vishwanath died 
and his son’s (BajI Rao’s) succession was under discussion, RanojI 
Sindia was a prominent chief in the Peshwd’s service. 3 The Peshwd’s 
cavalry assisted the Nizam against Mubariz Khan in October 1724. 
RanojI was wounded in the battle. 4 Some critical movements de¬ 
pended on him in the Peshwd’s campaign against the Nizam in 1727- 
28. 

In July 1729 RanojI was further elevated; he was granted the 
saranjam that was previously enjoyed by PilajI Jadhav and also re¬ 
ceived the honour of using the palanquin. 5 In 1730 the chauth and 
sardeshmukhi of subah Malwa was granted to Malharjl Holkar. 6 
Next year, on 20 October, 1731, RanojI Sindia was associated with 
him with equal powers. 7 About the same time the Peshw&’s seals 
were sent to RanojI to be used at his discretion. 8 After this, Malwa 


251 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

became the field of RanojI’s activities with Ujjain as his headquar¬ 
ters, where he revived the worship in many ancient temples. 9 He 
accompanied the Peshwfr in his expedition to meet Sawai Jay Singh 
in 1735-36 and was left behind to collect the tribute when the Peshwd 
Returned to Poona. As the Mughul went back on his word, the 
PQshwd made a dash on the capital, and defeated the forces sent by 
the emperor. Ranoji was one of the commanders who led the army 
against the Mughul and also fought against Sa'adat Khan. 10 A year 
later, Nizam-ul-Mulk, apprehensive of the Peshwd's victories in 
Hindustan, marched northward, was put in command of imperial 
forces and met the Peslnwd at Bhopal (January 1738). The Peshwd 
invested the Nizam in that place and Ranoji distinguished himself in 
the contest. 11 The Nizam signed a convention granting the subah - 
dari to the Peshwd. The imperial farman came three years later. 
Sindia and Holkar stood guarantee for due performance of duty by 
the Peshwd. n * 

The Peshwd's victory over the Nizam released large forces lock¬ 
ed in that struggle. A large part of them poured into the Konkan 
theatre of war where Chimnaji Appa was attacking the Portuguese. 
“Ranoji Sindia invaded Daman district, overpowered the small gar¬ 
rison of Nargol, Khatalwad, Umbargao, Dahanu and laid the enemy's 
country under fire and sword.” His detachment led in the final as¬ 
sault on the mighty fortress of Bassein. 12 

Ranoji Sindia died at Shujalpur in July 1745, while in service. 
He had three sons from his first wife-^Jayappa, Dattaji and Jotiba 
and two from the second, Mahadji and Tukojl. Jotiba predeceased 
his father, but the rest distinguished themselves in various fields of 
operations. 

Jay appa succeeded his father in his jdgtr which was then worth 
about Rs. 65 lakhs per annum. His position was made difficult by 
the new Peshrm Balaj I who could not see beyond immediate gains, 
and who in his inordinate greed for money, forgot the old ideals 
of forging alliances with Hindu rulers and establishing Hindu ascen¬ 
dancy. The Peshwd set aside the sage advice of Jayappa not to 
support Madho Singh in his dispute for the Jaipur throne with his 
brother Ishwarl Singh, and in the end alienated the entire Rajput 
princely order. 12a 

The feebleness of the Mughul empire invited foreign invasions 
from the north-west. Ahmad Shah AbdaR who had made himself 
master of Afghanistan on the death of his master Nadir Shah in 1747, 
started invading Hindustan and encroaching on Mughul territory. 


252 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 

He found willing allies in the Afghans who had settled in Rohil- 
khand. As the Abdall troops marched into India, the Rohillas would 
revolt and seize the adjoining districts belonging either to the em¬ 
peror or his Vazir Safdar Jang. At one stage it appeared that the 
junction of the two—the Abdall forces and the Rohillas would en¬ 
gulf Mughul rule and establish Pathan rule in its place. To avoid 
such a possibility the Vazir invited Maratha aid against the Afghans. 
In two great battles fought in March-April 1751, the joint armies 
of the Vazir and that of the Maratha chiefs—Sindia and Holkar, in¬ 
flicted severe defeats on the Rohillas and almost annihilated their 
forces. For a time the Pathan danger was averted. The Peshxvu eulo¬ 
gized the services of his two chiefs in the highest terms. 13 

Next year the two chiefs, Sindia and Holkar, came to the south 
taking under their wings the Nizam’s eldest son Ghazi-ud-din and pro¬ 
claiming him subdhdar of the Deccan. There was a revolution in 
the Nizam’s Court, both Ghazi-ud-din and Nasir Jang were killed. 
The Maratha army in which Sindia’s contingent took a leading part, 
surrounded the new Nizam at Bhalki in 1752 and liberated Junnar, 
Ahmadnagar and Khandesh districts of Maharashtra from Mughul 
rule. 14 

Next year a big army marched into Hindustan under the 
nominal leadership of the Peshwa’s brother, Raghunath Rao. 
Jayappa Sindia and Malhar Rao Holkar were the main advisers. 
Raghunath on his arrival in the Jat country demanded the huge tri¬ 
bute of one crore of rupees. The Jat Raja Surajmal pleaded his in¬ 
ability to pay such a big amount and asked the Maratha chiefs to 
show some consideration. Raghunath on the advice of Holkar, re¬ 
fused to budge an inch from his demand and began the siege of the 
fort of Kumbher wherein the Jat Raja was sheltering. The Mara¬ 
tha army was ill-equipped for siege-operations and made little im¬ 
pression on the Jat defences. One day a stray shot from the de¬ 
fenders killed Malhar Rao Holkar’s only son Khande Rao, whose 
death Holkar vowed to avenge. The siege had dragged on for 3 
months keeping a huge Maratha army tied down. On the interces¬ 
sion of Jayappa Sindia, Raghunath agreed to accept a much smaller 
tribute and raised the siege, Sindia’s intervention in the dispute 
looked on as the beginning of discord between the two houses of 
Sindia and Holkar. 15 

From Kumbher the Sindian force under JayappS marched into 
Marwar where Maratha aid had been invited by the lawful heir Ram 
Singh to regain his kingdom of Jodhpur against the usurper Bijay 


253 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Singh. Kishangarh, Ajmer, Merta, fell into the Maratha hands by 
February 1755 and Bijay Singh was hemmed in the fort of Nagore. 
When Bijay Singh found that his position was altogether hopeless, 
he resorted to base means to destroy his enemy. While his envoys 
pretended to continue negotiations, his agents made a murderous 
attack on Jayappa as he was finishing his bath. The attack proved 
fatal and Jayappa died oil 25 July, 1755. But the enemy did not 
benefit by the assassination of the Maratha chief. Jayappa’s brother 
DattajI rallied his men, declared JankojI, Jayappa’s son, as suc¬ 
cessor to the jacfrr and continued the siege operations. Fresh troops 
poured in from the Peshivti; Antaji Manakeshwar, Yashwant Rao 
Pawar and Samsher Bahadur arrived with their forces to help Sindia. 
Bijay Singh at last agreed to surrender half the kingdom of Marwar 
to his cousin Ham Singh, cede the forts of Ajmer and Jhalor to 
Sindia and pay him a tribute of fifty lakhs of rupees. The long- 
drawn siege was raised and the Maratha army marched away. 16 

The Peshwu called the Sindias to Poona where he confirmed 
Jankoji in Sindia’s j dglr. The Sindian force fought with great bra¬ 
very in the battle of Sindkhed, 12-17 December, 1757. It was des¬ 
patched to Hindustan in mid-1758 to guard the new Maratha con¬ 
quests, to defend the Mughul empire against the Afghan menace and 
levy tribute from Bengal, Bihar and Orissa. In 1759 DattajI Sindia 
marched into the Punjab, put SabajI Sindia in charge of the pro¬ 
vince and then in June crossed the Jamuna to punish Najib Khan 
Rohilla. The Rohilla chief was already in league with the Afghan 
king and played a waiting game. By the end of 1759 Ahmad Shah 
Abdall had descended into the Punjab, and made short work of the 
Maratha garrisons stationed in that province. DattajI Sindia rea¬ 
lized too late the treachery of Najib Khan. He broke his camp at 
Shukartal, sent away his heavy baggage and non-combatants and 
moved in the direction of the capital. The Abdall! king, in the mean¬ 
while, had joined Najib Khan in the Doab and the two together 
marched on the capital along the eastern bank of the Jamuna. They 
crossed Over at Barari ghat on 10 January, 1760 and overpowered 
Sindians force. DattajI Sindia was leading the vanguard and fell a 
victim to a bullet from the enemy’s sharpshooter. Sindia’s force 
20,000 strong was unable to withstand the overwhelming number of 
the enemy, armed with muskets and swivel guns. 17 Malhar Rao 
Holkar tried guerilla tactics till fresh reinforcements equipped with 
artillery, arrived in the north. But on 4 March, 1760, he was sur¬ 
prised near Sikandrabad and defeated with heavy losses. The 


254 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 

Maratha force fled southward to await the arrival of the Bhau with 
the Peshwa’s grand army. 

The battle of Panipat (14 January, 1761) has been described 
elsewhere. On that fateful day the Maratha army was annihilated 
and with it the faithful contingent of the Sindias. TukojI Sindia 
died fighting, while Jankoji was wounded, taken prisoner and killed 
by the enemy. The Sindian force suffered a severe set-back from 
which it took several years to recover. But from the battle-field pro¬ 
videntially escaped Mahadji Sindia, who was later on to build up 
the vast Sindia State in Hindustan. Raghunath Rao desired to put 
another Sindia in possession of the jagir, but Peshwa Madhav Rao 
appreciated the loyal services of RanojI’s sons and appointed, des¬ 
pite his illegitimate birth, Mahadji to the jdgir in 1767. 18 With the 
death of Malhar Rao Holkar in May 1766, and Raghoba’s defeat at 
Dhodap (1768) Mahadji was firmly in the saddle. He was already 
functioning as de facto chief of the Sindia jdglr from 1762. In 1766 
he succeeded in taking Gwalior from the Rana of Gohad and thence 
began the historic association of Gwalior with the house of Sindia. 

A great Maratha army led by Ramchandra Ganesh and Visaji 
Krishna entered Hindustan at the end of 1769. The Peshwa wanted 
to efface the ignominy of the disaster of Panipat, punish the trea¬ 
chery of Najib-ud-daulah Rohilla, and regain Maratha ascendancy in 
the north. The Jat army that barred Maratha progress was de¬ 
feated on 5 April, 1770. But dissensions then broke among the 
Maratha generals. They could not agree on the policy to be follow¬ 
ed towards Indian princes, especially Najib-ud-daulah. Holkar was 
friendly to the Rohilla chief who did his best to defeat Maratha plans 
and secretly formed an anti-Maratha alliance. However Najib died 
on 31 October, 1770. Ramchandra Ganesh was recalled and the 
leadership of the expedition fell to Visaji Krishna and Mahadji 
Sindia. Mahadji defeated the Pathans near Farrukhabad, and re¬ 
occupied the old Maratha districts in the Doab. On 10 February, 
1771, he took the fort of Delhi by assault and invited the emperor 
Shah ‘Alam to return to his capital. The exiled emperor entered the 
city on 6 January, 1772. The Maratha army then started in pursuit 
of Zabeta Khan, the son of their avowed enemy, Najib. It defeated 
him at Shukartal and overran his place, Najibgarh. Mahadji had 
the satisfaction to see the deaths of his brothers and nephew aveng¬ 
ed. The untimely death of Peshwa Madhav Rao halted further pro¬ 
gress of Maratha arms in Hindustan. 19 

The decade from 1772 io 1782 was a period of stress and strain 


255 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


for the Maratha State. Narayan Rao, who had succeeded his bro¬ 
ther in the Peshwdship, was murdered in August 1773. It was soon 
discovered that his uncle Raghunath and his wife were the prime 
movers behind the plot to remove the nephew and usurp the Peshwd¬ 
ship. The entire council at Poona felt great repulsion to the base 
act and vowed to keep Raghunath out of the Peshwuship. They 
formed the league of the Bdrbhdis, a regency council, and acting in 
the name of the infant son of Narayan Rao, sent a force in pursuit 
of the murderer. Raghunath Rao in hopes of winning support from 
Sindia and Holkar, fled to Indore, but having failed in his expecta¬ 
tions, concluded a treaty with the English on 6 March, 1775 at Surat. 
The treaty lost to Raghunath what little sympathy he had among his 
countrymen. For some time Mahadji Sindia was with the Gujarat 
army of the Peshwd, trying to bring about reconciliation between 
the Regency Council and Raghunath Rao. But Raghunath showed 
more faith in his English allies than his own compatriots and took 
shelter with them. Since then Sindia swung over to the Bdrbhdis 
and became their chief military supporter. He overawed a Kolhapur 
force in 1777 which was harassing the Peshwd’s territory near its 
(Kolhapur’s) western frontier and arriving at Poona in June 1778, 
suppressed the insurgency of Moroba Phadnis. He was Nana’s prin¬ 
cipal adviser when Raghunath Rao advanced on Poona at the head of 
an English force by way of Panvel, Khandala, Kamshet, Wadgaon 
and Talegaon. While myriads of Maratha horse closed on the small 
British force from all sides, the country through which it passed was 
completely denuded of men, animals and foodgrains. The Regency 
Council adopted a scorched-earth policy. Even the capital of Poona 
was evacuated and large buildings were filled with hay and com¬ 
bustibles. The English force which had been assured of a cordial 
welcome and hearty co-operation by Raghunath and his friends, was 
almost overwhelmed, and concluded on 16 January, 1779, the con¬ 
vention of Wadgaon, agreeing to the surrender of Raghunath Rao, 
evacuation of Salsette and other islands and return of the Bengal 
force to its base. Mahadji Sindia was the architect of this debacle 
of English arms at Wadgaon. 20 

The Governor-General not only rejected the humiliating terms 
of the convention but sent a force to attack Mahadji Sindia’s jagtr 
and cripple his sources in Malwa. Col. Popham surprised the fort 
of Gwalior on 3 August, 1780 and Hastings called it the most gallant 
enterprise nearly equal in its advantage to the battle of Plassey. 
Sindia, who had been fighting in Gujarat, now arrived in Malwa in 


256 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 

June 1780 to defend his territory. 21 Hastings despatched Col. 
Camac and Col. Muir to support Col. Popham’s offensive. The Bri¬ 
tish force then advanced to Sironj and later surprised Mahadji Sindia 
on 24 March, 1781 near Kolaras. 22 Sindia improved his position by 
constantly harassing the enemy’s flanks and inflicting a defeat on 
1 July, near Sipri. 23 On 13 October, 1781 a temporary truce was 
effected between Mahadji Sindia and Col. Muir on terms of no gain, 
no loss to either party. 24 

By this time the Governor-General had become aware of the 
grand alliance formed against the East India Company by the coun¬ 
try powers, and knowing English inability to fight on several fronts 
simultaneously, was anxious to come to an understanding with the 
Marathas. The temporary truce of 1781 was spelt out in a formal 
treaty of seventeen articles at Salbai on 17 May, 1782, and ratified 
by the Governor-General, on 6 June, 1782. By the 16th article of 
the treaty, Mahadji Sindia agreed to be “the mutual guarantee of 
both parties for the perpetual adherence to the conditions of the 
treaty.” The English surrendered Raghunath Rao, the root-cause 
of the seven years’ war, and all the territories occupied by them ex¬ 
cept Salsette and two other islands near Bombay. 25 “Sindia was 
given to understand by the Governor-General that his government 
would not interfere with his views at Delhi.” 26 

The situation at Delhi was very favourable to recover the lost 
ground and regain Maratha ascendancy in the imperial court. Shah 
‘Alam had bartered away to the English the Diwdni of Bengal for a 
pension of 26 lakhs of rupees and a promise to lead him back to the 
capital. His demand for the fulfilment of the promise had been met 
with all kinds of excuses by the English. The emperor had become 
sore with the English and had often thought of taking refuge with 
the Marathas, and lending his name and support to their ambitious 
plans in Hindustan. His V&zir, Mirza Najaf, had starved the em¬ 
peror, his vast harem and his dependants. In agony the emperor 
cried out, “I am sick of this life—no subsistence money, overwhelm¬ 
ing debts to the bankers and traders of Delhi. I cannot bear the 
shame of it any longer.” He felt that the Marathas alone would save 
the situation and a vast Maratha army would silence the English 
guns. 27 * 

Mirza Najaf Khan, the emperor’s Regent, died on 6 April, 1782, 
a month before the treaty of Salbai was concluded. Mahadji Sindia 
was now free to prosecute his ambitious plans in Hindustan. The 
two years from the conclusion of the treaty with the English to his 

257 

M. S.-17 


THE MABATHA SUPREMACY 

meeting with the emperor at Agra on 14 November, 1784 he spent 
in consolidating his position in Malwa and Bundelkhand. He put 
down the petty chiefs of Bhopal, Datia, Chanderi, Narwar, Khechi 
and Gohad. Gwalior fort was reoccupied on 31 July, 1783 and Gohad 
was reduced on 26 February, 1784. Mahadji wrote to the Poona 
Minister that Hastings had arrived at Lucknow and the English 
v/ould gladly advance to Delhi if the Marathas refused to support 
the emperor. Nan§ urged Sindia to take the initiative and establish 
Maratha influence in Delhi. 28 

Of the four lieutenants of the dead Regent, two—Mirza Shaft 
and Afrasiyab Khan met with violent ends. Muhammad Beg Ham- 
dani was in revolt and Najab Quli was sunk in debauchery. There 
was none left to take up the responsibility of managing the emperor’s 
affairs. Shah ‘Alam now turned to Mahadji for protection and for 
regulating his empire. On 1 December the emperor at a public 
darbar appointed the Peshwd as his Deputy ( Ndib-i-Mundib ) as well 
as Commander-in-Chief (Bakhshi-til-Mamdlik) subject to the con¬ 
dition that Mahadji Sindia himself should be permanent agent of 
the Peshwd in discharging the functions of these two offices. On 
the 3rd of the month the emperor appointed Sindia Vakil-i-Mutlaq, 
Regent plenipotentiary, direct from himself. The Poona Minister 
Nana Phadnis protested that Sindia had accepted honours higher 
than the Peshwd, and later on, the honour of V akil-i-Mutlaq was 
conferred on the Peshwd, with Sindia as his deputy. 

As a result of the agreement, Sindia obtained the executive 
authority of the Mughul empire such as it was, the command of the 
imperial army and of the two provinces of Delhi and Agra. The 
Marathas at last seemed to have realized their long-cherished dream 
of ruling from Delhi. Their constitution was so elastic that it did 
not matter how many overlords Mahadji Sindia, their chief in Delhi, 
had. 

Unfortunately Mahadji Sindia and the Poona Darbar miscalcu¬ 
lated his gains from the new venture. The devastation by constant 
war and the maintenance of armies by Mirza Najaf Khan and after 
his death by his four lieutenants, had left little money in the royal 
exchequer. Sindia’s own resources were not equal to his vaulting 
ambition and he soon found he could pay regularly neither the em¬ 
peror for his subsistence, nor the Mughulia troops, nor his own 
troops. If he had succeeded in establishing Maratha supremacy in 
Delhi, “it was”, wrote Browne, the British agent at Delhi to the 
Governor-General, “more by a concurrence of fortunate events than 


258 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 

by any great exertions of his own. The Musalman chiefs, dispersed 
and deprived of their power, want nothing but a head to enable them 
yet to assert their own independency”. 29 To the hostility to Sindia 
on religious grounds, there was another and a stronger reason, for 
their animosity. Sindia, to raise funds, started investigating the 
titles of the Mughul nobility to their jagirs 30 and pressed the Rajput 
chiefs for the arrears of their tribute due to the emperor. 31 

An inquiry into the titles of the jagirs was perfectly justifiable. 
Under the Mughul emperors mansabs were given only for life and 
were resumed on the death of the recipients. The emperors did not 
want to create a feudal aristocracy which would threaten their autho¬ 
rity. But in the disintegration of the empire what had been granted 
temporarily or for life, had come to be regarded as having been 
ceded in perpetuity. Sindia could make the two provinces granted 
to him viable and pay his military expenses, only if he coujd get rid 
of these usurpers and utilize the revenue to raise a new force loyal 
to him. No wonder the Musalman chiefs lined themselves up against 
the Maratha Regent of the emperor. 

The Rajput Rajas of Jaipur, Jodhpur and Udaipur, though 
Hindus, had suffered much from the rapacity of the Marathas, de¬ 
tested them and had no intention of paying the imperial tribute to 
strengthen the hands of the Maratha Regent of the emperor. 

The emperor had broken with the English and left their pro¬ 
tection because they would not pay his allowances regularly nor 
take him to Delhi. He expected Sindia to make regular payments 
towards the maintenance of his household and his dignity. Suspi¬ 
cion and indecision were the hall-mark of his character and even his 
best friends and well-wishers could not be sure of his constancy. 32 
Besides, Nana Phadnis, the Maratha Machiavelli, though he profess¬ 
ed to rejoice at Sindia’s success and rise to power in the imperial 
court, inwardly felt jealous of him and was reluctant to support him 
unless Sindia agreed to share that power with the Peshwa’s govern¬ 
ment, which really meant subordinating himself to the dictates of 
the minister. 33 

Then there were the Sikhs who made raids on the imperial pro¬ 
vinces of Delhi and beyond and who refused to abide by any agree¬ 
ment made with some of their chiefs. 

Mahadji thus had to steer his course through dangerous waters. 
He had to create instruments which could help him coerce all op¬ 
position into submission. He had observed the superior fighting 


259 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


qualities of disciplined troops of the East India Company in Gujarat 
and in Malwa, and had made up his mind to build his army on the 
new model. He was fortunate in acquiring the services of the Savo¬ 
yard soldier, De Boigne. Count Benoit De Boigne first joined Sin- 
dia’s service at the end of 1784 and raised for him two battalions of 
infantry with proper equipment of cannon, etc. These battalions 
first saw service in Bundelkhand under Appa Khande Rao. Later at 
the battle of Lalsot (28 July, 1787) when the Mughul troops started 
deserting Sindia, De Boigne’s battalions saved the situation in the 
course of the fighting and during the subsequent retreat. 33a 

The Marathas, long used to horsemanship and predatory warfare, 
looked with disdain on the infantry and refused to be recruited in 
De Boigne’s Campoos. The Savoyard, therefore, was obliged to fill up 
his battalions from non-Mara tha elements—Rajputs and MusalmanS 
hailing from Awadh, Rohilkhand and the Doab. Two battalions, 
though they held back the Rajputs at Lalsot, counted for little in 
the sea of Maratha cavalry. At the end of 1788 De Boigne asked for 
permission to raise a full brigade of ten battalions, but was refused, 
and left Sindia’s service for a short while. In 1789 he was recalled, 
given a jaidad and asked by Sindia to raise a campoo (a brigade) 
to meet his enemies in the field. This was done and within the course 
of the next five years De Boigne raised three brigades officered by 
European soldiers. The new army brought Sindia spectacular suc¬ 
cesses against Indian rulers, but during the process, the military be¬ 
came completely denationalised. The brigades when pitted against 
British armies at Assaye and Laswari in 1803, failed miserably, be¬ 
cause the European officers deserted them and the rank and file had 
not grasped the higher tactics and strategy. The famous Maratha 
cavalry had lost its 41an. 

But let us revert to the main narrative. The battle of Lalsot 
against Rajput combination turned out to be almost a second Pani- 
pat on account of the desertion of the emperor’s Hindustani batta¬ 
lions—about 14,000 infantry with 80 pieces of cannon, only two days 
after the fighting commenced. Mahadji broke off the engagement, 
sent away his heavy baggage, females and non-combatants to Gwa¬ 
lior by way of Khushalgarh. He himself retreated to the protec¬ 
tion of the Jat Raja’s fortress of Dig, recalled his detachments from 
the north and the east, deposited heavy guns in the fort of Bharat- 
pur and strengthened the garrisons of Aligarh and Agra. 34 

For a year Sindia remained in the wilderness. “He showed 
great fortitude and conduct during the crisis.” 35 He sent fervent 


260 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 

appeals to the Poona Minister to rush him reinforcements and trea¬ 
sure if'he desired him to re-establish Maratha supremacy at the 
Mughul Court. “Mahadji happened to remark that the Sindia 
family had made the supreme sacrifice on several occasions pre¬ 
viously. Everybody advised him to retreat before the advancing 
enemy, but to save himself by retiring, he felt, was worse than 
death.... Ten thousand Maratha troops were surrounded by one 
hundred thousand Hindustani troops and the Sardar (Mahadji) was 
therefore anxiously awaiting succour from the South. His condition 
was like that of the Gajendra who was being dragged into the deep 
pool by the crocodile.” 36 “We serve”, appealed Mahadji, “a common 
master; let our exertions be directed to the common cause. Let the 
cause of the Maratha nation be upheld in Hindustan and prevent 
our empire from being disunited and overthrown.” 37 

Nana's response was tardy; he despatched some treasure and 
asked ‘Ali Bahadur and TukojI Holkar (Sindia’s rival) to march to 
the help of Mahadji. ‘Ali Bahadur reached Sindia after a year and 
Holkar six months later. Mahadji had to act on his own with great 
circumspection. 

Ismail Beg who had succeeded to the leadership of the Hindus¬ 
tani forces, was joined by the Rohilla Ghulam Qadir, and they pro¬ 
ceeded to recover Mughul provinces from the Marathas. Aligarh at 

once yielded, the small Maratha force at Delhi fled, only Agra held 

% 

out under Lakhba Dada. Ismail Beg with the Rohilla Ghulam Qadir, 
moved out against Sindia’s forces marching to the relief of Agra. 
At Chaksana, eight miles from Bharatpur, the two armies met (April 
1788). The Maratha cavalry cracked before the furious onslaught 
of the Musalman chiefs, but the day was saved by De Boigne’s batta¬ 
lions; the Maratha army withdrew in the failing light of the evening. 

The Sikhs were reported to have invaded Ghulam Qadir’s jacfir 
whereupon he marched away to its defence. Sindia’s forces once 
more took the field and this time destroyed Ismail Beg’s army on the 
plains of Agra (18 June, 1788). 

Sindia would not proceed to the capital in the wake of the de¬ 
feated army. He was uncertain of the king’s attitude and w’anted to 
stabilise his position at Agra before moving north. This delay and 
indecision on the part of Sindia brought disaster on the king and 
his family. The two desperate Musalman chiefs marched to Delhi, 
obtained entrance into the red fort through the treachery of Nazir 
Manzur ‘Ali and asked the king to discover to them the hidden trea¬ 
sure in the fort. When the poor man denied knowledge of any con- 


261 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


cealed wealth, he, with his sons and female members of the family, 
w~as beaten k tortured and disgraced. In a fit of anger the ruffian 
Ghulam Qadir, plucked out the eyes of the monarch. Such ill treat¬ 
ment of the royal family was unheard of and Ismail Beg separated 
from the Rohilla. Ghulam Qadir now knew that the net was closing 
round him; he sent the plundered wealth to his fort in his ancestral 
jdgir district and fled from the palace on the night of 1 October. The 
Maratha army which arrived the next day found the fort strangely 
silent. The imprisoned princes implored the Maratha general to en¬ 
ter the fort and dccupy it. 

Now began the pursuit of the Rohilla chief which ended with his 

* 

capture on 31 December, 1788 and his decapitation and death two 
months later under the king’s orders. Mahadji arrived in the capital 
and reinstated the emperor with great pomp. He received, in return, 
confirmation of the dignities of Vakil-i-Mutlaq and Ndib-i-Mundib 
conferred five years back. 

But this did not put an end to his difficulties. ‘Ali Bahadur and 
Tukoji Holkar who had ostensibly come to Hindustan from the 
Deccan to help Sindia, wanted the glory of conquest without the 
pains and toil of campaigning; they began demanding equal shares 
in the conquests and openly encouraged Sindia’s enemies. Mahadji 
now realized what a false friend Nana was and decided to go it all 
alone. De Boigne, who had left Sindia’s service at the end of 1788, 
was recalled from his exile at Lucknow and was asked to raise one 
or two brigades in full strength. 

Ismail Beg, the Hindustani chief, and the Rajput Rajas were pre¬ 
paring for the coming contest and were sending agents to the British 
Resident at Lucknow and the Governor-General, soliciting British 
aid to drive away the Marathas beyond the Narmada. In February 
1790, they invaded the country of the Jat Raja, Sindia’s firm ally. 
It was the beginning of May when Sindia’s army under Gopial Bhau 
left Gwalior. Ismail Beg was strongly entrenched at Fatan, 80 
miles north of Jaipur, and his army—30,000 infantry and 17,000 
cavalry—looked almost invincible. But De Boigne’s brigade closed 
in on the enemy and stormed his lines (20 June, 1790). The enemy 
gave way on all sides and fled from the field leaving their guns, bag¬ 
gage, behind. ‘Ismail Beg’s fine army was annihilated and Jaipur 
was knocked out of the ring.’ 38 

In the battle of Merta fought on 10 September, 1790 the flower 
of Rathor cavalry was destroyed by De Boigne’s disciplined troops 
and the Raja of Jodhpur begged for terms. He was heavily fined; 


262 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 

the fort and the district of Ajmer were surrendered to Sindia as also 
Sambhar and the stirrounding districts. The power of the Rajput 
Rajas was broken in one decisive campaign. Ismail Beg was pur¬ 
sued into the fort of Kanud and was at last seized in April 1792. 
He spent the rest of his life as a prisoner in Agra fort where he died 
in 1799. 

Mahadji after reducing Chitorgarh and restoring it to its right¬ 
ful owner, marched to the Deccan. He was now the master of Hin¬ 
dustan and he wanted to draw full support for himself from his 
master the Peshwd and put an end to the sniping of the minister. 
He reached Poona on 12 June, 1792 and remained in the capital till 
his death in February, 1794. He wanted a fair and frank discussion 
of the entire political situation, of the administration of his new con¬ 
quests, of the rivalry between his house and that of Holkar, of the 
expenditure incurred by him in raising troops for his new respon¬ 
sibilities and of the tribute to be paid -by him. 39 ' The minister was 
afraid of losing his position and evaded open discussion. On one 
occasion “he enumerated his faithful and important services to the 
Peshwd and his house, declared that he had no object but the aug¬ 
mentation of the power and possessions of the State and if the 
Peshwd wished that his rival should triumph over him, he was pre¬ 
pared to resign his authority and possessions into his hands. This 
artful speech made a visible impression on the mind of the young 
Peshwd and caused him shed tears.” 40 In July 1793 Palmer was 
to report to his superiors of the three chiefs (Mahadji Sindia, Nania 
Phadnis and Haripant Phadke) entering into mutual engagements to 
reconcile their differences to support the Peshwd’s Government, to 
confirm the authority of Sindia in Hindustan and to accommodate 
the dispute between him and Holkar. 41 It is idle to speculate on 
what happened during the meetings. Seven months later Mahadji 
was still in Poona. He died at Wanawdi on 12 February, 1794, after 
a short illness. 

Mahadji’s death brought all powers into the hands of Nana 
Phadnis which he directed against the Nizam, the festering ulcer of 
the Maratha State. The Nizam was defeated and lost half his king¬ 
dom. But Nana’s glory was short-lived. The Peshwd from whom 
he derived support, accidentally fell dowm from a palace window or 
committed suicide (27 October, 1795). The great minister’s Wings 
were clipped and he found himself pitted against lying conspirators 
and ruffians of the worst type. The dismal story of the last days of 
the Peshwd’s raj has been told elsewhere in this book. Suffice it to 
say that the last decade of the eighteenth century was one “of con- 


263 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


stant clashes between Sindias and Holkars, of civil dissensions, 
monotonous in repetition and appalling in brutality. The brutality 
stands out because in comparison with the hideous cruelty of Asiatic 
contemporaries, the Maratha record has been generally humane. 
But during the last decade of the eighteenth century, as one after an¬ 
other every respectable leader passed away, the nation lost its 
honourable characteristics, including its humanity. On occasions, 
Maratha executions vied in cold-blooded ferocity with the worst of 
other lands.” 42 

Mahadji Sindia died in February, 1794, and was succeeded by 
his grand-nephew, a boy of fifteen years. Daulat Rao Sindia’s one 
aim was to obtain ascendancy in the Poona Court, but Nana Phadnis’s 
to retain it in his hands. But Nana so far had derived his strength 
from the dead Peshwd. The new Peshwd, Baji Rao Raghunath, re¬ 
fused to be a tool in the hands of Nana and secretly won over Daulat 
Rao Sindia by promising him fabulous treasure which he did not 
possess. So when Baji Rao was seated on the musnad with Sindia’s 
aid (December, 1796) he gave the latter a free hand to realise the 
amounts from his erstwhile minister, his friends and the rich resid¬ 
ents of the capital of Poona. This work Sindia assigned to Sharza 
Rao Ghatge, his new favourite whose pretty daughter he married. 
Ghatge was a monster in human form; he let loose on the city the 
fury of hell. The fair capital of Poona suffered at the will of its 
own master horrors similar to those suffered by Delhi at the hands 
of Nadir Shah. 43 

The widows of Mahadji Sindia made loud complaints that 
Daulat Rao was not attending to their needs and had cut down their 
allowances. Sharza Rao Ghatge who was asked to settle the dispute, 
dragged the ladies out of their tents and had them whipped. A feel¬ 
ing of horror went up in Sindia’s army where the ladies had sympa¬ 
thisers. They raised the banner of revolt and thus commenced the 
“widows’ war” which added to the general confusion. 

But what brought down the gigantic fabric of Sindia’s empire, 
reared with such great toil by Mahadji, was Daulat Rao’s vain at¬ 
tempt to subordinate the house of Holkar. Tukojl Holkar died in 
1797 and Daulat Rao Sindia immediately took up the cause of the im¬ 
becile Kashi Rao Holkar. The other Holkars refused to recognize this 
succession; their camp was attacked, Malhar Rao II was killed and the 
force dispersed. One of the Holkars had the misfortune to be cap¬ 
tured by the Peshwd's troops. He was brought to Poona and was 
trampled to death by an elephant under the orders of the Peshwd like 

264 




MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 


an ordinary felon. His brother Yashwant Rao who escaped to Khan- 
desh, raised an army amongst Holkar adherents and laid waste 
Sindia’s territories in Malwa. To meet the Holkar challenge, Daulat 
Rao Sindia at last left Poona in November 1800, and marching lei¬ 
surely northward, started sending his battalions in small batches 
over the Tapi. Yashwant Rao recognizing the folly of his opponent, 
hurled his cavalry against the scattered battalions of Daulat Rao 
Sindia and destroyed them piecemeal. MacIntyre was defeated at 
Newri on 25 June, and on 18 July, 1801, Holkar and his ally Amir 
Khan advanced on Hessing’s battalions drawn up under the walls of 
Ujjain. Holkar dispersed Sindia’s horse and a charge made by Amir 
Khan annihilated the battalions, Hessing alone escaping. Ujjain, 
Sindi'a’s capital, was laid under a heavy fine. 44 

Daulat Rao Sindia calling in his forces from Hindustan and the 
Deccan, overwhelmed Holkar at Indore on 14 October, 1801, scat¬ 
tered his battalions, captured his guns and sacked the city of Indore. 
But Daulat Rao was too indolent to pursue his enemy and allowed 
Holkar to slip away to Khandesh and raise another formidable army 
to challenge Sindia once more on the plains of Hadapsar (25 October, 
1802). Yashwant Rao asked the Peshwa to arbitrate in the dispute 
with Sindia. He wanted to be declared as Regent to the child 
Khande Rao in Holkar’s Malwa jdgir and sought parity with Sindia 
in Hindustan, thus sharing his conquests. The Peshwa was in no 
position to arbitrate even if he meant to. When Holkar’s army de¬ 
feated the joint forces of Sindia and the Peshwa at Hadapsar, the 
Peshufa took to flight and from Bassein negotiated with the English 
the subsidiary alliance with which to obtain their help to regain 
his Gadi. 

The English were determined to be the dominant power on the 
Indian continent and too willing to give such help. They took the 
Peshuba under their protective wings and asked the Maratha con¬ 
federates to abide by the treaty made with the Peshwa. Sindia 
understood that the treaty spelt an end of his supremacy and evaded 
reply to gain time to build an alliance with Bhosle and Holkar 
against the English. The British would not put up with the delay 
and declared war on him. At the same time, they issued a procla¬ 
mation asking Sindia’s European officers (about 300) to leave him. 
In two sanguinary battles fought at Assaye (23 September, 1803) 
and at Argaon (28 November), Sindia’s French-trained campoos in 
the Deccan were soundly beaten. In the northern theatre his gene¬ 
ral Perron abandoned the army at the eleventh hour and the leader- 
less host was almost annihilated by the English C-in-C, Lord Lake, 


265 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

in the battles of Aligarh (4 September), Delhi (11 September) and 
Laswari (1 November, 1803). In twelve weeks’ fighting Sindia’s* 
army numbering 43,000 infantry, 35,000 cavalry and 464 guns were 
destroyed. By the treaty of Sarje Anjangaon concluded on 30 
December, 1803, Sindia “ceded to the Company all his forts, terri¬ 
tories and rights in the country situated between the Jamuna and 
the Ganga, also his territories with forts in the countries to the 
northward of those of the Rajas of Jaipur and Jodhpur. He like¬ 
wise ceded to the Company the fort of Broach and territory depend¬ 
ing thereon, the fort of Ahmadnagar and surrounding territory, all 
territories southward of the Ajanta hills including Jalnapur and 
Gandapur districts. He also renounced all claims on the British 
Government and their allies, the Subahdar of the Deccan, the 
Peshwd and Anand Rao Gaik war.” Sindia found it difficult to re¬ 
concile himself to such huge losses (almost one crore and 25 lakhs 
revenue) but the return of Gwalior and Gohad and the conciliatory 
policy initiated by Cornwallis brought him round and in 1804 he ac¬ 
cepted-even a subsidiary force of 6,000 regular infantry. 45 

The next ten or fifteen years Daulat Rao employed in reducing 
the numerous petty chieftains of Central India and adjoining terri¬ 
tories who owed him tribute. The curious may read of his activi¬ 
ties during the decade in Broughton’s Letters from the Mahratta 
Camp. 

Two events during the period deserve notice. One was Sharza 
Rao Ghatge’s violent end in 1809. Sharza Rao was killed by two of 
Sindia’s chiefs in a scuffle; and the other was Daulat Rao Sindia 
selecting a site near Gwalior in 1810 for pitching his camp. The 
camp developed into the chief town, superseding the former capital 
of Ujjain. 

The result of Sindia’s warfare in Central India was all-round 
devastation and the rising menace of the Pindaris. Once he was 
free from the Nepal war, Lord Hastings made grand preparations to 
put down the Pindaris. He peremptorily demanded of Sindia to 
join the British force or be prepared to face the consequences. 
Sindia meekly signed the treaty of Gwalior in November 1817, pro¬ 
mising the fullest co-operation. A readjustment of boundaries was 
effected. Daulat Rao died in March 1827 at the comparatively young 
age of forty-eight. A life of pleasure cut short a career which had 
witnessed momentous events. Broughton thus describes his appear¬ 
ance in 1809. “He is turned of thirty; about five feet five inches in 
height and inclined to be fat. His complexion is rather dark and 


266 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 


his features agreeable. But his appearance indicates a debauchee. 
He was dressed in a plain manner but wore several strings of pearls 
and uncut diamonds round his neck, of which he is particularly 
vain.” 46 

The Gwalior state about the middle of the last century was said 
to contain 2,500,000 souls and to yield a revenue of Rs. 95,00,000, 
quite considerable taking into account the losses incurred by the 
treaties of 1803, 1817 and 1844. 

V. The Holkars of Indore: 

The Holkar family is wide-spread all over Maharashtra. They 
belong to the shepherd caste, a sturdy tribe with habits of outdoor 
living and moving from one pasture to another. The transforma¬ 
tion of the Dhangars into Marathla warriors was therefore smooth 
and easily accounted for. The first of the Holkars to rise to emin¬ 
ence was Malhar Rao. The family’s first place of residence was 
Wafgaon in Khed taluka near Poona from which they moved to Hoi 
Murum near Jejuri on the Neera river, forty miles south-east of 
Poona. The Holkars take their name from the village of Hoi where 
Malhar Rao Holkar’s father, Khan<Juj!, was a respectable cultivator 
and chaugula. To him was born Malhar! on 16 March, 1693. The 
father died when Malhar! was barely three years old. The mother 
then left the village to stay with her brother Bhojraj Bargal at 
Talode in Khandesh district. The district was no man’s land, both 
the Mughuls and the Marathas claiming overlordship of the terri¬ 
tories. Bhojraj instead of tending sheep, had raised a pathak —a 
body of mounted troops with which he served under Kanthaj! Kadam 
Bande, and in which he accommodated his nephew as soon as he 
could ride a horse and wield a lance. The story recorded in Holkar 
Kaifiyat and repeated by Malcolm in his Central India, 1 of Malhar! 
tending a flock of sheep, falling into sleep and being protected by a 
cobra from the sun’s rays is apocryphal. Malhar Rao Holkar came 
to the notice of Peshwd Baj! Rao when he fought the Nizam in 1720. 
In 1721 Malhar Rao fell out with Bande 2 and entered the Peshwd’s 
services. His local knowledge of Khandesh topography was of 
great use to the Peshwd and his rise from that year was meteoric. 
In 17J25 he was granted the command of 500 horse and was active 
on the northern frontier of Khandesh. Holkar with Ranoj! Sindia 
and Udaj! Pawar took a leading part in the battle of Amjhera (29 
November, 1728) in which the Subdhdar of Malwa, Girdhar Baha¬ 
dur, 3 and his army defending the province were destroyed. From 


267 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


that date Malhar Rao became the right hand man of the Peshwa. in 
Malwa and all other northern enterprises. In 1730 he was appointed 
Subdhdar of Prant Malwa and was made responsible for the collec¬ 
tion of chauth from that province, with RanojI Sindia as his col¬ 
laborator. 4 

In the absence of the Peshwa in Malwa between 1729-1735 
Malhar Rao Holkar kept the Maratha flag flying in that region. He 
made the governorship of Muhammad Khan Bangash (1729-32) 
difficult by attacking him at Sarangpur in June 1731 and marching 
to Sironj next year. Bangash realised that he was no match for the 
numerous cavalry led by Holkar and came to an understanding, with 
the latter by granting him the chauth of Malwa. 5 

In Octooer, 1731, the Peshwa divided the work of realising the 
chauth of Malwa between Holkar, Sindia and the Pawars. 6 In 1733 a 
Maratha force under Holkar and Sindia surrounded the new subah - 
dar of Malwa, Sawai Jay Singh, near Mandasor and levied tribute 
from 28 pargands of the province. In 1734 they again entered 
Malwa, marched up to Bund! and seated on the Gadi the rightful 
heir, Budh Singh. 7 In February 1735 Holkar led a force against 
Khan Dauran Mir Bakhshi and crossing the Mukundra pass, cut the 
Mughul army’s line of communication. Khan Dauran’s allies, the 
Rajput Rajas, became anxious to save their kingdoms from devasta¬ 
tion. The Mir Bakhshi thus finding fighting to be useless, agreed to 
pay the Marathas 22 lakhs of rupees as chauth for Malwa and went 
back. 8 

In 1736 when the Peshwa led an expedition to the north, Holkar 
worked under him. As Abhay Singh of Marwar was opposing Mara¬ 
tha ambitions and had joined the Turani party at the Court, Holkar 
at the head of a large force marched into Marwar. He visited and 
laid under contribution Merta, Nagore, Ajmer. The talks with 
Sawai Jay Singh proved inconclusive and next year the Peshwa 
marched on to Delhi. Malhar Rao took conspicuous part in the 
fighting with Sa‘adat Khan and the imperial force outside the walls 
of the capital. 9 Next year he was present at the battle of Bhopal. 10 
After defeating the Nizam, Holkar and Sindia were sent against 
Kota. 11 When in 1741 the royal orders were issued appointing the 
Peshwa governor of Malwa, Holkar and Sindia appeared in the deed 
as guarantee for the Peshwa’s loyalty. 12 

Peshwa Baji Rao passed away in 1740 to be succeeded by his son 
BalajI. BalajI lacked the statesmanship and military leadership of 
his father and was not clear about Maratha ideals. His grand-father 

268 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 

and father had established friendly relations with the Rajput chiefs 
and it appeared that the Marathas in alliance with the Rajput chiefs, 
would form a great confederacy and bring Mughul rule under their 
joint control. But Balaji on the advice of Malhar Rao Holkar, 
worked against the healthy tradition of fraternising with the Rajput 
chiefs and started levying heavy tribute on them under the pretext 
of mediating in their succession disputes. Thus Jaipur, Jodhpur, 
Udaipur, Bundl, Kota and other Rajput states were alienated and 
the Marathas came to be looked on as enemies and found themselves 
isolated. 13 

Another reason for Maratha isolation was their association with 
the adventurer, Ghazi-ud-Din, the most unscrupulous man to be¬ 
come Vazir of the Mughul empire. He despoiled the royal palace, 
murdered one emperor and grossly mismanaged affairs. The sup¬ 
port lent to this diplomat brought great odium on the Marathas and 
made them enemies of the Mughul nobility. When Ahmad Shah 
Abdall invaded India on the appeal of Najib Khan, formed a league 
with the Rohillas and other Muslim chiefs, and surrounded the grand 
Maratha army at Panipat, no Indian power came to their rescue and 
their army was annihilated on 14 January, 1761. 

It was fortunate that Abdali did not stay in India after his 
victory at Panipat. Holkar who had escaped unscathed from that 
carnage, defeated a great Rajput rising at the battle of Mangrol (30 
November, 1761). 14 He went to the Deccan and helped the Peshwd 
win his spectacular victory over the Nizam at Rakshasbhuvan on 
10 August, 1763. 15 But Holkar’s cavalry armed mainly with swords 
and lances, was in no position to face the East India Company’s force 
fighting in formations with long-range fire arms like guns and can¬ 
non. Shuja-ud-daulah who had suffered at the hands of the English 
at the battle of Buxar in October, 1764, called in Malhar Rao Holkar 
to his aid. The British force advanced to Kora and routed the Mara¬ 
tha horse (3 May, 1765). 16 “The guerilla warfare of the Marathas 
was doomed.” 17 

Malhar Rao Holkar died next year at Alampur (40 miles from 
Gwalior) on 20 May 1766. 15 His only son, Khande Rao, had pre¬ 
deceased him, being killed by a stray shot fired from the walls of 
Kumbher. The succession descended to Malhar’s grandson, Male 
Rao. Male Rao sank into insanity and died within a year of his 
succession. 19 Khande Rao’s widow, Ahalya Bai, who was managing 
the j&gir during Malhar Rao’s last days, now became the head of the 
administration defeating the intrigue of Raghunath Rao and the Hol- 


269 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

kar’s Diwdn, Gangadhar Yashwant, to seize Holkar’s private trea¬ 
sure and put a minor on the Holkar Gadi. 2() 

She had offered to do Sati on the death of her husband but had 
been dissuaded from the extreme sacrifice by her grief-stricken father- 
in-law. She combined talent, virtue and energy which made her a 
blessing to the country over which she ruled. 

Ahalya Bai appointed Tukoji Holkar, a trusted officer of Malhar 
Rao Holkar but no relation, to the command of the army. The divid¬ 
ed authority continued for about thirty years undisturbed by jea¬ 
lousy or ambition. 21 The main reason for this was the competence 
with which Ahalya Bai managed the civil affairs, the support she 
gave to Sindia (Rs. 30 lakhs in loan) 22 and the sanctity she gained 
by her charities. Tukoji who owed his elevation to the lady, remain¬ 
ed content with military command. 

The private hoard of the family calculated at 20 lakhs of rupees 
remained with Ahalya Bai. Besides, she had personal estates yield¬ 
ing annually about four lakhs, which with the above hoard she ex¬ 
pended at her discretion. All the rest of government revenue was 
brought into a general account and applied to the general expendi¬ 
ture of the government. Accounts were kept with scrupulous ex¬ 
actness. After paying civil and military charges Ahalya Bai 
sent the balance to supply the exigencies of the army employed 
abroad. 23 

“The character of her administration was for more than 30 years 
the basis of the prosperity which attended the Holkar dynasty; it 
continued to sustain its rank during her life as one of the principal 
branches of the Maratha empire. The management of all the pro¬ 
vinces in Malwa and Nemaur was her peculiar department and her 
great object was, by just and moderate government, to improve the 
condition of the country, while she promoted the happiness of her 
subjects. She maintained but a small force, independent of the ter¬ 
ritorial militia, but her troops were sufficient, aided by the equity of 
her administration to preserve tranquillity; and she relied on the 
army of the State actively employed in Hindustan and the Deccan, 
and her own reputation, for safety against all external enemies.” 24 

Ahalya Bai took upon herself the direct management of affairs 
and sat everyday for a considerable time in open Durbar, transact¬ 
ing business. Her first principle was moderate assessment and 
sacred respect for the rights of village officers and proprietors of 
land, and quick justice. .She referred cases to courts of equity and 
arbitration ( Panchdyats ) and to her ministers for settlement, but 


270 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 


when appeals were made to her decision, she heard every complaint 
in person with great patience. 

The success of Ahalya Bai in the internal administration of her 
domains was altogether remarkable. Raj wade in the introduction 
to the first volume of his Sadhanen traces the failure of the Mara- 
thas in Hindustan to their failure to work out the ideal of Maha¬ 
rashtra Dharma in a wider perspective. If only they could have 
emulated Ahalya Bai and succeeded in evolving good and just ad¬ 
ministration in their northern conquests as the lady did, the people 
of Hindustan might have gladly accepted their rule. So efficient 
were the relations which Ahalya Bai established with foreign powers 
that her territories were rarely invaded during her life-time. She 
was indulgent to the peaceable class and just and considerate to¬ 
wards the predatory. She had no occasion to change her minister 
or her revenue collectors. Her capital, Indore, she always regarded 
with particular consideration; and under her fostering care, from a 
village, it developed into a prosperous city and wealthy mart for 
Malwa products. The fond object of her life was to promote the 
prosperity of all around her; she rejoiced when she saw bankers, 
merchants, farmers and cultivators rise to affluence and considered 
their prosperity a legitimate claim to increased favour and pro¬ 
tection. 

When the family treasure came into her possession, she appro¬ 
priated it for the purpose of charity and good works. She built 
several fords (Ghats) and at that of Jaum, constructed a linking 
road with great labour and cost over the Vindhya range. She spent 
considerable sums on religious edifices at Maheshwar and built many 
temples, rest-houses ( Dharmashdlds ) and wells throughout the 
Holkar dominions. But her munificence was not limited to her own 
territories; at all the places of Hindu pilgrimage in the east, west, 
north and south—Jagannath Puri, Dwaraka, Kedarnath and Ramesh- 
war—she built holy edifices, maintained establishments to feed the 
poor and the brahmins, and sent annual sums to be distri¬ 
buted in charity. Besides fixed annual disbursements to her esta¬ 
blishments at the holy shrines of India, proportionate sums were re¬ 
mitted to other sanctuaries. She also took pleasure in supplying 
holy Ganga water to many shrines in the south to wash the sacred 
deities. Religion was one of the elements which inclined her to 
these charities and good deeds; but they also proceeded from wisdom 
and benevolence. Like St. Francis of Assisi her compassion extend¬ 
ed not only to her own kind but also to beasts of the field, birds 
of the air and fish of the river. “The peasant near Maheshwar used 


271 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


in hot days to see his yoke of oxen stopped during their labour to 
be refreshed with water brought by a servant of Ahalya Bai; while 
fields she had purchased were covered with flocks of birds driven by 
cultivators from destroying their grain.” 25 She refused to be drawn 
in rivalry with Mahadji Sindia when he was extending his influence 
over imperial affairs and raising campoos (European trained infan¬ 
try) to beat down fyis enemies. Foreign diplomacy and conquests 
of the Maratha State she left to such stalwarts like Mahadji Sindia, 
Nana Phadnis, Haripant Phadke and Parashuram Bhau. On chari¬ 
ties she spent from her private sources. State revenues she applied 
tc State administration and this was the field in which she excelled. 
Under her careful management, the territories of Holkar enjoyed 
peace and prosperity unknown before and which no amount of mili¬ 
tary expenditure could have secured. She seems to have antici¬ 
pated long before, Morley’s dictum that “the distinctive mark of the 
true statesman is a passion for good, wise and orderly govern¬ 
ment.” 26 She won empire over the hearts of the people and was 
held in the highest regard by the neighbouring rulers, the Peshwu, 
the Nizam and even Tipu Sultan, and was sanctified during her life 
time. Sardesai’s judgement that “the pious lady Ahalya Bai could 
hardly control the disorder in her own house or the external politics 
in which Sindia now attained prominence;"while she was lavish in 
her charities, she did not see the necessity of improving her armies 
on the new model or of co-operating with Sindia,” 27 seems very un¬ 
charitable and perverse. To Sardesai perhaps, the blaring of war 
trumpets, the clattering of war horses and the roar of cannon sound¬ 
ed sweeter than the ringing of temple-bells and laughter of children 
in their farm-houses. 

The above eulogy of Ahalya Bai should not mislead the reader 
into the belief that Holkar’s force was turned into a peace corps 
after the death of Malhar Rao. It participated in the great northern 
expedition of 1769-72, fought in Gujarat, Konkan and at Talegaon, 
in the first Anglo-Maratha war. It again saw some fighting when 
the Peshwa led his forces against Tipu Sultan in 1786. 

The years 1788-93 the Holkars wasted in meaningless rivalry 
with Mahadji Sindia at Nana’s bidding. At Lakheri (1 June, 1793) 
the Holkar troops led by the braggart Malhar Rao Holkar were 
soundly beaten, thus ending a long family dispute. It was sad to see 
the two main props of the* Maratha confederacy working against each 
other and in the end weakening the entire structure. Mahadji died 
in 1794 to be followed by Ahalya Bai next year. Tukoji Holkar 
lingered on for another two years, but was too old and ill to take 


272 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 

any effective part in the diplomatic game that was then being play¬ 
ed between the great Nana Phadnis, the wicked Baji Rao Raghu- 
nath Peshwid and the youthful but unwise Daulat Rao Sindia. Nana 
was imprisoned and sent to Ahmadnagar fort. Two of Tukoji’s sons 
were eliminated in the time’s confusion. 28 The paralytic and im¬ 
becile Kashi Rao became a tool in the hands of Sindia. 

But the adherents of Holkar’s house gathered round the flag 
of Yashwant Rao Holkar who fled from Poona to Nagpur and then re¬ 
appeared in Malwa. Yashwant Rao gave out that he was fighting 
on behalf of the young Khande Rao to preserve the honour of the 
Holkar house. He raised an army into which all classes—Pindaris, 
Bhils, Afghans, Marathas and Rajputs were indiscriminately admit¬ 
ted. Yashwant Rao had no fixed country, so he sustained his huge 
army by all-round plunder. Holkar’s war with Daulat Rao Sindia 
has been treated in gruesome detail elsewhere • (Chapter XV). From 
their time began what is known in Maratha history as Gardi Ka Wakt 
or the period of trouble (1800-1818). Malwa never witnessed such 
devastation as it did in the two years, 1801 and 1802 when Sindia 
and Holkar were struggling to get the better of the other. Sindia 
offered to release Malhar Rao Holkar’s infant son and with him all 
the Holkar possessions if Yashwant Rao would cease from further 
spoliation of his territories. But the latter now came forward with 
fresh demands of cessions from Mahadji Sindia’s new conquests. On 
this being refused, Yashwant Rao prepared to carry on the war on 
an extended scale in a new theatre of war. He moved southward 
to the Deccan asking the Peshwa to mediate in the dispute. 29 The 
Peshwa, even if he meant to do so, was in no position to dictate to 
his powerful feudatories. A battle was fought between the two 
sides at Hadapsar on 25 October, 1802, in which the joint forces of 
the Peshwa and Sindia suffered a total defeat and Daulat Rao’s 
friend, the Peshwa, fled the capital. Yashwant Rao Holkar sent 
many messages to the Peshwa to return to his capital, assuring him 
of his loyalty and devotion. But the Peshwa felt he could save him¬ 
self and fight the peril only by purchasing military aid from the 
English. The latter were only too glad to extend to him the sub¬ 
sidiary alliance, make the Peshutfi their subordinate and break the 
power of the Maratha confederacy. Holkar tried to build an alli¬ 
ance sending envoys to the Nizam, Sindia and Bhosle. But such 
was the deep-rooted jealousy between the parties that they could 
not agree on a common programme. While the British were mak¬ 
ing military arrangements to break the power of the Maratha con¬ 
federates, the Marathas wasted time in fruitless negotiations. 

273 

M.S.-18 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


The Peshwd himself was dismayed by some of the articles in 
the treaty of Bassein. He sent out secret messages to Daulat Rao 
Sindia and the Bhosle to do something to save him from the British 
clutches. Daulat Rao Sindia came to the Deccan and made appeals 
to all Maratha chiefs to rescue the Peshwd from British captivity. 
But the appeal fell on deaf ears. Anand Rao Gaikwar and the Nizam 
had already bartered away their independence, the Patwardhans and 
the Rastes had been won over, and British diplomacy took care that 
Holkar would not join the confederates by putting in his hands some 
incriminating correspondence in which Sindia had declared his in¬ 
tentions of pursuing Holkar as soon as the English were out of the 
way. The new model army on which Sindia prided himself, was 
made innocuous by persuading the European officers to leave their 
commands. In five months’ campaigning, four major battles and 
three secondary actions had been fought. Sindia’s army of 40,000 
infantry and 60,000 cavalry was ground to dust and lost upwards of 
a thousand field guns. The only help Holkar gave to Sindia was his 
advice to fight in the Maratha style and not face the English with 
his regular army—advice to which Sindia did not pay much atten¬ 
tion. 

With superb Machiavellianism Yashwant Rao Holkar had held 
aloof from the confederacy in the hope that the war would be a 
long-drawn affair and that he would join it when both sides were 
exhausted and he could claim the credit for ultimate victory. The 
speed of the British victories however left him no chance to inter¬ 
vene. Overlooking the divided counsels among the Marathas he 
attributed the British success to the treachery of the French officers 
in Sindia’s service and the imbecility of the confederates in not pur¬ 
suing the traditional warfare and foraging in the enemy’s country 
with their light cavalry and conserving their infantry and guns 
under the protection of their forts. 

Meanwhile when Sindia and Bhosle were fighting the British, 
Holkar left the Deccan, plundered Ujjain, Mandasor and then march¬ 
ed towards Jaipur levying tribute on the Rajput Rajas. The Rajputs 
had accepted British suzerainty and Holkar’s action was thus a chal¬ 
lenge to the Company’s authority. The British for a time took no 
notice of Holkar’s activities as they had the war on their hand. But 
Lord Wellesley, Governor-General, had marked out Yashwant Rao 
Holkar for punishment when a convenient time came. He wrote to 
Lord Lake on 9 January, 1804, “the authority exercised by Jeswant 
Rao Holkar, in the name of Khande Rao over the possessions of Holkar 
family is manifestly an usurpation of the rights of Cashi Rao Holkar, 


274 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 

the legitimate heir and successor of Tukoji Holkar. Consistently 
therefore with the principles of justice no arrangement can. be pro¬ 
posed between the British Government and Jeswant Rao which 
would exclude Cashi Rao from his hereditary dominions.” 30 

“Under the Peshwa’s authority the British Government would 
be justified in adopting measures for the limitation of Jeswant Rao’s 
power and the restoration of Cashi Rao’s rights either by force or 
compromise, and the spirit of our engagements with the Peshwa im¬ 
poses on us obligations to conjply with a requisition from the Peshwa: 
of this sort.” 31 The real reason for the Governor-General’s solici¬ 
tude for Kashi Rao Holkar’s legitimate rights was Yashwant Rao 
Holkar’s “enterprising spirit, military character and ambitious views 
which rendered the reduction of his power a desirable object with 
reference to the complete establishment of tranquillity in India,” or 
in other words, British supremacy in India. 

By article 12 of the treaty of Bassein, the Peshwa “engaged 
never to commit any act of aggression against any of the principal 
branches of the Mahratta empire”, and Arthur Wellesley was assur¬ 
ing Holkar that ‘so long as you do not interfere with the legitimate 
interest of the Company, or their allies, we have no desire to come 
in your way’. The Governor-General, however, took the opposite 
view and told Lord Lake on 17 January, 1804 to convey to Yashwant 
Rao Holkar that “the British Government was disposed to arbitrate 
the differences between him and his half-brother and to adjust the 
claims of the several branches of the family on the principles of 
equity and justice.” Wellesley held that it was his business 
to settle every one else’s business on the lines that seemed to him 
right—on the lines that gave the British supremacy op the 
Indian continent. Yashwant Rao Holkar not only rejected the offer, 
but sent his vakil to Sindia proposing an alliance and renewal of 
war. He also wrote letters to the Rajas of Nagpur, Jodhpur, Macheri 
and several other chiefs calling upon them to rise against the all- 
grasping power of the British. Wisdom had dawned on Yashwant 
Rao rather late and the appeal had been made to the victims of his 
rapacity, and they were too glad to forward these letters to the Bri¬ 
tish Commander-in-Chief, Lord Lake. 

To Lord Lake who had offered to mediate in his dispute and 
arrange his affairs, Yashwant Rao sent in March, 1804, several ex¬ 
travagant proposals. He asked for Haryana and territory in 
Bundelkhand, and districts in the Ganga-Jamuna Doab formerly 
held by his family, as well as what he now occupied; also that his 


275 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

right to levy chaiuth on other districts should be recognised. 32 These 
proposals were rejected and Holkar was asked to return to his own 
dominions before any talks could start with him. Holkar wrote to 
Arthur Wellesley and the Governor-General in defiant terms. If 
his request was not acceded to, he declared “countries of many hun¬ 
dred coss should be overrun and burnt. That the Commander-in- 
Chief should not have leisure to breathe for a moment and that cala¬ 
mities should fall on lacs of human beings by the attacks of Holkar’s 
army which overwhelms like the waves of sea.” 33 

On 16 April, 1804, war was declared against Holkar both in 
Hindustan and the Deccan. “The basis of that plan was a com¬ 
bination of the movements and operations of the British troops and 
those of Daulat Rao Sindia and Gaikwar acting against the forces 
and territories of Holkar from Gujarat, Malwa and the Deccan, while 
the main British army pursued Holkar from Hindustan.” 34 

But nothing worked according to plan. “Holkar’s power resid¬ 
ed not in the extent of his territory, but in the number of his ad¬ 
herents. His standard was the common rallying point of all the dis¬ 
banded soldiery of upper India and such other restless spirits. His 
empire indeed was the empire of the saddle. Holkar was bold, law¬ 
less and unscrupulous and he had sixty-thousand horsemen and an 
imposing park of artillery at his call.” 35 Holkar was not going to 
fight pitched battles and throw his men against cannon; he reverted 
to guerilla tactics and fought in the traditional Maratha style. 

There were four main phases of the war. Lake opened the offen¬ 
sive with a thrust southwards through Central India, preceded by a 
detachment under Col. Monson, while Col. John Murray began an 
advance on Indore with another force from Gujarat. Monson and 
Murray were to join their forces. But the plan miscarried and 
Monson after having advanced fifty miles in Holkar’s territory be¬ 
yond Mukundra pass, began his disastrous retreat on 8 July. Hol¬ 
kar’s full fury was let loose on his five battalions, six companies and 
3,000 irregular horse. Next day the irregular horse was attacked 
and destroyed. The Raja of Kota refused to give shelter to Monson’s 
battalions and the troops plodded on through the quagmire that 
Malwa had become in torrential rains. The rivers had swollen and 
become impassable. Puns had to be spiked and abandoned. While 
crossing rivers and nallahs British troops were attacked by Holkar’s 
hordes at Rampura, Khushalgarh and Hindaun. On 31 August the 

broken army reached Agra in a state of utter demoralisation and 
disorder. 


276 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 


Yashwant Rao Holkar was now the man of the hour. Round 
his standard gathered thousands of soldiers released from service in 
the armies of Sindia and Bhosle. With his ranks swollen to near¬ 
ly 1,00,000 men Yashwant Rao returned to Hindustan, flushed with 
victory. He triumphantly marched to Mathura, which the British 
abandoned. All Hindustan lay within Holkar’s grasp and for a mo¬ 
ment it looked as if “he would succeed in restoring Maratha supre¬ 
macy over India.” 36 

But Holkar made a serious mistake; he remained revelling at 
Mathura for four precious weeks with the stocks of wine and liquor 
abandoned by the British. Thus, when he made an attempt to 
storm Delhi and take possession of the emperor in October, it was 
too late. The enemy had used the respite to put the capital’s de¬ 
fences in proper shape. 

In the meanwhile the British Commander-in-Chief was not lying 
idle. He left Kanpur on 3 September and arrived within the vici¬ 
nity of Agra on 22 September. He pushed on to Delhi and on 18 
October Delhi was relieved. 

Foiled in his attempt to occupy the capital, Holkar now deter¬ 
mined to harass the enemy in the true Maratha style. He sent his 
infantry and heavy artillery to the protection of the fort of Dig and 
himself moved northward and then crossed into the Doab below 
Panipat. Lake was confronted with a difficult choice; he had to pur¬ 
sue Holkar and at the same time destroy his infantry. He divided 
his forces, sent Col. Frazer with infantry and artillery against Dig, 
while he himself started in pursuit of Yashwant Rao who threaten¬ 
ed to lay waste the Doab and the Nawab Vazvr’s territory. Holkar’s 
infantry was brought to battle on 13 November and scattered to four 
winds. Four days later at Farrukhabad, Lake was able to surprise 
Holkar’s cavalry while the men were lying asleep. The 60,000 
cavalry force which had accompanied Holkar to Farrukhabad was 
reduced to half its size. 

Holkar’s power was broken. For a while he sustained his posi¬ 
tion by the valiant defence his force, joined by the Jats, made at 
Rharatpur. Sindia declared that he intended to march to Bharat- 
pur to mediate between the warring parties. But the Jat Raja made 
a treaty with the British on 17 April 1805 and Holkar retreated from 
Hindustan with an army defeated and disgraced and with its equip¬ 
ment lost. 

The two defeated leaders met at Sabalgarh in May; despite 
early fraternizing, differences soon appeared. Sindia did not like 


277 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


to be “subjected to frequent demands of a pecuniary nature and the 
outrageous insolence with which these requisitions are insisted on 
by Jaswant Rao Holkar.” 37 Sindia and Holkar parted company, 
Holkar resting with his diminished army in Mewar. He then pro¬ 
ceeded to the Punjab hoping Ranjit Singh and the Afghans beyond 
Punjab might rise with him against the British. But Ranjit Singh 
gave no encouragement to Holkar’s chimerical scheme and Yashwant 
Rao was too glad to come to an understanding with the British by 
the treaty of Rajpoor Ghat on 24 December, 1805. 38 By the treaty 
Yashwant Rao was recognised as the legal ruler of the Holkar family 
in Mewar, Malwa and Haroti; Chandore and Amber were to be res¬ 
tored to the family after two years. 

Yashwant Rao’s health had been undermined by nine years’ 
long struggle and habits of a dissipated life. After returning from 
the Punjab he started casting cannon and attempting improvements 
in his army with an ardour and violence that indicated the onset of 
insanity. The defeat had unsettled his mind and he soon sank into 
complete insanity in which condition he lingered till his death on 
20 October, 1811. 

Yashwant Rao Holkar is idolised in certain quarters because he 
inflicted a crushing defeat on a British force and gave them some 
anxious time. But after watching his career one cannot but come 
to the conclusion that he was not the man who could have revived 
Maratha glory. He lacked Shivaji’s virtue and his organizing capa¬ 
city. 

Yashwant Rao left behind a son, Malhar Rao. During his mino¬ 
rity the regency was assumed by Yashwant Rao’s favourite mistress 
Tulsa Bai. But there was utter chaos in the State and the army 
became insubordinate. When Tulsa Bai tried to come to an under¬ 
standing with the British Government she was murdered. Holkar’s 
army sustained a complete defeat at Mahidpur. On 6 January, 1818, 
the treaty of Mandasor was concluded by which Holkar gave up all 
his claims to territories in Rajputana, Khandesh, Bundelkhand, 
agreed to keep a small force of 3,000 and accepted a subsidiary force. 39 
Holkar’s independence was gone and the State lingered on as a feu¬ 
datory of the British Government. 


VI. The Gaikwars of Baroda: 

The house of the Gaikwars of Baroda was considered as one of 
the four pillars of Maratha Confederacy, though the Gaikwars, for 


278 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 


a long time, did not owe allegiance to the Peshwas, considering 
themselves as subordinates to the Sendpati. After the defeat and 
death of Trimbak Rao Dabhade Sendpati in April 1731 at the battle 
of Dabhoi, the house of the Sendpati exerted little influence over the 
army or the province of Gujarat. It was in 1751 that Damaji Gaik- 
war who had revolted against the Peshwd, was brought to heel, sur¬ 
rendered half of Gujarat to the Peshwd and agreed to accept his 
hegemony. 

The Gaikwars were the hereditary Patels of Davdi, a village near 
Talegaon in Poona district, and rose in the services of Sendpati 
Dabhade. They were associated with the Sendpati from the begin¬ 
ning in the conquest of the province of Gujarat. The founder of 
the house was Damaji, grandson and son of Nandaji and KerojI res¬ 
pectively. He so distinguished himself in the battle of Balapur 
(1720) that on his return to Satara, the Sendpati recommended his 
lieutenant to the Raja’s notice, in the warmest terms. 1 Unfortunate¬ 
ly Damaji died too soon to enjoy the favours of the Raja. Khande 
Rao Dabhade was advanced in years and though he participated in 
the Karnatak campaign of 1725-26, and in the Palkhed campaign 
(1728), against the Nizam, he had lost his vigour and left affairs to 
his son Trimbak Rao and his subordinate PilajI Gaikwar. 

The decade from 1721 to 1731 forms a period of great confusion 
in the history of Gujarat. Maratha armies had entered the province 
of Gujarat and levied contributions there since the first decade of 
the 18th century. Raja Shahu, therefore, in the draft treaty he sent 
to Sayyid Husain ‘All in 1718, had demanded the chauth of Gujarat 
and Malwa, along with that of the six subdhs of Deccan. This had 
been refused in the final treaty, the emperor conceding only the 
chauth of the Deccan. But Baglan and Gujarat were assigned to 
Sendpati Dabhade as his sphere of activity and he was asked to 
make good his claims by arms. This was the time when the Mughul 
empire was crumbling and governors of distant provinces like 
Nizam-ul-Mulk, ‘All VardI Khan, Sa‘adat Khan and others were be¬ 
coming independent and carving out kingdoms, and petty Musalman 
Amirs like the governors of Surat, Broach and Cambay were be¬ 
coming Nawabs. The Marathas posed a serious challenge to Mughul 
authority. Peshwd BajI Rao, Malharjl and PilajI Gaikwar invaded 
Mughul provinces of Khandesh, Balaghat, Gujarat and Malwa. 

The last three had for their objective the conquest of Gujarat 
which they carried out sometimes in combination, sometimes inde¬ 
pendently of each other. The prize in the beginning was not the 


279 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

acquisition of territory, but the right to extract from the emperor’s 
viceroy the chauth or fourth part of the revenues. 

Pilajl, the adopted son of DamajI, was first given the command 
of about fifty horse and was stationed at Navapura. Pilajl soon join¬ 
ed the main force of the Sendpati at Talegaon. Owing to his saga¬ 
city and energy he rose to the leadership of a pdgu. He took his 
post at Songarh (border of Surat district), a hill in the wilderness 
difficult of access, belonging to Bhils and Kolis of the region. Son¬ 
garh henceforth became the cradle of the Gaikwar house. 

Pilajl conciliated the local hill-people and made an alliance with 
the Raja of Rajpipla, and started systematically encroaching on 
Gujarat. In 1720 he made an excursion into northern Gujarat and 
obtained a portion of the chauth of that part of Gujarat. In 1723 
he marched on Surat and defeated the governor of that place, Momin 
Khian, after which his levy of chauth in Surat athavisi became a 
•regular feature. In his enterprise he was joined by the Desais or 
Patels of Padra, Chhani and Bhayali in the Baroda pargana. Their 
local knowledge of the region was of great value to Pilajl Gaikwar. 

While Pilajl was operating in south Gujarat, the Peshwd invited 
UdajI Pa war to co-operate with him in Malwa and the bordering dis¬ 
tricts of north Gujarat. He gave him a letter (3 December, 1722) 
that the Pawars would receive for their services twenty-five per cent 
of the entire mokassa or revenue of Gujarat. Another chief who 
was active in the region was KanthajI Kadam Bande who had esta¬ 
blished himself in north Khandesh and carried raids both in Malwa 
and Gujarat. 

The situation in Gujarat became further complicated by the fre¬ 
quent changes in the governorship of the province. Haidar Quli 
Khan, emperor Muhammad Shah’s favourite, took over as Subahdar 
in June, 1722, but quit the province within less than a year (16 
February, 1723). Nizam-ul-Mulk who was then functioning as Vazir, 
took upon himself the governorship and appointed his uncle Hamid 
Khan as deputy governor (12 February, 1723). Nizam-ul-Mulk did 
not retain the province long. He resigned the office of Vazir 
and with it the governorship of Gujarat and Malwa in December, 
1723. 

Sarbuland Khan Mubariz-ul-Mulk was the next governor. He 
nominated Shuja‘at Khan, a local nobleman, as his deputy and Rus¬ 
tam ‘All Khan as governor of Surat. The official orders about the 
new changes reached Ahmadabad in August 1724. The new deputy 
asked peremptorily the man in office, Hamid Khan, to vacate the 


280 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 


governor^ palace in the city. He trained guns on the palace to 
force Hamid Khan to leave the city immediately. Hamid Khan left 
the city and reaching Dohad, 110 miles from the capital, reported 
the matter to his patron, Nizam-ul-Mulk. The Nizam was sour with 
the Court for the shabby treatment meted out to him and to his 
followers and entered into engagements with Kanthaji Kadam 
Bande offering him the chauth of Gujarat in return for assistance 
to his uncle Hamid Khan. At the end of the rainy season Kanthaji 
joined Hamid Khan with 20,000 horse and marched on Ahmadabad. 
Shuja'at Khan was taken unawares. About four kos from the city 
his force was attacked and dispersed by the allies, Shuja‘at Khan 
himself being killed. On the next day (17 December, 1724) Hamid 
Khan re-entered the city from which he had been driven out five 
months back. The chavCth and sardeshmukhi of Gujarat was gran¬ 
ted to Kanthaji. He sent out his agents to Viramgaon to levy ran¬ 
som. Meanwhile Hamid Khan turned out the imperial officers and 
took possession of the province. Henceforward the revenues of the 
province were lost to the emperor. 

As soon as the news of the revolt of Hamid Khan reached Delhi, 
orders were issued by the Court to Rustam ‘Ali Khan, Governor of 
Surat, to draw money from Surat treasury and raise a force to op¬ 
pose Hamid Khan. He offered terms of alliance to PilajI Gaikwar, 
and with his new ally, marched from Surat to Ahmadabad. The 
two forces sighted each other near Aras on* 7 February, 1725. Dur¬ 
ing the night Hamid Khan sent his agents to PilajI Gaikwar and won 
him over. When, on the next day, issues were joined, Rustam ‘All 
Khan found himself deserted by his Maratha ally and was over¬ 
whelmed by the joint forces of Hamid Khan and Kanthaji Kadam 
Bande. Then Hamid Khan bestowed on PilajI Gaikwar half of the 
chauth of Gujarat which he had promised to Kanthaji. Naturally 
the two Maratha allies of Hamid Khan came to blows over the spoils 
and fought each other near Cambay. Hamid Khan needed the sup¬ 
port of his two allies, and interceding, granted the chauth of north 
Gujarat to Kadam Bande, and of south Gujarat to PilajI Gaikwar. 2 

Sarbuland Khan’s governorship proved altogether ineffective. 
He drove out Hamid Khan but was powerless against Maratha hordes. 
He came to an understanding with the Peshwd by granting him 
chauth of Gujarat. Dabhade Sendpati resented this intrusion in his 
sphere. The rivalry between the two Maratha chiefs ended in the 
Senapati’s defeat at Dabhoi in 1731. (For details see Chapter IV). 
The Peshwd’s action was resented at the Court and he was asked to 
restore the Gujarat tribute to the Sendpati’s successor. 


281 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Having established his primacy among Maratha chiefs, Peshwa 
BajI Rao in deference to the Raja’s wishes, withdrew from Gujarat 
for a while. The post of Sendpati was conferred on Trimbak Rao’s 
younger brother, Yashwant Rao. Uma Bai, the mother of Trimbak 
Rao, became the guardian of the young man, and Pilaji Gaikwar 
worked as his deputy. The Gaikwar had now at his disposal the 
resources of the Sendpati. He was the master of Songarh, Baroda 
and Dabhoi, and was the ally of the Bhils and Kolis of the region 
and the friend of the local zaminddrs. He almost overwhelmed the 
Subdhdar, Abhay Singh. Abhay Singh resorted to treachery to get 
rid of his enemy. He invited Pilaji to a conference at Dakore and 
had him murdered. But the foul deed brought him no advantage. 
PilajI’s son, Damaji, took the field against the Subdhdar, and with 
his allies of the hills, marched on Ahmadabad, sending a part of his 
horse into Marwar. Abhay Singh retired to Jodhpur to defend his 
patrimony, leaving Ratan Singh Bhandari to oppose the Marathas. 
Ratan Singh could not succeed where his master, with greater re¬ 
sources, had failed. Baroda was reoccupied by the Gaik wars in 
1734. In 1735 the chauth of the northern half of Gujarat passed to 
the Gaikwar after he had defeated his rival Bande at Anand Mogri, 
25 miles south-east of Kaira and expelled him from that district. 
In 1737 the viceroyalty of the province was transferred to Momin 
Khan, the Governor of Cambay. Finding that he could not drive 
out the Marwaris without external aid, he invited Damaji Gaikwar 
to his help promising him half the revenue of Gujarat, except that 
from his own jdgir lands in Ahmadabad and Cambay. The alliance 
was kept up till the death of Momin Khan, which occurred in 1743. 
In 1738 Ratan Singh Bhandari was driven out of Ahmadabad. 
Damaji Gaikwar came to occupy half the city of Ahmadabad, sup^ 

pressed Kolis round Viramgaon, increased his hold over Sorath and 

_ ' ^ . 

took Bansda. He became master of considerable territory in Gujarat 
and the real chief of his party, as Yashwant Rao Dabhade though 
nominally Sendpati, was lacking in the qualities of leadership. The 
next Viceroy, Fakhr-ud-daulah continued the alliance with the Gaik- 
wars and granted them the districts of Borsad and Nadiad for the 
aid he received. 3 

The years 1750-52 were a critical period in Maratha history and 
proved a turning point in the fortunes of the Gaikwars. Raja Shahu 
died in December, 1749 and was succeeded by Tara Bai’s grandson, 
Ram Raja. Tara Bai nursed ambitions to carry on the administra¬ 
tion in the name of her grandson. She clashed with the Peshwd 
who had become the hereditary chief minister of the Chhatrapati. 


282 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 

Tara Bai tried to align the Maratha chiefs against the Brahmin 
Peshwd. The only Maratha chief to respond to her call was Damaji 
Gaikwar who considered himself as deputy of the Senapati and as 
such standing in special relationship with the Crown. 

Damaji Gaikwar responded to the dowager queen’s call and 
with an army of 15 r 000 strong, started raiding the Peshwd's terri¬ 
tory. On 18 February, 1751, an action was fought between the 
Peshwd’s troops and those of the Gaikwar at Bahadurpura in Khan- 
desh. Brushing aside the Peshwd's troops^ Damaji marched on to 
Satara* by way of Sangamner, Davdi, Pabal. The Peshwd’s forces 
challenged the Gaikwar on the Venya river near Satara, defeated 
him and trapped his force in Satara on 15 March, 1751. 4 At the end 
of ^April the Peshwd arrived on the scene and demanded twenty-five 
lakhs of rupees as military reparations and half of the province of 
Gujarat. When the Gaikwar would not consent, the Peshwd plun¬ 
dered his camp on 30 April and confined Damaji Gaikwar and his 
nominal master, Dabhade. After much parleying between the two 
sides which dragged on for a year, the Gaikwar “agreed to pay fifteen 
lakhs as arrears; he also agreed to maintain 10,000 horse and to aid 
the Peshwd when called on to do so; his yearly tribute was fixed at 
five lakhs and twenty-five thousand rupees, besides a sum for the 
maintenance of the Dabhade Senapati. Above all, he consented to 
part with half of his dominions and to account for all future con¬ 
quests in money or in land at the same rate. In return, the Peshwd 
bound himself to assist Damaji in the capture of Ahmadabad and 
the expulsion from Gujarat of the Mughul government”. By the 
arrangement, the Peshwd obtained in Gujarat territory ;worth 
Rs. 24,68,700 and the Gaikwar Rs. 23,72,500. The curious may ob¬ 
tain the details of the transaction from Appendix IV in Elliot’s 
book. 5 

From this date, the Gaikwar became a subordinate tributary of 
the Peshwd paying him tribute or falling in arrears. The subordi¬ 
nate position was acknowledged by the Gaikwars, but it needed one 
more struggle and defeat to rivet it firmly. After this event which 
occurred in 1768 just before Damaji’s death, the Sanad of appoint¬ 
ment of successive Gaikwars was granted by the Peshwd, exacting a 
ncuzardhd on the occasion, up to the end of 1798. The Gaikwars paid 
the Peshwd in tribute Rs. 2,96,98,644. A sum of Rs. 65,70,000 was 
remitted and still there was a balance of Rs. 39,82,798, which was 
never paid. 

The partition of Gujarat took place in 1752. Immediately after 
the release of Damaji in 1753, a combined Maratha army led by 


283 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Damaji Gaikwar, the Peshwd's brother Raghunath Rao, Vithal Shiv- 
deo Vinchurkar and Naro Shankar Raje Bahadur, undertook the siege 
of Ahmadabad. The capital of Musalman kings for over three cen¬ 
turies was stoutly defended by Jawan Mard Khan Babi. After a 
long investment Babi surrendered the capital city on 20 March and 
retired to his jdgir at Radhanpur. 

In 1756 the Nawab of Cambay seized the city while the Maratha 
Siibdhdar was away at Poona. DamajI Gaikwar recovered it from 
the Nawab after some arduous fighting. 

In 1760 Damaji joined the Peshwd’s army marching to Hindus¬ 
tan to seek the Abdall. He gave a good account of himself in the 
bloody battle of Fanipat, assisting Ibrahim Khan Gardi to destroy 
the right wing of the enemy’s army. He was one of the chiefs who 
returned home unscathed. Immediately after the disaster of Pani- 
pat, the Nawabs of Radhanpur, Palanpur, Cambay and other places 
rose against Maratha rule. Damaji put down the revolts; between 
the years 1763-66 he dispossessed the children of Kamal-ud-din Babi 
of Patan, Visalnagar, Vadnagar, Kheralu and Vijapur. In 1763 he 
took part in the battle of Rakshasbhuvan against the Nizam, and his 
horse materially contributed to the final victory. 

Damaji Gaikwar had come to cultivate friendly relations with 
Raghunath Rao since 1753. He supported the uncle Raghunath 
against the Peshwd. At the battle of Dhodap in 1768, a Gaikwar 
contingent under DamajI’s son Govind Rao, fought against the 
Peshwa and was defeated. Govind Rao was taken prisoner. “For 
his part in the civil strife Damaji was fined Rs. 23,25,000 and hig 
arrears of tribute for three years preceding were fixed at 
Rs. 18,75,000.” 6 The annual tribute was raised to Rs. 7,79,000 but 
his military service was reduced to four thousand cavalry. 

Damaji died op 18 August, 1768, before the agreement had been 
finally concluded. By far he was the ablest of the Gaikwar family. 
He brought practically the whole of Gujarat, including Kathiawar 
under his rule, expelling the Muslim nawabs of the province. His 
acceptance of the overlordship of the Peshwd brought him in the 
Maratha confederacy and was a source of. strength so long as the 
confederacy remained united and an active force. His friendship 
and loyalty to the uncle Raghunath drew on him the wrath of 
Peshwd Madhav Rao and the Gaikwar State was burdened with huge 
demands by way of outstanding tribute, fines and nazardnds in the 
next two decades. In fact, the history of the State till the close of 
the century is not the story of further conquests and wise adminis- 


284 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 


tration, but a sickening tale of fratricidal strife between members of 
the Gaikwar family, and the intercession of the Peshwa’s govern¬ 
ment and the Company’s government to satisfy their own ends, of 
which we will take only a brief notice. 

After Damaji’s death, the Peshwd decided the succession in 
favour of his son, Govind Rao, who agreed to serve the Peshwd with 
4,000 horse, pay a fine of 23 lakhs of rupees, a nazarand of twenty 
lakhs and the balance of last year’s tribute of seven lakhs—altogether 
fifty lakhs of rupees in cash. Govind Rao, who had been detained ip 
Poona after the battle of Dhodap, was unable to raise such a huge 
amount. His younger brother, Fateh Singh, who was ambitious and 
could change sides quicker than the chameleon his colours, now came 
forward to negotiate another settlement in favour of the eldest son 
Sayaji, born of the second wife of Damaji. Sayaji had been passed 
over because he was an imbecile. But he obtained recognition by 
the settlement of 1771, effected by Fateh Singh. Fateh Singh paid 
the nazarand on succession and became the Mutaliq or deputy to the 
Senrikhaskhel. Under the new arrangement, Govind Rao was to re¬ 
main satisfied with a jaglr worth three lakhs per annum and was to 
stay at the ancestral place of the Gaikwars, Davdi. The two brothers 
Govind Rao and Fateh Singh became bitter • enemies and fought on 
opposite sides in the first Anglo-Maratha war. Their wrangling con¬ 
tinued even after the conclusion of Anglo-Maratha hostilities. An¬ 
other member of the family, Khande Rao', a brother of Damaji took 
sides in the dispute of the brothers as suited his interest best. 

Fateh Singh when he returned from Poona in 1772, secured also 
non-compliance of the service clause on condition that he paid an¬ 
nually a sum of Rs. 14,54,000 for the tribute and remission of ser¬ 
vice as well. Though unhappy with the burden, Fateh Singh, for 
the time being, pretended to be pleased with the terms. 

In the meanwhile a civil war had broken out at Poona. Madhav 
Rao Peshwd died in November, 1772, and his brother Narayan Rao 
who had succeeded him in the Peshwdship, was murdered in August, 
1773. Raghunath Rao who became Peshwd , immediately recognised 
Govind Rao as Senakhaskhel and chief of the Gaikwar fief and sent 
him to Baroda to claim his patrimony. Raghunath was not destin¬ 
ed to remain Peshwd for long. A league of the Kdrbharis (coun¬ 
cillors) known as the Bdrbhdis was formed against him and drove 
him out of Poona. Raghunath Rao fled before the confederate army, 
and with a small force, joined Govind Rao Gaikwar at Baroda on 
3 January, 1775. Here he was pursued by the army of the confede- 


285 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


rates and defeated at Anand Mogri near Aras on 17 February, 1775. 
Raghunath fled by way of Cambay to Surat, and Govind Rao Gaik- 
war with the remnant of the army, fell back on Kapadvanj. At 
Surat Raghunath Rao concluded a treaty with the English on 6 
March, 1775, invoking their military aid in his hour of crisis. An 
English force of 2,500 strong, with cannon and other military equip¬ 
ment was to take the field on his behalf, for which he agreed to pay 
a lakh and a half rupees per month, and to cede in perpetuity Bas- 
sein with its dependencies, Salsette and other islands, the districts 
of Jambusar, Olpad and part of Ankalesar. 7 

Col. Keating’s campaign against the Marathas was not much of 
a success; in three months’ time the force had marched from Cambay 
to Dabhoi, a distance of about 100 miles only. 8 The Supreme Gov¬ 
ernment at Calcutta on I being informed of the proceedings of the 
Bombay Government, declared the treaty concluded with Raghoba 
(Raghunath Rao) invalid and the Maratha war as ‘impolitic, dange¬ 
rous, unauthorized and unjust’, and asked the ‘Bombay Government 
to withdraw its force to its garrison’. 9 However, there was one dis¬ 
tinct gain. Fateh Singh Gaikwar had changed sides and gone over 
to the English. 

When war again broke out between the Marathas and the 
English two years later (1778), Gujarat became the battle-field and 
General Goddard found it easy to win over the old ally, Fateh Singh 
Gaikwar. A treaty of offensive and defensive alliance was conclud¬ 
ed between the two parties on 26 January, 1780 at Kandila near 
Dabhoi. By the treaty the Peshwa’s share of the territory north of 
the Mahi river was to be given to Fateh Singh, in lieu of which he 
agreed to cede his share of the revenue of the districts known as 
Surat Athavisi , of Broach and of Sinnore on the Narmada to the 
British. Fateh Singh was to aid Goddard with three thousand horse. 

After the conclusion of the treaty, the allies marched on Ahma- 
dabad and took it by assault on 15 February, 1780, whereupon it 
was delivered to Fateh Singh. 10 He, in turn, surrendered to the 
English the districts in Surat Athavisi, retaining only Songarh. God¬ 
dard later tried to surprise Mahadji Sindia and Holkar, but the fight¬ 
ing was inconclusive. Fateh Singh, to the end, succeeded in defend¬ 
ing Gujarat against the allies’ troops. In the year 1781 fighting 
moved away from Gujarat to Konkan. Goddard’s troops were much 
harassed by Maratha horse when they tried to cross the Ghats. Nana 
Phadnis, in the meanwhile, to remove the enemy’s pressure, for¬ 
getting old animosities, forged an alliance with Haidar ‘All, the 


286 


i 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 


Nizam and the Bhosle of Nagpur. The resources of the Company’s 
government were stretched to the utmost limits and Hastings in 
order to detach the Marathas from the alliance, concluded with them 
a treaty (Treaty of Salbai) on May 17, 1782. Article VIII of the 
treaty provided that “the territory which has long been the jdcfir of 
SayajI and Fateh Singh Gaikwar, shall forever hereafter remain on 
the usual footing in his possession; and the said Fateh Singh shall 
pay for the future to the Peshwa the tribute as usual previous to 
the present war, and shall perform such services and be subject to 
such obedience as have long been established and customary. No 
claim shall be made on the said Fateh Singh by the Peshwa for the 
period that is past.” 11 Thus after a five years’ war, Fateh Singh 
was left in possession of all the territory he possessed at its com¬ 
mencement, while the Peshwa was not to claim from him any arrear 
of tribute which had fallen due during the period of the war. The 
Gaikwar’s status was acknowledged to be that of a jagirddr of the 
Maratha State and he was to render the usual service to the 
Peshwa. 

Fateh Singh died in December, 1789. Between the period of 
the conclusion of the treaty of Salbai (1782) and his death, he con¬ 
ducted the administration with great cleverness and prudence. For 
defence of his jdgtr he began engaging large bodies of foreign mer¬ 
cenaries and others, who later were to bring on the State disaster 
and ruin. Fateh Singh can be credited to have managed the State 
with ability during his stewardship. 

Goyind Rao was by far now the most lawful heir. But he lack¬ 
ed monetary resources, and another son, Manaji, conducted the re¬ 
gency for the next four years, by promising to pay the Poona Court 
the huge sum of sixty-nine lakhs of rupees by way of Nazarand and 
arrears of tribute. Manaji died on 1 August, 1793 and SayajI pre¬ 
deceased him in 1792. The field was now clear for Govind Rao. 
But the Poona Government would not recognise his right to succes¬ 
sion unless he agreed to pay a nazarand of Rs. 56,38,000, the arrears 
of Rs. 43,00,000 which represented tribute and the remission for 
service, and the debts of Manaji amounting to Rs. 20,00,000, alto¬ 
gether amounting to a crore and twenty lakhs of rupees. For meet¬ 
ing these demands he was asked to surrender all jewellery, treasure 
and cloth in the Baroda treasury and palace and to part with the 
Gaikwar territory south of the Tapi river. The impression spread 
that Nana Phadnis was resolved to ruin the Gaikwar family by the 
dismemberment of the Baroda State. But the British Resident at 
Poona intervened; Malet reported that “a formal retraction (of its 


287 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


usurpation of Gaikwar territory) was effected by his interposition 
in a very delicate manner.” 12 

Fateh Singh Gaikwar, despite his unscrupulous ways, had 
managed his State in a competent manner. Not so Govind Rao, who 
had been kept waiting for the Senakhaskhelship for twenty-five 
years. He brought his Kdrbhdris, Diwan RaojI Appaji, Majumdar 
and Phadnis from Poona, and their mutual rivalries and ambitions 
brought the State to the verge of ruin. The Poona Court had ob¬ 
tained ascendancy over the jdgir and was burdening it with all kinds 
of claims. “The evil was intensified by son striving against father, 
brother against brother, cousin against cousin, while wives and 
mothers pushed the interests of their husbands and sons with an en¬ 
tire disregard of justice or the common good of the family.” 13 

Govind Rao’s promises to pay the Poona Court the sum of a 
crore and twenty-lakhs of rupees, forced the State into a very ab¬ 
ject position. By 1797, he had paid the Peshuia Rs. 78,33,212, had 
been excused from paying another sixty lakhs, and yet he owed 
Poona Rs. 39,82,789. 14 

Even on his entry in Baroda in December, 1793, Govind Rao met 
with opposition from his son KanhojI. However, Kanhoji was be¬ 
trayed by his mercenary troops and placed in confinement. He 
escaped to the hills, was joined by the Bhils and ravaged Sankheda 
and Bhadarpur. He was subsequently joined by Malfiar Rao, son of 
the late Khande Rao of Kadi, who commenced hostilities against 
Govind Rao for not granting him certain favours. 

In 1794 the Gaikwar forces attacked Cambay, but were turned 
off by the English. In 1795 they were present at the battle of 
Kharda. 

In 1800 when Nana Phadnis died, Peshwd Baji Rao asked Govind 
Rao Gaikwar to eject Aba Shelukar (Nana’s nominee) from Ahma- 
dabad and take the Peshwa’s share of the province in farm. One 
consequence of this was that the Gaikwar obtained the administra¬ 
tion of that half of northern Gujarat which belonged to the Peshwd 
and did away with the evil of divided authority. Gaikwar’s com¬ 
mander Babaji defeated Aba Shelukar, took him prisoner and kept 
him at Borsad. 15 

The great anxiety of the Gaikwar to keep the farm, the interest 
of the Bombay Government in continuing the arrangement, and the 
policy of Peshwd Baji Rao to resume Gujarat districts, led ultimate- 


288 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 

ly to the rupture between the Peshwd and the British Government 
and the independence of the Gaikwar. 

Govind Rao Gaikwar died in October, 1800. 16 The State or 
rather the jdgtr had been impoverished by the huge tribute of 78 
lakhs of rupees exacted from him by the Poona Government. 17 ‘‘The 
treasury was empty; almost all the districts were mortgaged to cre¬ 
ditors and the few remaining ones were farmed to unscrupulous men 
who made haste to extort money; the tributary states withheld their 
tributes with impunity. The maintenance of the army alone ex¬ 
ceeded the receipts of the State; no attention was given to the ad¬ 
ministration of justice, the protection of the subjects and such other 
matters; there was, properly speaking, no government, for all power 
lay in the hands of rapacious and overbearing Arab soldiery and the 
government was distrusted most of all. Meanwhile Sindia and the 
Peshwd were watching the dissolution of the State with interested 
views.” 18 

The greatest evil from which the State suffered was the mer¬ 
cenary force first introduced by Fateh Singh Gaikwar. Govind Rao 
and his Diwdn Raoji AppajI went on increasing their number, which 
in 1800 stood at 13,126 foot and 3,730 cavalry. Their monthly ex¬ 
penses were Rs. 2,99,642. The most esteemed among them were 
pure Arabs hailing from Arabia. Arab garrisons held the forts of 
Baroda, Borsad, Sankheda and other strongholds. They were amen¬ 
able only to their pay-masters—Mangal Parekh and Samal Bechar, 
the two Sahukdrs, who supported the administration of any ruler, 
who could pay them best. The Arab soldiery was looked on as gua¬ 
rantee ( Bahandari ) for any promise made by the Government, wfiich 
invested their leaders with unlimited powers to interfere ir* the day 
to day administration. 

During the prevailing confusion Govind Rao died and was suc¬ 
ceeded by his son Anand Rao, another member of the Gaikwar house 
of feeble mind, rendered infirm from addiction to‘wine and opium. 
Rani Gahina Bai, with the minister Raoji, his brother BabajI, Mir 
Kamal-ud-din and the two pay-masters, formed a regency. But 
KanhojI (the eldest illegitimate son of Govind Rao) who returned to 
Baroda, gained the confidence of Anand Rao and became Mutaliq , 
pushing out the members of the regency. But KanhojI did not re¬ 
tain his authority for long. The main problem was to raise money 
to meet the demands of the soldiery. For this KanhojI treated harsh¬ 
ly most of the members of the Gaikwar family and respectable men 
in Baroda and mulcted them of money and jewellery. He Went to 
the length of confining the chief, Anand Rao himself. The Arab 

289 

M.S.—!• 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

soldiers got tired of him and seizing him, liberated Anand Rao; Raoji 
AppajI was again brought in to run the administration. 

Raoji found that his Diwdnship was not a bed of roses. The 
Arab troops demanded their arrears. The jagi'rddr of Kadi, Malhar 
Rao Gaikwar, was up in arms and was demanding the remission of 
his peshkash . Other members of the family were demanding some¬ 
thing from Raoji, while he had nothing to give. Raoji turned to the 
Company’s Government to help him out of the predicament, offer¬ 
ing to surrender the Chaurasi pargand (the district surrounding 
Surat) and the Surat chauth. Malhar Rao also sent an agent to 
Surat. 

The Governor of Bombay, Duncan, sent Major Walker to arbi¬ 
trate between Raoji and Malhar Rao Gaikwar. Major Walker 
reached Baroda on 29 January, 1802, met the Maharaja (Anand Rao) 
and held several discussions with him. He found the State sunk in 
debt, the soldiery in mutinous condition and the entire administra¬ 
tion in a state of suspended animation. Walker sided with the minis¬ 
ter and entered into a convention with him at Cambay in March, 
1802 by which Raoji agreed to receive a subsidiary force of two 
thousand sepoys and to cede territories for the expenditure of the 
troops. On 3 May, 1802, Malhar Rao was defeated and his place Kadi 
was taken. Another rebel Ganpat Rao Gaikwar was likewise dis¬ 
posed of. 19 

But the third and the most difficult problem was the disband¬ 
ing of the Arab soldiery. On 18 December, 1802, the fort of Baroda 
was invested and after much fighting the Arabs agreed to evacuate 
it on getting their arrears. The arrears (17£ lakhs) were paid and 
Anand Rao returned to Baroda as a British protege. He had already 
(6 June 1802) entered into a subsidiary alliance with the East India 
Company, taking a force of two thousand British sepoys with a 
battery of European artillery, for which he ceded territory worth 
Rs. 7,80,000 (Dholka 4£ lakhs, Nadiad 1£ lakhs, Vijapur 1.3 lakhs 
and Kadi Rs. 25,000) to the British. They had before this obtained 
Chaurasi pargand and the Surat Athavisi, and the pargands of Chi- 
khli and Kheda, altogether worth Rs. 2,58,000. 20 

The revenues of the Gaikwar State amounted to fifty-five lakhs 
of rupees; out of which it now gave away ten lakhs for the subsidiary 
force. The rebels Malhar Rao and Ganapat Rao were taken care of, 
as also the Arab soldiery. The debts, exclusive of the heavy balance 
claimed by the Peshwd „ were compromised for a sum less than forty- 
two lakhs, and money was raised on the security of the British Gov- 


290 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 

ernment for its liquidation. Major Walker also paid much attention 
to the collections from Kathiawar. From all these considerations 
Baroda State fell under the control of a regency consisting of the 
British Resident Walker, Carnac and William. 

The treaty of Bassein between the Peshwd and the East India 
Company in its 14th article recognised the existence of the treaty 
between the Company and Anand Rao Gaikwar and directed that 
the demands and papers of account between the Peshwa and his 
erstwhile feudatory should be examined and adjusted by the British 
Government. 

Peshwa Baji Rao after 1813 became anxious to resume his share 
of Gujarat districts, cancelled its farm to the Gaikwar Government 
and brought huge claims against that Government for arrears. 21 
When Gangadhar Shastri visited the Poona Government for the ad¬ 
justment of claims and counter-claims, he was murdered, but his 
murder absolved his Government from any claims of the Poona 
Court. Within a couple of years of the perpetration of the heinous 
crime, the Peshwd was bundled off to Bithur and British influence 
became supreme at Baroda. The Gaikwars became one of the sub¬ 
ordinate allies of the British. 

VII. The Angrias of Kolaba: 

The conquest of Konkan brought Shivaji early in conflict with 
the Sidis of Janjira who commanded the western coast and taught 
him the necessity of building a strong navy. As Sir Jadunath 
Sarkar has remarked, “to the owner of Konkan it was essential that 
the Sidi should be either made an ally or rendered powerless for 
mischief. Without a navy his subjects on the sea-coast and for some 
distance inland would remain exposed to plunder, enslavement and 
slaughter at the hands of the Abyssinian pirates. The innumerable 
creeks and navigable rivers of the coast, while they naturally foster¬ 
ed the growth of rich ports and trade centres, made it imperatively 
necessary for their protection that their owner should rule the sea.” 1 

The year 1659 marks the date of the beginning of the Maratha 
navy. The shallow ports of Pen, Panvel, Kalyan, Bhiwandi saw 
considerable activity in building small crafts for the Maratha navy 
and by 1664 Shivaji was able to fit out a fleet of sixty frigates for a 
distant expedition. “The English President describes the Maratha 
vessels as pitiful things, so that one good English ship would destroy 
a hundred of them.” 2 Though the small Maratha vessels appeared 


291 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

insignificant to the English merchants in comparison with their 
ocean-sailing ships, they were active enough in harassing the Sidis 
and their new master, the Mughul emperor. Within twenty years 
ShivajI’s fleet had grown to 400 vessels, most of them small galbats 
not more than fifty tons. The fighting strength of the navy was, 
according to the English factory reports, represented by about 160 
vessels. 3 

The fortunes of the Maratha navy reached their lowest ebb by 
1690. ShambhujI, the king of the Marathas, was captured and exe¬ 
cuted by the Mughuls; their strongholds in the upcountry were oc¬ 
cupied by them. A formidable army under Matabar Khan pitess-. 
ed the Marathas from the north; the Sidi found the opportunity 
to assert himself; he recovered the territory lost during the last re¬ 
gime and his fleet scourged Maratha vessels and swept them off the 
sea. At a time when the political existence of the Maratha State 
was at stake, it was not to be expected that the Marathas would have 
the will or find means to save their fleet. The whole naval esta¬ 
blishment crashed and went to pieces. In this critical condition the 
Maratha flag was kept flying aloft over the sea by the daring, re¬ 
sourcefulness and initiative of the famous KanhojI Angria of Kolaba. 

Little is known of the family and early days of KanhojI. His 
daring activity and skilful seamanship are traced by European 
writers to his Abyssinian parentage, but nothing can be far from 
the truth. The Angrias, whose family name is Sankhpal, hail from a 
tiny village, Angarwadi, in the Mawal hills, six miles from Poona. 
They are blue-blood Marathas and would spurn to marry in families 
lower than those of Deshmukhs, Jadhavs, Jagtaps and Shltoles. 4 
Tukoji Sankhpal took service under the great Shivajl about 1658 
and distinguished himself in several actions. He was rewarded with 
a command of 200, and posted at Suvarnadurg, an important naval 
post which occupied a menacing position hardly twenty miles south 
of the Sidis’ frontier. Here KanhojI first opened his eyes and passed 
his childhood. Here he watched Maratha ships making out for the 
open sea and falling upon the enemy’s fleet, and here he received 
the practical training of seamanship from the uncouth but faithful 
Koll sailors. 

KanhojI made his mark during ShivSjl’s time and is honourably 
mentioned in the Chitnis Bakhar. 4 * The family history would have 
us believe that the Kiladar of Suvarnadurg, Mohite, being hard- 
pressed by the Sidi, proposed surrendering the place. KanhojI sent 
news of this treachery to the authorities and seized this chicken-heart- 

292 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 

ed fellow. Taking on himself the command, he not only declined yield¬ 
ing the place, but boldly attacked the besiegers. In one of the sor¬ 
ties he fell in the enemy’s hands, but extricating himself from his 
confinement, KanhojI managed to reach the walls of the castle and 
beat off the Sidi’s attack. He was then appointed second in com¬ 
mand to Si doji Gujar, the Sar-Subha of the Maratha navy. When 
the latter died in 1698, he succeeded him in the entire command of 
the navy, making Kolaba his headquarters. 5 

His task was not an easy one. The central Maratha authority 
had disappeared; the Konkan province had been overrun and de¬ 
vastated by the Mughuls. There were no allies to help, no resources 
tamely upon and no reinforcements to be expected. On the other 
hand, in the absence of human allies, his sea-girt castles and their 
geographical situation in a far-away corner afforded KanhojI excelr 
lent protection, and from here he sallied forth to attack enemy ships 
and prey upon their merchantmen. By 1700,’ KanhojI is mentioned 
in foreign records as one of ‘the most daring pirates’ that infested 
the Malabar coast and made commerce hazardous. 

To get a right perspective of Angria’s maritime activities they 
must be viewed as a part of the general struggle of the Maratha 
nation against the Mughul conquest of their homeland. This ex¬ 
plains Angria’s inveterate hostility to the Sidis who were the 
Mughul representatives afloat. The chief objective to which his 
policy was directed was to recover Maratha territory occupied by 
the Sidis during the interim that followed ShambhujI’s execution, 
drive the Sidi to his island retreat, annihilate his independence and 
render him powerless for mischief. The western seas were to be 
Maratha waters and all who visited ports established in them, were 
to be taught to respect Maratha sovereignty and secure his permis¬ 
sion for trading in those waters by buying his passes. Whatever 
power refused to conform to his orders, would do it at the peril of 
bringing on its merchantmen his strong hand. His claim was chal¬ 
lenged by the Sidis as well as the Western powers—the Portuguese, 
the English and the Dutch, who on account of the important trading 
interests they had established in western waters, found such a de¬ 
mand most galling and injurious to their commerce. With their 
strongly built ships they were confident of their strength on the sea, 
manned as their ships were by skilful sailors and equipped as they 
were with far superior armaments. Their chief factories being esta¬ 
blished in the Mughul’s territory they were afraid that their recog¬ 
nition of Maratha claim and any assistance given in pursuance there¬ 
of, would antagonise them with the emperor and draw upon them 


293 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

his wrath. Their interests, therefore, dictated that they should 
range themselves on the side of the enemies of the Marathas when 
they could not maintain their neutrality. During the fifty years of 
Sarkhelship in the Angria family the Maratha power increased and 
almost overshadowed the Mughul empire. This growth of Maratha 
power is reflected in the annihilation of some of the maritime rivals 
of the Angria and the submissive attitude of the remaining in the 
halcyon days of its rule. 

Angria’s heavy hand soon fell on the Sidi and the Mughul. In 
January, 1700, the Bombay Factory recorded “that KanhojI Angria 
was at war with the Sidi and he was getting better of his enemy.” 
The war went on intermittently. Though the Sidi sought the help 
of the Portuguese in the contest with the Angria, he was not able to 
make much headway against him and was forced to yield to his op- 7 
ponent two-third of the revenue of Kolaba, Khanderi and Sagargarh 
and part of the revenue from Chaul. 6 

As his resources increased KanhojI began challenging foreign 
merchantmen that ventured on the sea without his passes. In 1702 
a small, trading vessel from Calicut with six Englishmen fell into his 
hands and was carried into one of his harbours. To a demand for 
its release he sent a reply That he would give the English cause to 
remember the name of KanhojI Angria’. In 1703 the Viceroy of 
Goa found it necessary to address him a friendly letter. 7 “Two 
years later he is described as a rebel ‘independent of the Raja ShivajT, 
and Mr. Reynolds was deputed to find him and tell him that he would 
not be permitted searching, molesting or seizing vessels in Bombay 
waters, to which he returned a defiant answer, that he had done many 
services to the English, who had broken faith with him and hence¬ 
forth he would seize their vessels wherever he could find them.” 8 In 
1707 the Bombay frigate was blown up in an encounter with Angria’s 
, ships. In 1710 a Dutch sloop of war was captured and the Godol- 
phin narrowly escaped the same fate. In 1711 the Directors were 
told that Angria could take any ship except the largest ones; “along 
the coast from Surat to Dabul he takes all private merchant vessels 
he meets”. The next year he captured the Governor of Bombay’s 
armed yacht and the Anne of Karwar 9 and attacked the Somers and 
the Grantham, East Indiamen. While thus already contending with 
the Sidi, the Portuguese and the English, he was in 1713 embroiled 
in the civil war between Tara Bai and Shahu. KanhojI Angria, a 
staunch partisan of Tara Bai, advanced to Rajmachi, defeated Shahu’s 
Peshwd, Behro Pant, and threatened to march on Poona. 


294 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 


Though he had succeeded so far, KanhojI knew the limitations 
of his strength. He understood that when a sea-power acquired ter¬ 
ritory on land with a frontier open to the attack of a military state, 
it incurred a great danger. It was necessary for his success on the 
sea that his back-door should be secure with a friendly neighbour 
guarding the western passes. BalajI Vishwanath, Shahu’s new 
Peshwa , convinced Angria of the wisdom of subordinating to his 
master, assured him how an alliance with Shahu would benefit both 
parties and finally won him over (28 February, 1714). In conse¬ 
quence, while Angria acknowledged allegiance to Shahu, he was con¬ 
firmed in the command of the fleet, granted twenty six; forts and forti¬ 
fied places in Konkan, among which was Khanderi, hardly ten miles 
from Bombay. He was also promised assistance in a contest with 
the Sidi. As some of the places that had been made over to Angria 
by the treaty were yet in the hands of the Sidi, hostilities followed. 
The Sidi, being no match for the joint forces of Angria and the 
Peshwa, was defeated, and surrendered to KanhojI valuable territory 
on the mainland. 10 

While the negotiations with Shahu demanded his attention 
Angria was wise enough to patch up his differences with the English. 
He invited an English agent to Kolaba and agreed that “in future 
English ships should be free from molestation, that no ships of any 
nation coming into Bombay harbour should be interfered with be¬ 
tween Mahim and Kennery, that English merchants should have 
liberty of trade in Angria’s ports on payment of the usual dues, and 
that Angria should be responsible for any damages done in future 
by the ships belonging to his Maratha superiors. In return the 
Governor engaged to give passes only to ships belonging to mer¬ 
chants recognised by the Company and to allow Angria’s people full 
facilities in Bombay.” 11 

The treaty concluded with the English proved but a temporary 
truce. With the arrival of Charles Boone in December 1715, as 
Governor, the Bombay settlement began to show great activity in 
equipping its fighing marine. The immediate cause of hostilities 
was the capture of three merchantmen, the Success, the Robert, and 
the Otter by Angria. 12 KanhojI contended that these vessels belong¬ 
ed to foreign merchants, and though laden with the goods of the 
Company, could claim no exemption from his passed, The English 
retaliated by the seizure of one of Angria’s shibar that visited Mahim 
and by attacking his coastal towns. The war against Angria in 
1718 failed. The causes of the failure were obvious. The batteries 
the English ships carried, though effective against Angria’s floating 


295 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

castles of wood, were powerless against the rocky walls of his castles. 
The Company’s soldiers at this period were ill-paid, ill-disciplined 
end had little training. The men in command were mere clerks, and 
the trappings of military dress could not transform them into sol¬ 
diers who could hold their own against the astute Angria. While 
the English squadron attacked more than a hundred miles away from 
its base, the communications of the fort with land remained safe so 
that it continued to ,draw support from the mainland. 

Least disheartened by this failure, the English now turned their 
attention nearer home. On the close of the monsoon another ex¬ 
pedition was fitted out against Khanderi. 13 After a fruitless bom¬ 
bardment against the island and Kolaba, the fleet sailed southward 
and visited Gheria (Vijayadurg) and Karwar and then returned to 
Bombay (November, 1718-January, 1719) to defend it against 
Angria’s fleet which had been called north from Vijayadurg. Angria 
then for a time lulled the Bombay authorities with talks of peace, 
but when the danger blew away he withdrew his offer. 

The English Governor was determined to destroy Gheria which 
he regarded as the nest of the pirate Angria, and despite his two 
failures, fitted another expedition against that place. It consisted of 
nine ships of the line and several fishing boats for landing troops. 
On board were about 600 picked soldiers commanded by Walter 
Brown, one of the Bombay Factors. 

On 19 September, 1720, the fleet arrived in sight of Gheria. The 
shells from the London and the Prahm, a floating battery, burst in 
vain against the solid rocks of the Victory fort (Vijayadurg). The 
only alternative left to the besiegers was to destroy Angria’s ships 
that had retired up the river; for attacking the castle from the land 
the party was altogether inadequate. The fort on the landside was 
covered by the town which had to be occupied before the walls could 
be assaulted. The fleet divided, a part of it sailed in the harbour 
skirting the walls of the castle and opened fire. A number of 
Angria’s ships were destroyed, but this made little impression on the 
castle. Brown was no soldier, knew nothing of strategy, nor how 
to handle the men, and had no consistent plan of attack. The first 
attempt at landing having failed disastrously, the men refused to em¬ 
bark on another fruitless trial. The squadron, after making a de¬ 
monstration against Deogarh, prepared to retire to Bombay when as 
ill-luck would have it, it fell in with pirates and was dispersed. Thus 
ended most ignominiously the attempt on Vijayadurg. 14 

Angria’s career was unchecked and he now threatened to march 


296 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 

his men to Bombay. The two heavy defeats made the English for¬ 
get for a time their jealousy of the Portuguese and seek their co¬ 
operation in crushing their common enemy. The repeated losses 
Portuguese shipping had suffered, persuaded the Goa authorities to 
accept the overtures of the English, and a treaty providing for a 
joint attack on Kolaba was concluded on 20 August, 1721. 

In consequence, there was feverish activity in Bombay, Bassein 
and Goa, and news of the hostile preparations soon reached Angria. 
He immediately made offers to compose his differences with the Portu¬ 
guese; threw provisions and ammunition in the fort of Kolaba and 
requested King Shahu to succour him. 

The arrival of a royal squadron in Bombay under Commander 
Mathews further added to the strength of the allies. On 29th 
November the expedition sailed from Bombay and joined the Portu¬ 
guese force at Chaul. The English contingent consisted of over 2,400 
men amply provided with artillery. The Portuguese assembled a 
still larger force which carried over 30 field guns. The combined 
army, 6,000, assisted as it was by a powerful fleet, appeared invin¬ 
cible. 15 

The country between Chaul and Alibag, a span of ten miles, is 
covered with wood and is swampy near Kolaba. The crossing of the 
Kundalika and the march to Kolaba with the heavy guns delayed 
the army on the road for over a fortnight: The time gained was 
sufficient for Pilaji Jadhav and Peshwd Baji Rao to pour their horse¬ 
men through the Konkan passes, and when the allies appeared before 
Kolaba on 12 December, 1721, they found themselves in great danger 
of being outnumbered by Maratha cavalry. While the Portuguese 
commander was surveying the field accompanied by Mathews, a 
Maratha horseman suddenly sprang upon the party from behind a 
bush and wounded Mathews with his lance. 

As the enemy’s strength was daily increasing it was necessary 
to deliver the attack without loss of time. Not estimating the num¬ 
ber of the army that was opposing them, the allies divided their 
force; the English undertook to assault the fort, while the Portu¬ 
guese were to hold at bay the enemy that was encamping outside, 
and to defend the camp and the rear against surprise. The superio¬ 
rity of the allies lay clearly in their artillery, and their neglect of 
this advantage rendered them helpless against Maratha cavalry. 
While the little English party attacked the walls, Baji Rao threw 
himself against the Portuguese column and sent it flying. The as¬ 
saulting party under Col Braithwaite met with a hail of shot and 


297 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

stone and when the Portuguese force dispersed, its rear was threa¬ 
tened and it was obliged to fall back. “All the field guns and a great 
deal of ammunition fell in the hands of the Marathas.” 16 

There were now bickerings among the allies; the English laid 
the blame for the miserable episode on the Portuguese, charged them 
with cowardice and their commander in a fury rushed at the Portu¬ 
guese captain and roughly handled him. This insolent behaviour 
was not calculated to hold together the loosely knit alliance. Peshwa 
BajI Rao on behalf of Angria made overtures of peace which were 
honourable to both the parties and were readily accepted by the 
Portuguese on 9 January, 1722. The alliance that had been herald¬ 
ed with so much eclat, broke up without achieving any of its 
objects. 17 

The war with the English continued with pauses at intervals. 
When pressed in other quarters Angria would hold forth the olive 
branch and express willingness to make peace on his own terms. 
Such an attempt was made in 1724 when KanhojI wrote a friendly 
letter to the new Governor Phipps and requested him to depute an 
agent of credit to discuss terms of peace. The Governor turned 
down his request, charged him with piracy, asked him to renounce 
war and demanded a proof of his sincerity, by immediately setting 
at liberty English prisoners. This called forth Kanhojfs ire; he re¬ 
plied that “it little behoved merchants to say that his government 
was supported by violence, insults and piracies; for the great Shivaji 
founded his kingdom by making war against four Kings; and that he 
himself was but his humble disciple; that he was very willing to 
favour the merchants trading according to the laws of his country,” 
and offered to release the English prisoners if his men, imprisoned 
by the English, were set at liberty. The negotiations were com¬ 
pleted and an exchange of prisoners effected in 1725. 18 

The vessels Angria developed and used for fighting his enemies 
were of various types—the Pal, the Shibar, the Machwa, the Galbat 
or Gallivat and the Ghurab. The chief war-vessels were the ghuraib 
(grab) and the galbat supporting the ghurab, and acting as its scout. 
The galbats, according to Low, were large row boats built like grabs 
but smaller, not more than seventy tons. They had two masts, a 
strong main mast and a slight mizzen mast, the main mast bearing 
a large triangular sail. Forty or fifty stout oars could send a galbat 
four miles an hour. Some large galbats had fixed decks, but most 
had spare decks made of split bamboos. They carried six to eight 
three or four pounders^ 


298 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 


“Angria’s grabs were of two classes, two masters upto 150 tons 
(600 khandis ), and three masters upto 300 tons. They were broad 
in proportion to the length and drew little water. They narrowed 
from the middle forwards, where instead of bows, they had a prow 
of a Mediterranean galley. Two nine-to-twelve-pounder cannon 
were planted on the main deck under the forecastle, pointing forward 
through port holes cut in the bulkhead and firing over the prow. The 
cannon on the broad sides were from six to nine pounders.” 

In its method of fighting, Angria’s navy reproduced the guerilla 
tactics which had proved so successful on land. The light Maratha 
boats sailed faster, and sailed round the clumsy merchantmen, and 
if pressed, could find safety in the shallow creeks and river mouths 
along the coast where the European men-of-war could not pursue 
them. When the heavy enemy ship was becalmed in the sea and 
could not move, the small Maratha vessels, moved as they were by 
oars and not dependent on wind, found their opportunity. They 
prowled out of their hiding, and reaching the stern of the enemy 
vessel, one by one they unloaded their prow-guns at a close range 
and sheered off to load their guns and return to the attack. Their 
strategy consisted in avoiding the fire from the broadsides of the 
enemy’s ships. After the enemy guns were silenced, two or 
three of the grabs ran aboard their victim and attacked sword in 
hand. 

Kanhoji’s relations with the central authority were marked 
with the greatest cordiality after the treaty of 1714. That treaty 
allowed him full independence in the management of his fief and 
assured him ample resources for the navy so long as he acknow¬ 
ledged the king of Satara as his liege-lord and paid him tribute. 
Shahu respected the Admiral who, almost single-handed, recreated 
the navy and when the two met at Jejuri in March, 1718, the occa¬ 
sion was marked with great ceremony and pomp. 

The last few years of Kanhoji’s life were years of comparative 
peace. He had many sons of whom Sekhdji, Sambhaji, Manaji and 
Tulaji maintained their father’s tradition of seamanship. He died 
on 20 June, 1720. 

On his father’s death, Sekhdji Angria succeeded to the admi¬ 
ralty, receiving the investiture robes from the king on 5 August, 
1729. 19 As a loyal feudatory he agreed to participate in the pro¬ 
blems facing the Maratha State. The first occcasion arose when the 
Marathas attacked in 1731 places in the Portuguese province of the 
North near Kalyan. In support of the attack on land SekhojI at- 


299 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


tacked Portuguese vessels at sea and captured two merchant Pals 
and one gallivat. 20 The attack on the province of the north was not 
pressed home and hostilities were soon stopped. 

Much more serious was the Maratha attempt on the Sidi’s terri¬ 
tory and castle of Janjira. The attack was discussed for years from 
1727 onwards; when SekhojI visited Raja Shahu at Satara in 1731, 
the former agreed to support the expedition with his fleet. The de¬ 
tails of the attack were, however, never discussed. In February, 
1733, the head Sidi—Sidi Rasul—died and there was a split among 
his commanders about the successor. Raja Shahu despatched a force 
under the Peshwa to capture the enemy’s castle of Janjira and over¬ 
run his territory. SekhojI was asked to cooperate in the venture. 
The Peshwa descended into Konkan in May, 1733, and seized Raj- 
puri and Khokri on the mainland opposite the castle and a part of 
the Sidi’s fleet lying in the harbour. He invited SekhojI Angria to 
help him blockade the castle of Janjira. 21 

The attack on the castle came at an odd season of the year 
when the sea was rough and SekhojI was not willing to risk his fleet in 
the enterprise. He pleaded his inability to support the Peshwa im¬ 
mediately. He however, occupied lower Chaul, Thai and Rewas near 
his headquarters Kolaba. As the Sidi was a protege of the English, 
he (SekhojI) sent agents to Bombay to secure their neutrality in the 
forthcoming contest with the Sidis. 22 But the English refused the 
guarantee and with the Sidi’s consent, occupied the island of Underi 
at the entrance of Bombay harbour on 16 July, 1733. The English 
presence at Underi caused great consternation in Angria’s camp. 
Before he could achieve anything, SekhojI died on 28 August, 1733 
after a short illness. 23 As he had no child of his own he was suc¬ 
ceeded to the admiralty by his brother, Sambhajl. 

The importance of Angria’s house started declining with the 
death of SekhojI Angria. There were two reasons for this. Ciyil 
war broke out among the brothers; ManajI Angria sought help not 
only from the Peshwa, but from the English and the Portuguese— 
the sworn enemies of the family. Both were jubilant and glad to 
extend help to ManajI and thus reduce the strength of the Maratha 
navy. The Peshwa’s moves in the dispute were deplorable. Instead 
of supporting the naval strength of the Maratha State represented 
by Sambhajl, he took ManajI under his protective wing and did every¬ 
thing to reduce Sambhajl Angria’s strength. The Peshwa was fast 
developing as the chief executive authority of the Maratha State and 
sought to bring the Angrias under his influence. Sambhajl refused 


300 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 

to accept the Peshwa’s leadership and was twice foiled (1735 and 
1740) in his attempts to gain the possession of Kolaba, which place 
had been associated with the chiefship of Maratha navy. So Sam¬ 
bhajI Angria’s exploits at sea remained isolated instances of his 
prowess, but did not contribute to the advancement of Maratha 
power. A few details in the career of SambhajI would clarify the 
issues. 

In May, 1734, the Bombay Government reported that Angria’s 
whole fleet stationed at Gheria consisted of 13 grabs and* 30 gallivats, 
and it feared that he would be out earlier than usual, trusting to the 
superiority of his number. But within a few months its fears were 
laid at rest as civil war broke out between the two brothers—Sam¬ 
bhajI and ManajI. SambhajI suspected ManajI of secretly plotting 
against his life with the support of his arch enemies—the English 
and the Portuguese. ManajI, when SambhajI called him to account 
for his action on his visit to Kolaba at the beginning of 1735, sought 
the shelter of the Portuguese at Revdanda. The Peshwa, keen to 
have a deciding role in Konkan, visited Kolaba from February to 
April, 1735 and divided the Angria jdgir between the two brothers. 
ManajI was resettled in the possession of the northern Konkan with 
its headquarters at Kolaba, with the title Vajarat-maaib. SambhajI 
as Sarkhel was allowed to keep "the main fleet with his headquarters 
at Vijayadurg. 24 His possessions narrowed down to a barren strip in 
south Konkan stretching from Bankot to Malwan, the revenues of 
which were hardly adequate to keep his fleet afloat. 25 The days of 
the Maratha navy as a powerful arm of the Maratha State, were over. 

The result of the division made by the Peshwa was that Sam¬ 
bhajI Angria lost all interest in the prosecution of the war against 
the Sidis of Janjira. He earned the odium of being in league with 
them—the enemies of the Marathas. When Sidi Sa’at’s force was des¬ 
troyed in the battle of Charhai Kamarle by ChimnajI Appa in April, 
1736, a contingent of ManajI Angria fought by the side of the main 
force led by ChimnajI and ManajI’s stock went up at the King’s Court. 
When SambhajI tried to bring his ships to the attack of Anjanwel, 
he was foiled by the English navy. His difficulties were not appre¬ 
ciated at the Court where he became suspect of dereliction of duty 
and neglect of his responsibilities. All this caused great vexation 
to SambhajI Angria. 

SambhajI retaliated against the English by the capture of the 
Company’s ship Derby under the command of Capt. Anselm. On 
the morning of 26 December, 1735, the ship was sighted near Suvama- 


301 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

durg. The wind had fallen and the sea was becalmed. Angria’s 
gallivais sallied forth to attack the ship and in a hard fight lasting 
over ten hours, shot away all the Derby’s masts, boarded it and 
captured it. About 115 sailors were taken prisoners. After six 
months’ imprisonment, Capt. Inchbird negotiated their release, pro¬ 
mising peace for the next six months and discussion of other dis¬ 
puted points. 26 But the English soon went back on their word on 
a paltry excuse and started attacking Angria’s ships at sea. 

Sambhaiji Angria was the arch-enemy of the English and they 
were always deliberating his destruction. One such deliberation 
took place on 8 July, 1737, when according to information “the enemy 
had constantly in pay fifteen or sixteen thousand men and could 
easily raise another six thousand on a short warning. It was there¬ 
fore thought convenient to lay aside all thoughts of making an ex¬ 
pedition by land against the enemy.” 

The motion “whether destroying the enemy’s grabs in his ports 
could not be effected being next taken into consideration the com¬ 
manders of the cruisers acquainted with the situation of Gheria, in¬ 
formed the Board that when the enemy’s grabs were in the river, 
they were constantly hauled up into a bay round the fort which form¬ 
ed a half moon and they lay close to two lines of guns near the 
water side and a new tower lately built which commanded the river 
and the bay where the grabs lay. That on dark nights there were 
lights constantly burning upon the river and a careful watch was 
kept by the enemy. It was thought that making an attempt on the 
fortifications would prove ineffectual and was therefore dropped.” 27 

In 1738 Commodore Bagwell was ordered to blockade Angria’s 
fleet at Gheria. But the Commodore failed miserably, reporting 
that the Company’s marine was not strong enough to withstand 
Angria’s fleet and that Angria was a stronger enemy than the Bom¬ 
bay Government thought him to be. 28 

All the while SambhajT’s fleet was also chasing Portuguese mer¬ 
chantmen and in 1738 he even captured the Portuguese warship 
Sao Miquel near Gheria. Soon after that SambhajI seized two 
Dutch vessels. In reprisal the Dutch sent a fleet against Gheria, 
but the fleet could make little effect on the place and sailed away. 29 

From March, 1737 to May, 1739, the Marathas were at war with 
the Portuguese over their Province of the North (Salsette-Bassein 
district). In the war the Angria brothers did make an attempt to 
capture Portuguese ships carrying succour to Bassein, but lacking a 

302 


MAKaTHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 

concerted plan, their fleets were in no way helpful to Maratha armies 
lying before Bassein. 

In January, 1740, SambhajI Angria’s fleet was seen prowling 
near Bombay and made an unsuccessful attack on the English squa¬ 
dron, but his real objective was Kolaba. He seized Hirakot, Sagar- 
garh and Chaul and besieged the fort of Kolaba. When the news 
reached ChimnajI Appa, within five days he appeared near Kolaba 
with a much superior force, seized Pali, Mirgarh and Ur an belonging 
to Manaji Angria and defeated Sambhajl’s small force. The English 
also sent assistance to the beleaguered garrison and Kolaba was saved 
for Manaji. 30 

SambhajI was not reconciled to the loss of Kolaba and opened 
negotiations with the Sidi, the English and the Portuguese to secure 
their neutrality in his domestic dispute. 31 But before anything could 
be done in the matter, a fire broke out in his fleet about September, 
1741, by which he sustained considerable loss; many of his sea¬ 
soned sailors left him on account of his poverty. 32 Proud man that 
SambhajI was, he could not stand the barbs of misfortune; he died 
on 12 January, 1742. 33 

The death of SambhajI Angria did not restore peace and great¬ 
ness to the house of Angria. Manaji sent his agents to Satara to ob¬ 
tain the Sarkhelship but the king conferred it in 1743, on TulajI 
Angria, Sambhajl’s brother, who worked with him, exhorting him 
to do something worthy of the honour. TulajI was brave like his 
brothers, and despite enemy opposition, succeeded in capturing the 
fort of. Anjanwel lying at the mouth of the Vasishthi river, and 
Govalkot near Chiplun on 25 January, 1745. 34 Two years later he 
visited Satara to pay homage to the king. He also paid his respects 
to the Raja’s two wives. 

About the end of 1747 a great dispute arose between TulajI 
Angria, the Pratinidhi of Vishalgarh, Amdtya of Bawda and Savant 
of Wadi over Angria’s capture of Mudagarh. Making Mudagarh his 
base, TulajI started an all-round aggression and came in conflict with 
the petty feudatories in the region. 35 TulajI was defeated when the 
feudatories received aid from the Peshwd. 

In 1748 TulajI was again defeated with heavy loss at Kudal by a 
Savantwadi force and was pursued as far as Sangva near Ratnagiri 
and his country was laid waste. 36 

But TulajI Angria’s career at sea was unchecked. He was an 
intrepid seaman and would not easily give up the claim of the 


303 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


sovereignty of the sea made by his father KanhojI and his brothers 
Sekhdjl and SambhujI. In April, 1743 he engaged the Ketch Sala¬ 
mander and forced it to seek the shelter of Kolaba. On 22 Novem¬ 
ber, his squadron of seven grabs and eight gallivatts fell in with an 
English convoy and exchanged gun fire with it for twelve hours. On 
1 December three grabs and four gallivats of Angria were sighted 
off Mangalore and chased away by English vessels. 37 Another squa¬ 
dron consisting of seven grabs and seventeen gallivats attacked Por¬ 
tuguese men of war between Honavar and Goa, carrying on the fight 
for two days and two nights. Despite Tulajl’s offer of peace, the 
English sent the Restoration and the Bombay grabs in December, 

1744, to assist the Sidi to foil Tulaji in his attempt to seize Anjanwel 
and Govalkot. Raja Shahu sent a message to the English Governor 
at Bombay not to afford any assistance to the Sidi at Anjanwel. But 
the Governor obdurately replied that Tulaji and his predecessors had 
committed untold miseries on the Company’s trade and obliged them 
to spend immense sums for its protection. He had therefore no 
option but to take all opportunities of distressing the Angria. 38 

Tulaji however captured Anjanwel and Govalkot on 25 January, 

1745, and continued to challenge English ships at sea. In December, 
1745, there were reports from Tellicherry that Angria’s ships were 
near the place looking out for merchant vessels, and seized the Prin¬ 
cess Augusta and the Expedition , 39 In February, 1746, he took three 
out of five Gujarat vessels. In November, 1746, Angria landed his 
force at Mangalore and laid waste the place. 40 In January his fleet 
seized two Dutch sloops between Calicut and Tellicherry. He was 
again active in 1748 and in December his fleet was cruising off Mount 
Daily near Cannanore. In October, 1749, he attacked Commodore 
James’ fleet and took the Restoration grab near Gheria. “The engage¬ 
ment began at night and on the 13th about noon it being calm, she 
was boarded on all quarters and the vessel was taken.” 41 Next year 
Tulaji was bold enough to attack Commodore Lisle in command of 
several vessels. Again in February, 1753 he attacked three Dutch 
ships of fifty, thirty-six and eighteen guns, burnt two large ones and 
took the third as prize. 42 So great was Angria’s strength and such 
were his movements from Cochin in the south to Diu in the north 
that for forty years the E. I. Company incurred heavy expendi¬ 
ture (Rs. 5,00,000 per annum) to protect her trade. 43 

Elated with his successes Tulaji built several new vessels and 
boasted that he would soon be master of the west coast Tara Bai 
the Regent Queen, knowing Angria’s hostility to the Peshwd, en¬ 
couraged him to attack the Peshwd’s places in Konkan. In February, 

304 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 

1753, TulajI besieged Vishalgarh but was driven off. 44 By 1754 
TulajI Angria’s. cup was full; the European powers—the English, the 
Dutch, the Portuguese—hated him like poison. His warships sailing 
from Cochin to Diu threatened the very existence of their commerce. 
From the time of their conquest of Salsette-Bassein, ChimnajI Appa 
had suggested to the English a joint expedition against the Angria. 45 
So long as Raja Shahu was alive, he would not allow the Angrias to 
be annihilated. But after his death in December, 1749, the Peshwd 
was free to follow his own line with the recalcitrant feudatories. 
The succession dispute, the Gaikwar’s revolt and the Nizam’s acti¬ 
vities made him overlook TulajI’s insolent behaviour. In April, 
1753, he made it plain that he would not permit Angria’s persecution 
of Brahmins and vatandars any longer. 46 In early 1754 BalajI BajI 
Rao sent letters to the Bombay Council, “earnestly desiring us to 
join our forces with theirs to demolish TulajI Angria”. 47 The 
Peshwa’s Subdhdar RamajI Mahadeo pressed the English to attack 
Gheria and bring about the total destruction of Angria. A treaty was 
concluded on 19 March, 1755, by which it was settled that the English 
should be in charge of naval operations and that ships, treasures, 
guns etc., captured from the Angria should be equally shared. 48 

By 7 April, 1755, Suvarnadurg and three other castles to the 
north had fallen to the joint attack. As the monsoon was now ad¬ 
vancing, the English squadron under Commodore James returned to 
Bombay. But the Peshwas land troops pressed on the campaign, 
overran Angria’s territory and captured Angria’s stronghold of 
Anjanwel, Govalkot and Ratnagiri. 

After the monsoon of 1755, the allies renewed their attack on 
Angria’s headquarters—Vijayadurg. Admiral Watson had arrived in 
India with a royal squadron and he was directed by the Madras 
authorities to go to the west coast to join the attack on Angria. With 
him sailed the hero of Arcot, Clive, with a battalion of 800 Euro¬ 
peans and another of 1,000 sepoys. According to Ives, the Maratha 
army consisted of 6,000 horse and the same number of foot. Ives 
seems to have left out of account the army that was already operat¬ 
ing in Konkan under KhandojI Mankar and Samsher Bahadur. The 
Maratha fleet cooperating with the British squadron consisted of 
four ghurabs and fifty gallivats lying in the Rajapur creek, four miles 
north of Gheria. 

The British fleet joined by the Company’s marine, sailed from 
Bombay on 7 February, 1756, and arrived before Vijayadurg four 
clays later. The cannonading of the castle started on 12 February. At 

305 


M S -20 



THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


four in the afternoon, a chance shot falling on one of Angria’s ships, 
set fire to his entire fleet cooped up in the bay, and in a short time 
all the seventy ships lying in the harbour belonging to Angria were 
burnt down. TulajI Angria had no allies left, his country was over¬ 
run by the Peshwa’s armies and his headquarters surrounded by the 
enemy. His predicament was a hopeless one and he gave himself 
up to the Maratha commander. In his absence the fort could not 
hold out long. Clive landed his troops on the I3th and encamped on 
grounds between the fort and the town, from where the Peshwd’s 
troops could not communicate with the besieged. The same even¬ 
ing, the British took possession of the ‘impregnable’ fort where¬ 
in they found 250 guns, considerable amount of gunpowder, six brass 
mqrtars, ten lakhs of rupees in cash and about four thousand pounds 
worth of goods and valuables. They now demanded the surrender 
of TulajI Angria who was in the Maratha camp. The Maratha com¬ 
mander refused the English demand on which the English declined 
to hand over the fort to the Marathas. 

The Peshwd entered a strong protest to the Bombay Govern¬ 
ment about its breach of a solemn promise, after which the allies 
came to an understanding and Vijayadurg was restored to the Peshwd 
on 12 October, 1756. In lieu of it, the English obtained Bankot and 
ten surrounding villages. 

TulajI Angria remained in custody of the Peshwd till his death 
in 1786. His sons, however, escaped to Bombay. 

After TulajI’s subjugation the southern Konkan was put under 
the command of Anand Rao Dhulap. RamajI Mahadeo, who was 
Subdhdar of north Konkan obtained Suvarnadurg. After Ramaji’s 
death, Phadke held charge of North Konkan. 

The Peshwd’s relations with the other branch of the Angria 
family—ManajI Angria—were not very happy. He was always en¬ 
croaching on Angria’s territory and took a number of outlying forts. 
ManajI died in 1758 as a feudatory of the Peshwd and was succeeded 
by RaghujI. RaghujI was a good ruler and did much to improve the 
land from the salt-marsh. In 1776 he seized the impostor of Sada- 
5 hlv Rao Bhau and handed him over to the Poona Government. 
Forbes who visited his country has given a pleasant account of it. 
RaghujI died in 1793, after which there was great confusion in the 
succession to the title. The Maratha navy was no longer the terror 
that it was to foreign rulers and in 1839 the small jdgir of ManajI 
Angria lapsed to the British Government for want of a direct heir 
and became a part of the present Kolaba district. 


306 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 


SECTION IV, pp. 250-266: THE SINDIAS OF GWALIOR 

I. Malcolm Sir John, Memoir of Central India, Vol. I (1880), p. 95. 

Z- S .P D., XXX,’ p. 246. 

3. K S P Y. y No. 496. 

4. S P.D., XXX, p. 270. 

5. S P D., XXX, pp. 290-94. 

6. Ibid., p. 300. 

7. Ibid, pp. 304-06. 

8 Ibidy p. 306. 

9 Ibid, p. 321. 

10 Brahmendra Swaminche Charitra f No. 27; S P D. X, XV, pp. 37-49. 

II. Br. Ch., No. 33-38. 

11a. Malcolm J., op. cit., pp. 78-79. 

12. S.P.D., XVI, 127; K S P Y., no. 31; Salseite Chronicle, p. 48; Pissurlencar. 
Marathas & Portuguese , p. 68. 

12a. Aitihasik Patravyawahar, Nos. 68, 76. 

13. K.S.P Y. (1930 Ed.), pp. 87-89. 

14. S.P.D. , XXV, pp. 144-49; XXVI, p. 202. 

15. Bhau Sahebanchi Bakhar (Ed. by S. N. Joshi, 1959), pp. 4-7; but from Aitihasik 
Patravyawahar , 41, 76, (1933), the differences began much earlier. 

16. Raj wade, MIS., Vol. I, 37, 39; K.S.P.Y., pp. 128-39; S.P.D., II, pp. 48-65; XXI, 
pp. 70, 82, 83; XXVII, pp. 105-10. 

17- Raj wade, op. cit., 156, 165; SPD., II, p. 114; XXI, p. 181, 182, 185; XXVII, 
^247; Sarkar, Fall of the Mughal Empire, II, pp. 220-22. 

18. Rajwade, M.I.S., XXII, nos. 59-60. 

19. S.P.D., XXIX, 219-80; Persian Calendar, III, 544, etc. 

20 Gleig, G. R., Warren Hastings, II, p. 39. 

21. Sardesai, Hist. Papers Re: Mahadji Sindia, (1937), Nos. 103-109. 

22. Ibid, Nos. 134-46, 152- 

23. Ibid, No. 154. 

24. Ibid, Nos. 182, 188-90. 

25 Aitchison, Treaties & Engagements , etc. (1863), Vol. Ill, pp. 49-54. 

26 Grant Duff, History of the Mahrattas, Vol. II (1921), p. 153. 

27- Sarkar, Fall of the Mughal Empire, Vol. Ill, p. 200, 221, 289-90. 

28 V. V. Khare, Life of Nana Phadnxs (1927), p. 137; Nana Phadnis to Mahadji 
Sindia, printed in an Appendix in Life of Mahadji Sindia by V. R. Natu (1894), 
pp. 296-7. 

29 Browne to Macpherson, G. G., cited by Desmond Young, Fountain of Elephants, 
p. 83; also see Brown’s letter to Hastings 10 January, 1785, Browne Corres¬ 
pondence, pp. 266-74. 

30 P R C., I, pp. 69-70. 

31- Ibid, p. 61. 

32. Ibid, p. 64, 81. 

33. Ibid, pp. 178-79, 387, P.R.C., II, pp. 258-59, 288-89. 

33a. For De Boigne’s career as Sindia’s general see Desmond Young, Fountain of 
Elephants , pp. 74-175. 

34. Hist. Papers of Mahadji Sindia (Ed. Sardesai, 1937), Nos. 503, pp. 6924)7. 

35 Grant Duff, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 182. 

36- Cited by Sardesai in Marathi Riyasat, Uttar. Vibhag, II (19290,, p. 127. 

37. Grant Duff, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 183. 

38. Sarkar, Fall of the Mughal Empire, IV, p. 26. 

39 PTR.C., II, pp. 254-55, 258-59; also Sardesai, New History, Vol. Ill, pp. 228-42; 

Sarkar, Fall of the Mughal Empire, IV, pp. 127-30. 

40, P.R.C., I, pp. 388-89. 

41 Ibid, p. 390. 

42 Thompson, Edward, The Making of the Indian Princes, pp. 11-12. 

43. V. V. Khare, X, pp. 5309-18. 

44. P.R.C., IX, 28; Malcolm J., Central India (1880), I, pp. 175-76. 

45. Aitchison, Treaties & Engagements, etc. Vol. IV, pp. 221-25, 233-43. 

46 Broughton, T. D., Letters written in a Mahratta Camp (Constable and Co.), p. 28. 


307 




THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


SECTION V, pp. 266-277: THE HOLKARS OF INDORE 

1. Holkaranchi Kaifiyat (1954, Ed. by Y. N. Kelkar), pp. 1-2; John Malcolm, 
Memoir of Central India (1826, reprint 1880), I, pp. 117-19; Shahu Chhatrapati 
Diary, pp. 83-84. 

2. S.P.D., XVII, 1. 

3 S.P.D., XIII, 31-38 and Jaipur Akhbars. 

4 S.P.D., XXX, p. 285, 292, 300, 304. 

5. Irvine, William, The Bangash Nawabs of Farukhabad, J.A.S.B., 1878, pp. 316-21. 

6. Peshwa’s letter in Appendix IV of Barve’s Life of Malhar Rao Holkar. 

7. S.P.D., XIV, 11, 18; XV, 1; Jadunath Sarkar, Fall of the Mughal Empire, I, 
pp. 249-52. 

8 S.P.D., XIV, 21, 23; Sarkar, op. cit., p. 285. 

9. S.P.D., XV, 47. Tarikh-i-Hind in Elliot & Dowson, Vol. VIII. 

10. S P.D., XV, 68. 

11 Brahmendra Charitra, App. 52. 

12. Malcolm, Central India, I, pp. 78-79. 121; S.P.D., XV, p. 86. 

13 Aitihasik Patravyawahar, 68; S.P.D., II, pp. 129-33. See also Dr. Raghubir 
Sinh’s Paper, Rajput-Maratha Relations, Mardtha History Seminar, 1971. 

14 S P D XXI 92-94 

15. Khare, V. V., I; 3*33-35; SPD., XXXVII, 105-06. 

16- B I S M Q., IX, No. 2, pp. 31-32. S.P.D., XXIX, 90, 98, Khare, 575. 

17. Sardesai, New History, II, p. 505. 

18 Chandrachud Daftar, I, 104-5; Parasnis, Maheshwar Darbarchi Batamipatren, 
204. 

19- Chandrachud Daftar, 202. 

20. Holkar Kaifiyat, pp. 42-47; S.P.D., XXIX, 176, 180. 

21 Malcolm, Central India, I, pp. 129-60. Malcolm was the Political Agent from 
1818-25 and drew up the report which was the basis of his Memoir of Central 
India, 1826. This was reprinted in 1880 in two volumes which have been used 
for the' section. Nana Phadnis often tried to pension off the lady and make 
Tukoji the sole administrator of the Jagir. But Ahalya Bai refused to oblige 
the Poona Gooti (See Sardesai, Marathi Riyasat, Uttar Vibhag, pp. 1-11). 

22 Malcolm, op. cit., I, p. 149. 

23. Malcolm, op. cit., I, p. 136; See also Holkar Kaifiyat (1954), p. 121. 

24. Malcolm, op. cit., I, 143-49. 

25 Malcolm, ibid., p. 155. 

26. Morley, John, Burke, p. 130. 

27 Sardesai, New History, III, p. 211. 

28. P R C. VI, pp. 24-25, 405. 

29. Khare, Y. V., Aitihasik Lekha Sangraha, Vol. XIV, pp. 7404-36. 

30 lytartin, Wellesley Despatches, Vol. IV. 

31 Martin, Wellesley Despatches, IV, 4 ff. 

32. Malcolm, Political History of India (1970, reprint), Vol. I, p. 150. 

33 Martin, Wellesley Despatches , IV, p. 107. 

34. Ibid, p. 322. 

35 Kaye, Life of Malcolm, I, p. 305. 

30 Malcolm, Central India I, p. 209. 

37- P R C., XI, p. 199. 

38 Aitchison, Treaties, Engagements, etc., Vol. IV (1864), pp. 289-93. 

39. Aitchison, op. cit., pp. 294-97. 


SECTION VI, pp. 278-290: THE GAIKWARS OF BARODA 
1. Kavyetihas Sangraha Patren Yadi, p. 396. 

2 S P D:; XXX, 312, p. 271, Irvine, William, Later Mughals, II, pp. 170-71, 
Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. I, Pt. I, pp. 302-318. 

3. Elliot, F. A. H., The Rulers of Baroda (1934), p. 32. 

4 Purandare Daftar, I, 322-33, 335-43. 

5. Elliot, op. cit., p. 35; K S P Y., 99; Grant Duff, History of the Mahrattas I 
p. 467. 

6 Elliot, op. cit., p. 39. 


308 


MARATHA PROVINCIAL DYNASTIES—II 

7. Aitchison, C. U., Vol. Ill, Treaties, Engagements etc . (1863), Vol. Ill, pp. 24-30; 
Grant Duff, History of the Mahrattas (1921), Vol. II, pp. 23-30. 

8. Duff, op. cii., 34-42. 

9. Duff, ibid., p. 49. 

10 Sardesai, Hist. Papers Re: to Mahadji Sindia, 1937, pp. 72-75. 

11. Aitchison, C. U., Treaties, Engagements, etc. (1863), Vol. Ill, p. 51. 

12-. P R C., II, p. 314. 

13. Elliot, F A H., op. cit., p. 57. 

14. P R C., XII, p. 277. 

15. Khare, V. V., Aitihasik Lekha Sangraha, XIII, pp. 6936-37. 

16. PRC., VI, pp. 600-02. 

17. P R C., XII, p. 279. 

18. Elliot, F A H., op. cit., pp. 63-64. 

19 Grant Duff, op. cit., II, pp. 320-27. 

20. Duff, ibid., P R C., VII, pp. 20-21. 

21. P R C., XII, pp. 275-92, 301-09, 324-26. 

SECTION VII, pp. 290-305: THE ANGRIAS OF KOLABA 

1. Sarkar, Jadunath, Shivaji and His Times , (4th Edn.), p. 244. 

2. Ibid., p. 249. 

3 Ibid, p. 247. 

4. Mawji and Parasnis, Kaifiyats and Yadis, p. 1. 

4a. Chitnis SaptAprakaranatmak Charitra (ed. Hervadkar), pp. 203. 

5. Chitnis, Thorle Shahu Maharaj Charitra, p. 38. 

6- Biddulph, John, Malabar Pirates , p. 76. 

7. Sen, S. N., Military System of the Mardthas, p. 194. 

8. Sen, S. N., Early Career of Kanhoji Angria and other Papers, pp. 8-9. 

9. Sen, S. N., Military System of the Mardthas, p. 196. 

10. Foster, Introduction to Downing’s A History of the Indian Wars, pp. xii-xiii; 
Chitnis Thorle Shahu Charitra, pp. 37^40. 

11. Foster, ibid., p. xii; Sen, op. cit., pp. 197-98. 

12. Sen, op. cit., pp. 200-01. 

13. For Khanderi expedition, see Sen, Early Career of Kanhoji Angria , etc., 
pp. 12-19. 

14. Bombay Records, Public Ueptt. Diary, IA, p. 150, 228, 242-64; Clement Down¬ 
ing, A History of the Indian Wars, pp. 29-30. 

15- Downing, op. cit., pp. 53-57. 

16- Ibid. 

17- Downing, ibid., S.P.D,, XXX, 63. 

18. Public Deptt Diary, 2A, pp. 118-66 and Hamilton,. A New Account of the East 
Indies, Vol. I, p. 245. 

19. S.P.D. , XXXIII, 1. 

20 • Sen, Military System, etc., p. 215. 

21 S.P.D.,. III'. 2; Purandare Daftar, I, 104; Forrest, Home Series, Vol. II, p. 52. 

22. S.P.D., Ill, 63, 64. 

23. S P D., Ill, 72-83. 

24. Rajwade, MIS., II, p. 71; Br. Charitra, 130. 

25. S.P.D., XXIV, 4. Tulaji Angria’s complaint of insufficiency of resources. Also 
Public Dept. Diary, 9A, 8 Dec. 1735, p. 291. 

26. Pub. Dept. Diary, 9A, p. 3, 21, 50, 374, 704. 

27. Ibid., 10B, pp. 286-88. 

28- Sen in the New Indian Antiquary, Vol. I, No. 2, pp. 122-24, Sambhaji Angria. 

29. Ibid, p. 124-125. 

30. Ibid: also Pub. Dept. Diary, 13A, B, pp. 209-276. 

31. S.P.D., XXXIII, 457. 

32. Pub. Dept. Diary, 14C (1741), pp. 491-93. 

33- Rajwade, MIS., Ill, 308, 345. 

34. Waidya Daftar, cited by Sardesai in Riyasat, Vol. V, p. 109. 

35. S.P.D., XXIV, 46-52; Aitihasik Patravyawahar, 39, 80; Bdlaji Baji Rao, Diary I, 
34. 

36. Ratnagiri Gazetteer (New Series), pp. 167-68. 

37- Pub. Dept. Diary, 16A, pp. 48-49. 


309 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


38. Ibid, 17E (1744), pp. 426-40. 

39. Ibid, 18A, p. 35, 19A, p. 31. 

40. Ibid, p. 502. 

41. Ibid , 24A (1749), p. 303, 24B, p. 484; Shrivastava, Angreys of Kolaba, p. 129- 

42. Milburne, Oriental Commerce, I, p. 294. 

43. C. R. Low, History of the Indian Navy, I, p. 124. 

44. Shahu Chhatrapati Roznishi, pp. 110-11. 

45. Pub. Dept. Diary, 13B, pp. 330-39. 

46 Shahu Chhatrapati Roznishi, p. Ill, No. 240. 

47. Sec. and Pol. Dept. Diary, I, pp. 1-2. 

48 Ibid, pp. 1-35 (printed by Forrest in the Maratha Series), Ive, A voyage from 
England to India, p. 88, Orme, History of Hindostan, I, pp. 407-17, S P D., 
XXIV, 164, 171, 173. For a general account of the Angrias of Kolaba, see Dhabu, 
Kulabkar Angre, Manohar Malgonkar, Kanhoji Angrey. 


310 


CHAPTER IX 


THE ENGLISH, THE FRENCH AND OTHER 
EUROPEAN COMPANIES IN INDIA 

ANGLO-FRENCH CONFLICT UP TO 1763 

I. The English Presidencies upto 1746: 

The increasing disintegration of the Mughul empire became 
marked after 1720 and was conducive to the growth of the English 
settlements in Bengal and on the Coromandel Coast, The over¬ 
running of many parts of the country, particularly of Bengal and 
the Karnatak, by the Marathas, further contributed to the disinte¬ 
gration of the Muslim power over them and to the growing assertive¬ 
ness of the Presidencies of Fort St. George and Fort William. The 
Nawabs of Bengal were greatly weakened by domestic squabbles and- 
Hindu disaffection. In the Karnatak the situation was even worse, 
and further complicated by the turbulence of the poligars and the 
suppression of the old Nawayat ruling family by the new dynasty 
of Anwar-ud-din Khan. 

In England itself the wisdom and policy of Sir Robert Walpole 
encouraged a policy of peaceful trade. The Government supported 
the Company against the claims of the Ostend Company formed by 
the Austrian emperor Charles VI in 1717, and contrived the forma¬ 
tion of a triple alliance of France, England and Holland which forced 
the emperor, among other things, to wind up his Company which was 
suspended in 1727 and suppressed four years later. 1 

The E.I. Company got from King George I a charter of confir¬ 
mation with ampler powers, among which was a provision for the 
starting of Mayor’s Courts in the three Presidencies and extending 
its life to 1766, with the usual stipulation of three years’ notice be¬ 
fore termination. In 1742 the Company offered to the Government 
a loan of one million sterling on condition that its monopoly should 
be extended to 1780 and even then it should continue to be a trading 
body without the monopoly. 

The growth of the three Presidencies was well marked during 
the period 1708-1746. Madras was fortunate in its succession of 
Governors which included men like Thomas Pitt, Edward Harrison, 


311 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Joseph Collet, James Macrae and Richard Benyon. Harrison 
(1711-1717) strove hard with the Nawab to secure the grant of sonr 
suburban villages. The Madras farman , comprehended in the Im¬ 
perial grant secured by John Surman, exempted the Company's goods 
from customs in all the ports of Golconda and confirmed the grant 
of the suburban villages. Governor Collet planted the first large 
suburban village of weavers so necessary for the cloth trade of the 
settlement. In the time of Governor Macrae (1725-30) a royal 
charter reconstituted the Corporation and remodelled the Mayor’s 
Court which had been in existence from 1687. Governor Morton 
Pitt (1730-35) arranged for the policing of the Black Town (occu¬ 
pied by Indians) of the settlement. His successor Benyon (1735- 
44) was faced with the threat of Maratha attack and with growing 
anarchy in the Karnatak. 

Nawab Zu’lfiqar Khan who established Mughul dominion over 
the Karnatak was followed by Da’ud Khan Panni, who transferred 
the headquarters of the Karnatak Subah from JinjI to Arcot. Da’ud 
Khan’s Diwan and Faujdar, Muhammad Sayyid, later Nawab Sa‘ada- 
tullah Khan, was the acknowledged Nawab of the Karnatak during 
1710-32; and he was confirmed by Nizam-ul-Mulk when the latter 
established his authority in the Deccan. The rule of Sa‘adatullah 
was noted for its justice and equity. 2 

In 1725 the Trichinopoly country was ravaged by one Iwaz 
Khan; and Sarfoji Raja of Tanjore who belonged to a collateral 
branch of the Bhosle family, appealed for help to Raja Shahu who 
sent Fateh-Singh with an army. The Marathas exacted tribute from 
the regions of Bidnur and Seringapatam. 

Nawab Sa’adatullah appointed to the charge of many killas 
(forts) in his subah his own followers of the Nawayat community. 
On his death, Baquir ‘All, a nephew, who was the killedar of Vellore, 
became his successor; but he gave up the masnad to his younger 
brother, Dost ‘Ali Khan, and retired into private life. Dost ‘Ali had 
an only son, Safdar ‘Ali, and five sons-in-law, of whom the eldest 
was the infamous Ghulam Mqrtaza ‘Ali of Vellore and third was the 
well-known adventurer, Chanda Sahib. 

In 1734, Safdar ‘Ali and his brother-in-law Chanda Sahib went 
on a roving expedition to the South. Our sources of information 
are not agreed as to the sequence of the events that led to the un¬ 
scrupulous seizure of Trichinopoly by Chanda Sahib from the hands 
of Rani Mlnakshi, the widow of Vijayaranga Chokkanatha, the last 
Nayak of Madura. Chanda Sahib advanced to Trichinopoly a second 


312 


ENGLISH, FRENCH AND OTHER EUROPEAN COMPANIES IN INDIA 

time in 1736, captured Madura and Dindigul and became master erf 
the Nayak kingdom, while Rani Minakshi committed suicide in des¬ 
pair, and Bangaru Tirumala, the father of. her adopted son, sought 
refuge into the forests of Sivaganga. The great Maratha invasion 
of the Kamatak in 1740 was instigated by, among other factors, 
Bangaru Tirumala; RaghujI Bhosle, the leader of the Maratha army, 
directed Murari Rao Ghorpade who was made the Governor of Tri¬ 
chi no poly, to place Bangaru on the Nayak throne. When Nizam-ul- 
Mulk came down to the south country and seized Trichinopoly 
(1743), Bangaru sought Maratha assistance but in vain. With him 
disappeared the last vestige of Hindu rule in the southern district. 3 

According to the historian Mark Wilks, Safdar 4 Alt and Mir 
Asad, the Diwan of the Nawab, had secretly invited the Marathas; 
but the defeat and death of Dost ‘Ali in the pass of Damalchefuvu 
foiled their plan by which the invaders were to have by-passed the 
Nawab quietly and made an attack on Chanda Sahib at Trichinopoly. 
On his father’s death, Safdar ‘Ali shut himself up in Vellore, nego¬ 
tiated with the invaders through Mir Asad and got a secret under¬ 
standing with them by which they were to get a large portion of the 
dominions under Chanda Sahib as the price of his effectual removal 
from the country. After some time the Marathas renewed their 
pillaging operations in the coastal districts. Chanda Sahib had pro¬ 
visioned Trichinopoly against a likely siege; but being deceived by 
the temporary withdrawal of the Marathas, he sold off the provi¬ 
sions. His negotiations to avert an attack, did not succeed, and after 
his brother Bade Sahib was defeated and killed by the enemy, he 
surrendered Trichinopoly in March 1741. 4 

The weak rule of Safdar ‘Ali gave a chance to his crafty cousin 
Murtaza ‘Ali of Vellore to supplant him. The Nawab was assassi¬ 
nated when he visited Vellore on a feast day (October 1742); but 
the usurper could not secure the masnad. The nobles represented 
to the Nizam that the elder of the two sons of the murdered Nawab 
should be raised to the dignity. 

Nizam-ul-Mulk advanced to the Karnatak in the early part of 
1743; he put the elder son of Safdar ‘Ali in charge of one of his 
own officers and restored a semblance of order (August 1743). He 
then proceeded to Trichinopoly which he contrived to secure, after 
six months of desultory operations. Khwaja ‘Abdullah Khan who 
was in charge of the Arcot subdh, was commissioned to re-establish 
Mughul authority in the east. The Nizam left Arcot for Hyderabad 
after formally appointing ‘Abdullah Khan as the Nazim, but the 


313 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


latter died all of a sudden (it was alleged of colic in March 1744); and 
another noble in his service, Anwar-ud-din Khan, who was greatly 
conversant with the politics of the Deccan, was immediately ap¬ 
pointed. Anwar-ud-din took charge of the Karnatak subah in April 
1744, as well as the boy-prince. Soon after, the boy-prince (Sa’ada- 
tullah Khan II) was assassinated by some discontented Afghan 
troopers during a marriage festival (July 1744); and Anwar-ud-din 
was suspected of having had a hand in the tragedy. 5 

Anwar-ud-din was confirmed in his post; he tried to deprive the 
old Nawayat ruling family of all chances of regaining power.. He 
was, however, ignorant of the conditions prevailing in the European 
settlements on the coast and unable to keep the chiefs and poligars 
in submission and order. Hence his administration was not effi¬ 
cient. 6 

It was soon after the accession of Nawab Anwar-ud-din when 
Nicholas Morse had succeeded Benyon as the Governor of Madras 
that news reached the coast that England and France were at war. 
But the English Presidency was then more concerned with Maratha 
and Karnatak politics than with distant European affairs. 

In Bengal the English power grew up steadily in strength and 
prosperity. There were constant rumours, during the War of the 
Spanish Succession, that French privateers would attack English 
shipping in the Hughli river. Nawab Murshid Quli Khan (1704- 
25) was a little jealous of the English, particularly when, as a fruit 
of the embassy of John Surm&n to Farrukh-siyar, they obtained a 
jarman ordering the Nawab not to meddle with them and empower¬ 
ing them to continue to enjoy all their existing privileges. 7 

The Nawab granted the English the right of free trade only on 
payment of a large sum. His successor, Shuja Khan, (1725-39) was 
more favourably disposed towards the Europeans; but he was indo¬ 
lent and guided wholly by two brothers, the younger of whom, the 
famous ‘AH VardI Khan contrived to get the succession on his mas¬ 
ter’s death. ‘All VardI Khan respected the privileges of the Euro¬ 
pean settlements,, as he appreciated the benefits accruing from their 
trade and he is even said to have foreseen, their coming supremacy 
over the country. He fought several campaigns against the Marathas 
who invaded Orissa and Bengal from their base at Nagpur. Dur¬ 
ing one of these invasions the English at Calcutta were permitted to 
dig an entrenchment round the city, the remnants of which are still 
to be seen and the memory of whicji is kept up in popular memory 
as the Maratha Ditch. Though Calcutta grew rapidly in population, 
its fort remained relatively weak. On ‘All VardI Khan’s death in 


314 


ENGLISH, FRENCH AND OTHER EUROPEAN COMPANIES IN INDIA 

1756, the English were more concerned with the doings of the 
Nawab than with the activities of the Dutch and the French in the 
province. 8 

In Bombay since 1690 the English position continued weak. 
The trouble from Kanhoji Angria persisted; he frequently threaten¬ 
ed the safety of Bombay itself from the island of Khanderi; and his 
depredations injured the subordinate English agencies at Surat, Kar- 
war, Tellicherry and Anjengo. Further trouble came from the Arab 
pirates of Muscat. Kanhoji’s successors continued to be hostile. 
After some time the position improved; the English made a treaty 
of friendship with the Peshwd in 1739 after his conquest of Bassein. 
Bombay, however, was the weakest of the three Presidencies, though 
from the point of view of its fortifications it was superior, to both 
Madras and Calcutta. The destruction of the Angria power and the 
storming of their fortress Vijayadurg (Gheria) in alliance with the 
Peshwd were effected in 1756. Thus only gradually did the English 
free themselves from every one of the dangers that beset them, viz., 
the Angria power, the Sidis, oppressive control of the Mughuls 
which now disappeared from Gujarat after 1737, and the Peshwas 
who were now befriended. 

Already the effect of European trade was seen in the smother¬ 
ing of the Indian hold on trade and shipping. The local carrying 
and foreign trade slipped more and more from Indian hands and 
the loss became steadily greater. It was more marked irt the field 
of foreign trade. The Dutch were the first to enforce the most 
thorough-going action in this field. But the English quickly follow¬ 
ed and outpaced them. The growth of the Company’s trade and 
shipping while having an adverse effect on Indian shipping and 
trade, strengthened largely the mercantile marine of England. 9 

II. French Fortunes down to 1746: 

After the death of Martin, Pondicherry deteriorated. Cheva¬ 
lier Hebert who was Governor in the years 1708-13 and 1715-18, 
strove to raise funds and improve trade. He invited prominent 
Indian merchants from Madras to settle at Pondicherry. Among 
these was Tiruvengadam Pillai who laid the basis for the influence 
and power which his famous son, Ananda Ranga was to enjoy later 
as Dubash and Courtier. Lenoir, during his first governorship 
(1721-23) built up French credit with the Indian merchants despite 
lack of a regular supply of goods and bullion from home. In his 
time the commerce of Pondicherry began to revive rapidly. 


315 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Lenoir was Governor for the second time for nine years (1726-35), 
and further increased the prosperity of Pondicherry. 10 His successor, 
Benoit, enlarged French influence and secured for it considerable 
political power. It was during his time that Karikai 11 was acquired 
and the bonds of French friendship with the rulers of the Karnatak 
were strengthened. 

In the face of the Maratha invasion of 1740 Dumas offered a 
refuge to the families both of Safdar ‘Ali and of Chanda Sahib within 
the walls of Pondicherry and defied boldly the Maratha demand for 
their surrender, for which he got the personal title of Nawab and 
the rank of Mansabddr of 4,500 horse. 

Dupleix who succeeded Dumas perceived that the affairs of the 
Karnatak were rapidly drifting into anarchy and determined that 
Pondicherry should be strengthened against possible attacks by 
Indian powers or European rivals. He was convinced that in the 
event of an attack by an European power, the reputation and the 
position of the French would depend much upon the Indian estimate 
of the French power and therefore he strove hard to gain the esteem 
of the Indian rulers. While he carried out the orders of the Direc¬ 
tors to reduce expenditure, he ignored their instructions to stop all 
further fortifications of Pondicherry which he completed with 
moneys from his private purse. 

At the outbreak of the war in Europe between England and 
France (March 1744) the English and the French Companies were 
in possession of about equal power and equal extent of territory. 
But the advantage really lay on the English side, in respect of 
financial stability, commercial prosperity and material resources. 
Both were suffering from a chronic lack of resources and were, 
bitterly jealohs of each other. Each attributed its failure in com¬ 
merce to its inability to maintain a strict trade monopoly between 
Europe and India due to the jealousy and opposition of the other. 
Both were unscrupulous in the methods of trade and diplomacy. 
Dupleix had, for the present, the idea of creating “power by means 
of native alliances and of making France a great power in India by 
the side of native powers.” 'The English were, in a military sense, 
powerless, so far as their strength then stood to seriously injure their 
rivals, but expected that the European war would bring reinforce¬ 
ments. 

As early as 1742 the French, fearing that hostilities might dam¬ 
age their power in India, had approached the English Government 

% 

for a convention of neutrality between the two Companies. The 


316 


ENGLISH, FRENCH AND OTHER EUROPEAN COMPANIES IN INDIA 


French Ministry was so sure of obtaining this convention that it 
ordered their Directors to instruct Dupleix to cut down expenditure 
and to stop the work of fortifying Pondicherry which was going on. 
On the other hand, the English who were then eager for war, rejected 
the French offer and despatched a naval squadron under Commodore 
Barnett to intercept and capture French vessels in the eastern seas 
and to help the English in crippling French commerce in South India. 
Dupleix now tried every possible means to bring about a conven¬ 
tion of neutrality as between Pondicherry and Madras; but Morse 
refused to agree. Dupleix’s alternative hope was that La Bourdon- 
nais, the enterprising Governor of Mauritius and Bourbon who had 
provided himself with a fleet of cruisers and aimed at a dash on the 
English settlements, might come to his help. But this hope ended 
also in disappointment, as La Bourdonnais was just then ordered to 
send his ships to France. Dupleix, however, was not daunted. He 
appealed to Nawab Anwar-ud-din to prohibit the English from attack¬ 
ing the French within his jurisdiction. The Nawab sent a letter 
to the English Governor that the English would be punished for aqy 
injury that they might inflict on the French; and in answer to Morse’s 
protest that he had imperative orders from England to attack the 
French, the Nawab replied that it was the duty of the English as 
settlers on the Coromandel Coast to obey his commands (July 
1745) 12 Consequently Commodore Barnett who had reached the 
coast had to sail away without attacking Pondicherry which he could 
have easily captured. Meanwhile La Bourdonnais had managed to 
fit out another squadron at the Islands with which he reached the 
Coromandel Coast in July 1746. He met the English fleet under 
Peyton (who had succeeded Barnett) off Negapatam in an indecisive' 
engagement. Peyton thereupon made for Trincomalee to repair his 
ships, and La Bourdonnais reached Pondicherry. In August he 
again encountered the English squadron near Negapatam, but Peyton 
refused action under the impression that the French ships had a 
heavier complement of guns, and made for Pulicat, from where though 
he learnt that Madras was about to be attacked by the French 
squadron, he quickly sailed for Bengal. The urgent appeal of 
Governor Morse to him came too late and Peyton escaped it by the 
haste of his departure. 

III. The Anglo-French Struggle: First Phase (1746-1749 ) : 

From the arrival of La Bourdonnais on the coast the commence¬ 
ment of the actual struggle between the English and the French in 
India may be reckoned. 13 La Bourdonnais made Pondicherry safe 
for the time; his fleet commanded the whole coast, while Madras was 


317 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


unprotected. Morse promptly claimed the protection of the Nawab 
which he had promised to extend to the English in such a contin¬ 
gency. 

But the Nawab gave no definite answer to the English appeal and 
was wavering in mind; nor would he order the French not to attack 
the English territories in his province. But Dupleix apd La Bour- 
donnais had all along regarded the capture of Madras as the certain 
fruit of a decisive French victory at sea; and both regarded it as a cer¬ 
tainty from the moment of the retirement of the English squadron. 
La Bourdonnais’ fleet, supplied with additional guns, ammunition and 
men from Pondicherry, appeared in the roads of Madras in the middle 
of September 1746. The French erected batteries, and after a short 
bombardment received the surrender of the Fort from the English 
(September 21). Now began a bitter quarrel between the two 
French leaders as to the disposal of the captured place. 14 

The real facts of the case seem to be something like this. As 
soon as Dupleix received La Bourdonnais’ first letter announcing the 
capture of Madras, he was overjoyed. La Bourdonnais himself was 
at first disposed to be guided by his advice and said that he had some 
discussion with the English regarding the ransom of Madras, but 
had entered into no definite agreement with them as yet. Dupleix 
had resolved from the very first that all discussion about ransom 
should be abandoned; he claimed that he had supreme authority as 
Governor-General of French India to decide the fate of Madras^ 
and that La Bourdonnais was subject to his authority. Dupleix 
pleaded at length with La Bourdonnais, how, with Madras in French 
hands, Fort St. David could not long resist capture, and it would be 
easy to capture even the settlement of Calcutta. Further he 
argued that if Madras were restored to the English for a ransom, the 
latter as soon as their fleet should return, would try to capture Pondi¬ 
cherry itself. La Bourdonnais, partly unwilling to submit to 
Dupleix’s authority and also because he might have received 
a private present from the English, declared that he had already 
pledged his word for a ransom, hastily concluded an agreement for 
the French evacuation of Madras by January 1747, and left the coast 
soon after. 15 

Dupleix was unshaken in his determination to retain Madras 
and treated the English at Madras as prisoners of war. But he had 
lost the help of the fleet, while the Nawab held that his action was 
but a trick to cheat him out of Madras. He sent a strong force under 
his eldest son Mahfuz Khan to wrest Madras from the unfaithful 
French. The details of the battle 16 of Adyar river between Mahfuz 


J18 


ENGLISH, FRENCH AND OTHER EUROPEAN COMPANIES IN INDIA 

Khan and Paradis, are told at length in the Private Diary of Ananda 
Ranga Pillai. The French fire was too hot and quick for 
the Muhammadans. 

Dupleix, now free from all immediate danger on the Nawab’s 
side, was emboldened to proceed to the attack of Fort St. David,, 
the only remaining possession of the English On the coast. He had 
already directed two futile attempts on the fort before March 1747. 
Now Admiral Griffin arrived with a powerful British squadron on 
the coast, saved Fort St. David for the time, and in a short while, 
closed the seas to all French trade. Each succeeding attempt of 
Dupleix to capture Fort St. David angered the Nawab against him 
more and more; and each failure increased the deadlock of the strug¬ 
gle. Though the French enjoyed military superiority, they had to 
garrison Fort St. George, in addition to Pondicherry and Karikal, 
and could not get provisions and other things by sea. In January 
1748 Dupleix personally commanded the third expedition against 
Fort St. David; but it fared no better than the previous ones, since 
an English squadron approached the coast. For some .months the 
deadlock continued; in June a French fleet reached the coast and 
Dupleix launched yet another attack on Fort St. David at a time when 
the English fleet was away. The attempt could have succeeded, but 
for the skill of Major Lawrence who had assumed command of the 
English garrison and forced the French to retreat. In the meantime 
an English fleet under Admiral Boscawen reached the coast in July, 
with the definite aim of reducing Pondicherry before the rains 
should set in. But as the English fleet had been long expected and 
as Dupleix had taken measures to strengthen his fortifications, the 
English attack could make no impression and had to be withdrawn 
with considerable loss through sickness and lack of caution. 
Dupleix’s reputation stood greatly enhanced after this set-back for 
the English. 

News of the conclusion of the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle reached 
India when Dupleix, much elated by his late success, began to plan 
yet another attack on Fort St. David. There was mutual exchange 
of prisoners and places taken in the war. The English got back 
Madras and the French, Cape Breton Island in North America. Thus 
closed the first phase of the Anglo-French struggle. 17 

IV. The Renewal of the Struggle—The War down to thb 

recall of Dupleix ( 1749-1754): 

The temptations which prompted both the English and the 
French to interfere in the politics of the Indian powers were very 


319 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

strong and not easily resisted. The English were the first to move. 
Shahuji, the exile Raja of Tanjore, had offered to cede to them the 
port Devikottai at the mouth of the Coleroon and to pay their ex¬ 
penses, though Pratap Singh, the actual ruler, had been in corres¬ 
pondence with them and they had courted his assistance as against 
the French. The expedition which they sent against Devikottai 
failed. But a second one succeeded. The English thus secured the 
reward without performing their part of the bargain. When Pratap 
Singh promised to confirm the English in their new possession, the 
latter not only renounced the cause of Shahuji but agreed to keep 
him in confinement in Madras. Comment on this action is needless. 18 

On the death of the aged Nizam-ul-Mulk in June 1748, his second 
son Nasir Jang, who had been for the greater part in the/Deccan and 
had acted for his father, promptly seized the treasury and assumed the 
powers and title of subahdar of the Deccan. But a favourite grand¬ 
son of Asaf Jah, Muzaffar Jang by name, who had been governor of 
Adoni and Bijapur for some years, claimed the subahdari on the 
ground that his grandfather had nominated him his successor by a 
will. 

Affairs were also taking a serious turn in the Karnatak. Dupleix 
had clearly seen that Anwar-ud-din was not to be depended upon as 
a firm ally and was disinclined to value or solicit European aid. The 
name of Sa‘adatullah Khan was still popular and the members of 
the Nawayat group to which he belonged were still in control of 
numerous strong forts. Chanda Sahib had been till recently 
prisoner of the Marathas in the Deccan. His wife and family had 
been sheltered at Pondicherry since 1740, and through them Dupleix 
had maintained a close correspondence with him. Largely through 
his good offices, Chanda Sahib was liberated in the early part of 1748 
and even furnished with some Maratha troops. After some move¬ 
ments in which his help was solicited by both the rulers of Chitaldurg 
and Bidnur and he lost his eldest son Abid Sahib in the battle of 
Ivlyconda, he contrived, according to Orme, in obtaining a complete 
victory for his Chitaldurg ally and raised a force of 6,000 men. 
Chanda Sahib then joined Muzaffar Jang and persuaded his ally to 
venture upon the claim to Hyderabad. Early in 1749, French nego¬ 
tiations with Chanda Sahib were complete, by which French help 
was promised to him in his plan of attack against Anwar-ud-din. 19 
Chanda Sahib persuaded Muzaffar Jang to begin their combined ope¬ 
rations in the Karnatak where the former’s influence would be of 
great help to the latter. In June 1749 they moved together towards 
the Karnatak and were joined by a small French force. Anwar-ud-din 


320 


ENGLISH, FRENCH AND OTHER EUROPEAN COMPANIES IN INDIA 

was now thoroughly alarmed and tried to prevent their entry into 
the Payen Ghat or lower Karnatak country. At Ambur, 50 miles to 
the west of Arco’t, Anwar-ud-din was defeated and slain, the defeat 
having been due to the treachery of Husain Khan Tahir, the Jdglrddr 
of Ambur. Mahfuz Khan, the elder son of the Nawab, was made 
prisoner and the younger, Muhammad ‘Ali, escaped to Trichinopoly, 
of which he was the governor (August 1749). The victors entered 
Arcot in triumph and Chanda Sahib was formally installed as the 
Nawab of the Karnatak by Muzaffar Jang. After spending some time 
in receiving the homage of their vassals, the victors proceeded to 
Pondicherry where they indulged in a round of festivities; and 
Chanda Sahib made a grant to the French of eighty villages in the 
vicinity of Pondicherry, while Muzaffar Jang declared his intention of 
giving the districts round Masulipatam to them as soon as his autho¬ 
rity should be established in that quarter. Dupleix urged that the 
victors should advance without the least delay against Trichinopoly 
and drive Muhammad ‘Ali out of the place. But when Muzaffar Jang 
and Chanda Sahib actually set out from Pondicherry in December 
1749, they turned towards Udaiyarpalayam and Tanj ore where they 
expected large contributions which would relieve them from their 
intense financial embarrassments. At Tanjore their doings were not 
fruitful; the Raja procrastinated, Muzaffar Jang was not amenable 
to the directions of either Dupleix or of Chanda Sahib and suddenly 
news reached that Nasir Jang was fairly well on his march into the 
Karnatak with a huge army. When the latter reached Chengamah 
in March 1750 Chanda Sahib retreated in haste from Tanjore across 
the Coleroon, dragging Muzaffar Jang along with him and exposed 
him to stray attacks from the Maratha adventurer, Murar Rao of 
Gooty. Even when protected by the guns of Pondicherry, Muzaffar 
Jang was restive and surrendered to his uncle Nasir Jang and was 
kept a captive. The French troops who were to help Chanda Sahib 
refused to continue in camp on account of some grievances. 

In the meantime, the English were not idle. Madras was res¬ 
tored to them in August, 1749, and all its old inhabitants whom 
Dupleix had tried in vain to seduce to Pondicherry, readily returned 
to it. After the battle of Ambur, Dupleix had tried to secure San 
Thome which would serve as a standing check on Madras, but the 
English cleverly forestalled him by seizing the place by virtue of a 
grant made to them from Muhammad ‘Ali. They sent troops to 
help their ally at Trichinopoly. 20 

The actual entrance of Nasir Jang in the Karnatak was preced¬ 
ed by the rush of Maratha horsemen under Murar Rao. Chanda 

321 

M.S.—21 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Sahib aimed at avoiding encounter with the huge army of Nasir 
Jang and hoped it would eat up the resources of the country and 
then withdrew. In spite of the retreat of the French commander 
D’Auteuil to Pondicherry when Nasir Jang advanced near it, and 
of Muzaffar Jang’s surrender to his uncle, Chanda Sahib continued 
unshaken in his loyalty to Dupleix who was not at all disheartened 
and kept up high pretensions in his negotiations with Nasir Jang 
insisting that, as a necessary condition to any peace, Nasir Jang 
should recognise Chanda Sahib as the rightful Nawab of the Kar- 
natak and no member of the family of Anwar-ud-din should be 
appointed Nawab (March-April 1750). When negotiations broke 
off, Dupleix resorted to intrigue and undermined by bribes and other 
inducements, the loyalty of the Pa than Nawabs of Cuddapah, Kur- 
nool and Savanur; and the court of the Nizam was split into two 
factions, of which the pro-French one was headed by Shah Nawaz 
Khan and his crafty Peshkar , Ramdas Pandit. 

Captain Cope who assisted Muhammad ‘Ali, fought an indecisive 
action with the French who did not fail to profit by the indolence into 
which Nasir Jang fell. In July Dupleix sent some French troops to 
Masulipatam and occupied it. He followed up this success by the 
capture of the temple fortress of Tiruviti from which Muhammad 
'‘Ali had to flee to Jinji, where his troops reassembled. A small 
French force under D’Auteuil and Bussy then advanced against Jinji; 
and their assault and capture of the place in the course of a night 
attack greatly raised their fame. 21 These exploits, besides raising the 
reputation of the French, roused Nasir Jang from his fancied secu¬ 
rity. The latter marched from Arcot whither he had retired towards 
Jinji; but as the monsoon set in, his movements became difficult, 
and his army suffered from scarcity and sickness. In these circum¬ 
stances, he opened negotiations with Dupleix, who, insisted as before, 
upon the recognition of Chanda Sahib as the rightful Nawab, the 
liberation of Muzaffar Jang and the cession of Masulipatam and 
Jinji to the French. During the progress of these negotiations, 
Dupleix had tin*e to enter more fully into intrigue with the trea¬ 
cherous Pa than Nawabs. Before Nasir Jang had time to make new 
proposals, the French commandant of Jinji advanced in his unwieldy 
and sprawling camp. In the midst of the confusion, Nasir Jang was 
shot dead through the heart by one of the Nawabs and Muzaffar Jang 
was released from prison and promptly elevated to the throne. 
Chanda Sahib, on hearing of this revolution, hastened to Pondicherry 
where he and Dupleix embraced ‘like two friends, escaped from ship¬ 
wreck.’ (December, 1750). 22 


322 


ENGLISH, FRENCH AND OTHER EUROPEAN COMPANIES IN INDIA 

Dupleix had now attained the summit of his ambition. The 
Karnatak was in a manner his own and the Deccan was under his 
influence. Two days after his elevation to the masnad of the Deccan 
Muzaffar Jang was received at Pondicherry with acclamation, con¬ 
firmed Chanda Sahib in the Nawabship of the Karnatak and appoint 
ed Dupleix to be his representative in the whole of the country 
up to the south of Krishna. Muhammad ‘Ali’s hold on Trichi- 
nopoly, to which he had escaped from the camp of Nasir Jang, 
was the only obstacle to Dupleix. He had been negotiating that 
Dupleix would persuade Muzaffar Jang to give him a governorship 
in any other part of his dominions, as the condition of his surrender 
of the place. This point was the height, of the ascendancy of the 
French power in India. 

Muzaffar Jang left Pondicherry for his capital in January 1751 
and was accompanied by a French force under Bussy on whom his 
hopes of secure power and even personal safety depended. He 
had scarcely traversed some distance from Pondicherry when the 
Pathan Nawabs of Cuddapah, Kurnool and Savanur who* were discon¬ 
tented with their share of the spoils raised a melee in the Cuddapah 
district in the course of which Muzaffar Jang was cut to pieces. In 
the confusion Bussy persuaded the nobles to agree to the choice of 
Salabat Jang, one of the surviving sons of Nizam-ul-Mulk, who 
promptly confirmed the French in all their privileges. 

Now the English perceived the gravity of their situation. 
Saunders, the English Governor of Madras, despatched a body of Eng¬ 
lish troops and sepoys under Captain Cope to Muhammad ‘Ali’s 
assistance. The latter, taking courage, had broken off air negotia¬ 
tions with the enemy, and when Chanda Sahib, after receiving the 
submission of the chiefs to the north of the Coleroon, prepared to 
march against Trichinopoly in person, the English sent an additional 
contingent to Trichinopoly, which, after a surprise attack at the hands 
of the French near Valikandapuram, reached Muhammad ‘Ali with 
great difficulty (July 1751). 

The operations round Trichinopoly which now commenced and 
lasted for nearly three years, were very complicated. They are 
narrated in great detail and with splendid animation by the contem¬ 
porary historian, Robert Orme. 

Chanda Sahib and the French occupied the island of Srirangam, 
drove the English from the fortress of Koiladi and encamped on the 
south bank of the Kaveri to the east of Trichinopoly. The English 
were twice reinforced, but the enemy troops were far more numerous 


323 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


and there were no deceiving operations for some time. Meanwhile 
the diversion on Arcot was planned. Muhammad ‘Ali, to whom the 
credit for this suggestion should really go, had been of the view that 
troops from Madras could take possession of several places in the 
Arcot country and thus compel the enemy to desist from marching. 
After the English reverse at Valikandapuram, Saunders appreciated 
the value of the Nawab’s proposals. But still he doubted whether 
even the combined forces of the English $nd Muhammad ‘Ali, even 
if they should take Arcot, might be strong enough to keep it and 
collect the tributes from the poligars without considerably diminish¬ 
ing the garrison at Trichinopoly and thereby facilitating the enemy. 
Muhammad ‘Ali strongly urged his plan and Saunders entrusted 
Clive, who now came into prominence, with the task of the capture 
of Arcot. 

The capture of Arcot by Clive 23 (August 1751) assisted by the 
Nawab’s troops did not make any impression on Dupleix who believed 
that the place could be easily retaken. The subsequent siege oi 
Arcot by Raza Sahib, assisted by French troops lasted 50 days. 
Murtaza ‘Ali quarrelled, or pretended to quarrel with Raza Sahib, 
while Murar Rao definitely went over to the side of the English. On 
the 24th of November the enemy raised the siege and retreated—- 
the event being deemed to be ‘the turning point in the eastern career 
of the English’. Clive pursued the retreating enemy through Chettu- 
pattu to Jinji. After a short stay at Fort St. George, he reassembled 
his troops as the enemy began to ravage the neighbourhood. In 
February 1752, Clive won the victory of Kaveripauk. Just then he 
was summoned to lead a body of troops to relieve Trichinopoly which 
was still besieged. He accompanied Major Lawrence who had as¬ 
sumed the command and reached the place by the end of March 1752. 
Muhammad ‘Ali’s chief reliance was on the help from Nanjaraj of 
Mysore. The accession of Mysore to his side was followed by that 
of the Raja of Tanjore and of Murar Rao. But all this was little 
avail so long as the French were superior in regular forces. Dupleix, 
anxious to retain the superiority, had strictly ordered Law, the French 
commander at Trichinopoly, to attack and intercept the advancing 
forces of Lawrence. But Law was unenterprising while Lawrence 
cleverly distracted his attention and by-passed him. Law now foolish¬ 
ly resolved to retreat into the island of Srirangam, which was with¬ 
in actual cannon-shot and could be cut off from all supplies and com¬ 
munication. Chanda Sahib protested against this suicidal course; 
and Dupleix held it to be the worst piece of folly that Law could 
commit and urged him that if he should retreat at all, he should 


324 


ENGLISH, FRENCH AND OTHER EUROPEAN COMPANIES IN INDIA 

march back on Pondicherry so as to allow reinforcements joining 
him at a distance from Lawrence’s forces. Clive took up a strong, 
position to the north of Srirangam and on the road to Pondicherry* 
with a view to cut off any reinforcements;* from Dupleix reaching 
Law. He also repulsed a surprise attack made on his position. Law’s 
only hope of safety now lay in his conjunction with D’Auteuil who 
headed the convoy from Pondicherry. But Captain Dalton tricked 
D’Auteuil into the belief that the entire British army was advancing 
against him and forced him to retreat, leaving* all his stores and am¬ 
munition in English hands. 

The communications of the enemy were now completely cut off; 
and most of Chanda Sahib's adherents now deserted him. He had fre¬ 
quently urged upon Law the necessity of their making a final effort 
to break away. But repeated failures had depressed his mind and 
undermined his health. He attempted to gain over the Tanjore 
general to his side, in the hope that the latter might aid his escape 
tc Karikal. But when he surrendered, he was promptly imprisoned. 
Lawrence proposed that Chanda Sahib should be given over to the 
English for safe custody; but the proposal was unacceptable to all his 
native allies, especially to Muhammad ‘Ali. Ultimately Chanda 
Sahib was killed, it is said, at the instigation of Muhammad ‘Ali 
(June 17521. 24 

Thus ended the French siege of Trichinopoly. No such blow had 
fallen on the French since they entered the field of Indian politics. 
Their ally, Chanda Sahib, was no more, and their military prestige 
was vastly lowered. The triumph of the English was great; their re¬ 
presentative, Muhammad ‘Ali, was now the undisputed master of 
Trichinopoly. Bussy, the only capable general on the French side 
was by the side of the Nizam far away from Pondicherry. Pondi¬ 
cherry itself had been denuded of its garrison; and JinjI and other 

places in French possession were equally unprotected. 

» 

V. French influence in the Deccan: 

But French influence in the Deccan continued to be in tne as¬ 
cendant. The events which followed Salabat Jang’s elevation 
strengthened the French hold over him. Scarcely had he crossed 
the Krishna on his march to his capital, when the Peshwa attacked 
his dominions, having come to a secret understanding with Ghazi-ud- 
din Khan, the eldest son of Nizam-ul-Mulk who had hitherto remain¬ 
ed at Delhi and now put forward a claim to his father’s throne; but 


325 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

domestic troubles forced the Marathas to retire to Poona for the time. 
The threatened arrival of Ghazi-ud-din, the possibility of a renewed 
Maratha invasion and the spirit of disaffection which prevailed in the 
northern part of his dominions compelled Salabat to set off for 
Aurangabad where Bussy restored discipline among the troops and 
won, by his tact, the respect of the nobles. When the Marathas re¬ 
newed their invasion, Bussy pursued the war into the enemy coun¬ 
try and defeated the retreating Maratha troops very near Poona it¬ 
self (December 1751). The Marathas lost heavily and Bussy’s fame 
resounded throughout the land. Raja Ramdas who was now in great 
power at the Nizam’s court, was sincerely devoted to French interests 
and almost an agent of Dupleix; and Salabat Jang reconfirmed the 
cession to French of the territory round Masulipatam and conferred 
the government of Karnatak on Dupleix and his successor. 

When Raja Ramdas was killed by assassins (7 April, 1752), 
Salabat Jang retreated to Ahmadnagar and submitted to an armistice 
and Bussy cleverly conciliated Sayyid Lashkar Khan, the new minis¬ 
ter, who was inimical to the French. Within a few months Ghazi- 
-ud-din Khan appeared in person at Aurangabad armed with a grant 
from the titular Mughul emperor appointing him to be the Niz&m. 
He was quickly joined by the Peshwa; and when his offer to Dupleix 
on condition that French assistance was to be withdrawn from Sala¬ 
bat Jang was refused, he gave a formal grant to Muhammad ‘Ali of 
the Nawabship of the Karnatak. The contest between Nasir Jang 
and Muzaffar Jang seemed now about to be repeated. But the situa¬ 
tion was saved by the sudden death of Ghazi-ud-din by poison. 25 
Bussy, influential as ever, defeated Raghuji Bhosle of BerSr who 
was ravaging the northern districts and came to an understanding 
with the Peshwa and Bhosle at Bhalki (November 1752). As his 
reward, Bussy got the grant of an extensive district on the right bank 
of the Krishna, which he immediately made over to his nation. It 
was his wish to take Salabat Jang to the Karnatak where French 
affairs had badly deteriorated. But a sudden revolution at Hydera¬ 
bad where Sayyid Lashkar Khan contrived to take advantage of 
Bussy’s retirement* to Masulipatam for recouping his health, scatter¬ 
ed the French troops in different parts and induced Salabat Jang to 
dismiss his French bodyguard and even enter into an active cor¬ 
respondence with the English. 

Dupleix saw the seriousness of the situation, directed Bussy to 
proceed forthwith to Hyderabad and learnt with satisfaction that the 
latter had succeeded in overawing his enemies and in making. Sayyid 
Lashkar Khan, the new minister, to submit to a settlement. 26 


326 


ENGLISH, FRENCH AND OTHER EUROPEAN COMPANIES IN INDIA 


The French occupation of the Northern Sarkars was not entire¬ 
ly peaceful. The local Muhammadan governor and the powerful 
Raja of Vizianagaram were subdued only after great difficulty. 
Meanwhile Bussy was engaged in various punitive campaigns in 
order to reduce the half-independent zaminddrs and hill-chiefs of the 
interior. He also adjusted several disputes which had arisen between 
Salabat Jang and the Raja of Mysore and Murar Rao. 

To revert to the Karnatak affairs: Lawrence thought that he 
had nothing more to do, now that Chanda Sahib had disappeared, 
than to put Muhammad ‘Ali in possession of all his territories. But 
he soon perceived that serious dissensions had arisen between the 
Nawab and his other allies, the Mysoreans and the Tanjoreans. 
Nanjaraj, the Mysore general, demanded the cession of Trichinopoly 
and its dependencies to himself, while the astute Murar Rao, offer¬ 
ing to mediate between the Nawab and the Dalwai, only made the 
breach wider. The Nawab protracted negotiations and the Dalwai 
tried to persuade Lawrence to return to Madras, because on the 
English departing, he could easily secure Trichinopoly either by force 
or fraud. 

Dupleix now got some reinforcements and profiting by these dis¬ 
sensions, audaciously claimed the right to act in the name of Salabat 
Jang, and even proclaimed Raza Sahib, the son of Chanda Sahib, to 
be the rightful Nawab of the Karnatak. An English attempt to re¬ 
duce Jinji was repulsed; and elated by this success, Dupleix sent a 
force to march against Fort St. David, which was however compelled 
to retreat. Lawrence refrained from an actual violation of French 

territory, observing the rules of war then in force, but contrived to 

* 

induce the French to come out of Pondicherry and severely defeated 
them at Bahur (near Pondicherry) Clive reduced the forts of Cove- 
long and Chingleput and then retired on sick leave to England; and 
Lawrence went back to Fort St. David for the monsoon season. 

Meanwhile Dupleix reopened negotiations with the Mysore 
Dalwai and persuaded Murar Rao 27 to join him openly. In Decem¬ 
ber, 1752, the Madras Council declared Nanjaraj to have become an 
open enemy After a few skirmishes the English were compelled, 
on account of their poor strength, to remain on the defensive; while 
the Mysoreahs began so close a blockade of Trichinopoly, that when 
Lawrence proceeded to its relief early in 1753, he had to remain in* 
active for some time, and his supplies from the friendly Raja of 
Pudukottah were attempted to be cut off by Astruc, the astute French 
commander. 23 


327 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


In other parts of Karnatak also, affairs were moving badly for 
the English. Tiruviti fort to the west of Cuddalore, fell into French 
hands. Tiruvannamalai was threatened by them and Muhammad 
‘Ali’s troops were driven from Arcot and Dupleix sent a strong re¬ 
inforcement to Astruc which rendered the position of Lawrence most 
perilous. The latter however launched an unexpected attack against 
a strong rock position which struck the French with panic and crea¬ 
ted dissensions between them and their allies. He also gained the 
Raja of Tanjore over to his side and got reinforcements from Fort 
St. David, and in a few days was able to inflict a second defeat on 
the enemy, following it by driving the French out of an entrenched 
position. When Astruc retook the command, Lawrence again launch¬ 
ed a sudden attack on the French position, dispersed their allies and 
took Astruc himself prisoner. But Dupleix sent every available sol¬ 
dier to Srirangam where the French were then encamped, and in a 
sense of over-confidence, they attempted to storm the fort, but only 
exposed themselves to a severe and devastating fire. This success 
saved Trichinopoly from the most serious danger that had befallen 
it during the course of the war (November 1753) and Captain Dalton, 
“the hero and defender of Trichinopoly ,J , beat up the Mysore camp 
and expelled from the city all Mysoreans. (Letter from Lt. J. Harri¬ 
son, dated 13 December, 1753—in Orme, MSS , India III, 26). 

The acute part of the struggle was now over. But though Law¬ 
rence cduld defeat the French in the field, he could not drive them 
away being deficient in cavalry. On the other side, Dupleix also was 
at the end of his resources. In the beginning of January 1754, com¬ 
missioners from Madras and Pondicherry met at the Dutch settle¬ 
ment of Sadras to adjust the claims of the English and Muhammad 
4 Ali as against those of Salabat Jang and the French. But the basic 
demands of the two parties were quite irreconcilable with each other 
from the outset.^ 9 

At the same time the English negotiated with the Mysoreans. 
Lawrence continued on the defensive trying to secure supplies from 
Tanjore and Pudukottai. In the course of these operations Law¬ 
rence was helped by a brave Indian soldier, Muhammad Yusuf Khan, 
who was the captain of the sepoys in the English service and later 
became the Nawab’s governor of Madura and Tinnevelly. At Jast 
the French, disheartened by their repeated failures, attempted to des¬ 
troy the dam across the Kaveri river on which the prosperity of the 
kingdom of Tanjore depended. This act threw the Raja of Tanjore 
firmly into English hands. But before a decisive struggle could be 
fought, the rains had begun and operations had to be suspended. 


328 


ENGLISH, FRENCH AND OTHER EUROPEAN COMPANIES IN INDIA 

Lawrence retired to winter quarters; and about the same time a 
strong English fleet under Admiral Watson reached Madras. Imme¬ 
diately afterwards, news was received of the recall of Dupleix and 
of the conclusion of a truce preparatory to a final peace between the 
two Companies. 30 

VI. Events down to the advent of Lally (1754-58): 

Before his departure from Pondicherry, Dupleix gave Godeheu, 
his successor, a detailed account of the military operations in pro¬ 
gress and advised him to maintain Bussy at the Nizam’s court to 
strengthen the French hold over the Northern Sarkars, to push on 
vigorously the operations against Trichinopoly and to send there the 
reinforcements that came along with him before the expected arrival 
of Admiral Watson. Godeheu gave no indication of the course that 
he intended to pursue. The provisional treaty of January 1755 be¬ 
tween himself and the English Governor declared that both the 
Companies should renounce all Indian governments and dignities 
and not interfere in the disputes of the Indian powers; and both 
parties should restrain their native allies from carrying on the war. 
No mention was made of Muhammad ‘Ali and not a single reference 
was there as to the pretensions of Dupleix to the rulership of the 
Karnatak 

Dupleix declared that Godeheu signed away in this treaty “the 
ruin of the country and the dishonour of the nation” and held that 
when Godeheu landed at Pondicherry in August 1754, French affairs 
had already taken a turn for the better. Even Cultru, a recent 
French exponent of Dupleix’s genius and work, leans to this view. 
Godeheu himself found “on his arrival the greatest confusion, the 
army clamouring for pay, and the treasury empty” and was convinc¬ 
ed that it would be folly to continue the war. The Pondicherry 
Council wrote to Paris immediately after the provisional treaty of 
January 1755 that nothing more fortunate could have happened to 
the French. The English were also of the same opinion. They held 
that the peace was unduly favourable to the enemy. Admiral 
Watson loudly declared that the treaty tied his hands and robbed the 
English of further victory. Edward Ives, who came to India with 
Watson’s fleet in the latter part of 1754 wrote thus: “The peace was 
by all deemed to have been a masterly stroke of French politics. ” 3 °a 
Orme, the contemporary historian of the Anglo-French Wats, is also 
of the same opinion; and he wrote that the English were obliged to 
conclude “a truce on such precarious and unequal terms as would 
enable the French to recommence the war with double strength if 


329 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


the conditional treaty were not accepted by their ministry in Europe.” 
It must also be remembered that Godeheu at first stood out for higher 
terms, and it was only after the arrival of Watson’s fleet with a strong 
force on board that he came down in his demands. It is also a mis¬ 
take to suppose that the peace was in any sense humiliating to the 
French or deprived them of their possessions and power to an undue 
extent. “Godeheu fully appreciated the work of Bussy, who him¬ 
self had no illusions as to the critical position of affairs; and in spite 
of the clause against interference in native politics, the latter was 
left undisturbed at Hyderabad. Finally the peace was only provi¬ 
sional and required ratification, which never came, for the outbreak 
of the Seven Years’ War occurred before the decision of the home 
authorities was known. Therefore, even the slight territorial changes 
suggested in the draft treaty were never made.... and it was the 
outbreak of hostilities in 1756, and not Godeheu’s treaty which ruin¬ 
ed the French settlements in India ” 

An enthusiastic French admirer of Dupleix says that “the 
English have charged themselves to prove to the world that Dupleix 
was no dreamer and that his plans were never chimerical; on the con¬ 
trary the English themselves have adopted them; they were his dis¬ 
ciples.” 

Opposed to this view is the reverse side of the picture, which 
paints Dupleix in comparatively dark colours. Thornton, the emi¬ 
nent historian of British India, declares that in Dupleix’s character, 
ambition, vanity and duplicity formed predominant elements. His 
ambition was that of a man who aspires to sudden greatness. His 
vanity was well-known to his contemporaries; and his duplicity was 
carried in some instances to a very bad extent. Major Lawrence 
wrote of him a few months before his departure, that “he neither 
values men nor money, nor anything but what can gratify his own 
ambition. ... he talks not like the Governor of Pondicherry, but as 
the prince of the province.” Dupleix treated the Directors and minis¬ 
ters at Paris as if they were persons of no importance at all. He 
withheld from them information as to the real state of affairs, in¬ 
forming them of his victories, but concealing from them his reverses. 

Dupleix’s policy was not so consistent and far seeing as has 
been alleged sometimes. His plans of an extended dominion and of 
the destruction of the English power are not traceable distinctly be¬ 
fore 1746. With many splendid gifts he was defective in calm and 
plain judgment. His plans were boldly outlined and skilfully form¬ 
ed, but the course which he pursued was not cautious and definite. 


330 


ENGLISH, FRENCH AND OTHER EUROPEAN COMPANIES IN INDIA 


His ostentatious parade of Mughul dignities and of sovereign power 
and his intrigues with the Indian princes were blunders, because a 
European governor ought to rule on European principles and by 
European forms. 

Yet in spite of his many defects and his final failure, Dupleix is 
a striking and brilliant figure in Indian history. The mature judg¬ 
ment of Elphinstone pays a warm tribute to the memory of the great 
French Governor thus: “We look with admiration on the founder of 
the European ascendancy in India, to whose genius the mighty 
changes which are now working in Asia owe their being; the first 
who made an extensive use of disciplined sepoys; the first who quit¬ 
ted the ports on the sea and marched an army into the heart of the 
continent; the first above all, who discovered the illusion of the 
Mughal greatness, and turned to his own purposes the phantom.” 
(The Rise of the British Power in the East , pp. 226-27). 

Soon after the conclusion of the Treaty both parties began to re¬ 
gard it as a mere truce, and while pretending to adhere to its provi¬ 
sions, each tried to secure for himself special advantages, the French 
in the Deccan and the English in the districts of Madura and Tin- 
nevelly where by subduing the poligars for their Nawab, they hoped 
to gain financial benefit. Godeheu and Saunders left India soon 
after the peace; and De Leyrit, the new Governor of Pondicherry, 
was soon convinced that a further war with the English was inevit¬ 
able. 

When news of the outbreak of the Seven Years’ War reached 
India towards the end of 1756, De Leyrit learnt that France was pre¬ 
paring to send a powerful armament and sent all available troops 
against Trichinopoly which was then but weakly garrisoned. The 
French contrived to occupy several strong positions to the east and 
south of the city. But a relieving English force under Caillaud 
entered Trichinopoly cleverly and forced the French to retreat to 
Pondicherry (June 1757). After this the French concentrated all 
their forces on the relief of Wandiwash fort which was then threaten¬ 
ed by the English. They followed up this operation by capturing 
Tiruvannamalai and several neighbouring forts. When Lally 
landed at Pondicherry in April 1758, the situation had veered round 
definitely to the advantage of the French. All the strong forts of the 
Karnatak with the exception of Arcot, Vellore, C^onjeevaram and 
Chingleput were in their hands. The English forces were shut up 
in Trichinopoly; they had to garrison Madras and Fort St. David and 
their available troops had been despatched in the previous year to 


331 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Bengal, while the fleet under Watson was in the Hughli. For the 
moment, on the Coromandel Coast the French were not only masters 
on the land, but were also supreme at sea up to the end of 1758. 

VII. Deccan hffairs: 

Both De Leyrit and Godeheu maintained Bussy and the French 
contingent at the Nizam’s court. But Dupleix’s departure shook the 
confidence of the Nizam and his advisers in the strength of the 
French, and when Bussy announced to Salabat Jang the terms of 
the Treaty of Pondicherry, the latter significantly remarked: “You 
know that the state of my affairs necessarily demands the support 
of European power; on this condition I am able to govern. Either 
you must remain here or I must enlist the English in my interest.” 
Bussy’s prompt help to Salabat Jang who marched against Mysore 
for claiming all arrears of tribute, his success in protecting the coun¬ 
try along the march from plunder and pillage and in bringing about 
peace with the Mysoreans, as well as the Marathas who made a simul¬ 
taneous attack, enabled French influence to continue unabated in 
1755. In the next year Shah Nawaz Khan and the anti-French party 
in the Deccan got the ears of Salabat Jang who was then staying at 
Aurangabad, turned his mind against the French and applied to the 
Peshwd for assistance in driving them out. The latter most readily 
accepted the invitation and cleverly made an offer to Bussy that he 
should enter the Maratha service. Bussy, who was then at Masuli- 
patam, made his way to Hyderabad where he determined upon the 
bold expedient of attacking the city itself and there standing on the 
defensive. The reinforcements sent to him in time from Masuli- 
patam succeeded after much fighting into forcing their way to his 
camp. This bold stand of Bussy impressed the feeble mind of 
Salabat Jang. On the same day, when Bussy was joined by the re¬ 
inforcements under Law, his rank and honour were fixed as high as 
before at a public durbar (August 1756). But he no longer ex¬ 
perienced or retained that complete hold which he had hitherto en¬ 
joyed. 31 

Salabat Jang’s reconciliation was chiefly due to the revolution 
in Bengal and the capture of Calcutta by Siraj-ud-daulah and the 
diversion to Bengal of the proposed English expedition. Bussy spent 
some months in the subjugation of the unsettled parts of the Nor¬ 
thern Sarkars. He made a triumphal progress through the country 
and met with no resistance at all, except at Bobbili where, at the in¬ 
stigation of the crafty Vijayarama ^Raju of Vijayanagaram, he pul 
to the sword all the brave defenders. 32 He secured Vizagapatam and 


332 


ENGLISH, FRENCH AND OTHER EUROPEAN COMPANIES IN INDIA 

other settlements of the English in the Sarkars. He was even temp¬ 
ted by Siraj -ud-daulah to march into Orissa and Bengal and help 
him against Clive who had arrived at Calcutta at the head of the 
avenging expedition. But he soon learnt that Clive had forestalled 
him, coerced the Nawab into submission and taken by assault 
Chandranagur, the French settlement on the Hughli. He proceeded 
to attack the English establishments within the Sarkars and captured 
all of them (1757). 

While Bussy was thus occupied with the affairs of the Sarkars, 
a conspiracy was formed against Salabat Jang by Shah Nawaz Khan 
for raising Nizam ‘Ali, his younger brother, to power and expelling 
the French with the assistance of the Marathas. Bussy quickly 
marched to the rescue of his master. The presence of the French 
army and the personal influence of Bussy tore the conspiracy to 
shreds. Salabat Jang, who had been reduced to impotence,, was re¬ 
stored to power, and Nizam ‘Ali was forced to take refuge in flight 
(February 1758). Bussy succeeded in restoring some degree of 
order and stability in the state and returned in triumph to Hydera¬ 
bad, where he received from Count de Lally, who had just then 
landed at Pondicherry, orders to. return to the Karnafak with all his 
troops. 

VIII. Lally and the End of French dominion (1758-61): 

Count de Lally was descended from an Irish emigre family and 
had distinguished himself in the War of the Austrian Succession, and 
accompanied Prince Charles in the Rebellion of the Forty-five’. He 
was a brave, conscientious and incorruptible soldier, but insolent, 
irritable and destitute of comprehension and extended vision. His 
voyage to India was protracted and attended by the loss of a good 
proportion of his men. But when he landed at Pondicherry in April 
1758, the bulk of the English troops and their whole fleet were away 
in Bengal with no prospect of their speedy return. Only a portion 
of the Englsh fleet returned from Bengal and met the French squa¬ 
dron that carried Lally’s expedition, in an indecisive engagement 
near Cuddalore. Immediately after his landing, Lally marched a 
portion of his army against Fort St. David. He became impatient 
over the preparations for the expedition with De Leyrit and indis¬ 
criminately impressed many Indian inhabitants of Pondicherry. 
When the weak garrison of Fort St. David capitulated, after a short 
resistance, Lally was overjoyed and immediately despatched a de¬ 
tachment to Devikottai which also surrendered. It was expected 
that he would now turn to the capture of Madras whose Governor, 


333 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


George Pigot, had appealed to Clive for reinforcements. But the 
latter was convinced that Lally could not take Madras as it was 
well supplied with provisions and declined to weaken his own posi¬ 
tion in the imminent crisis he had to face. Meawhile Lally had 
quarrelled most violently with De Leyrit as he was unable to furnish 
him with money or means of transport, but found that he could do 
nothing except lose his temper. D’Ache, the French Admiral, was 
also obstructive. Lally resolved to march into the Tanjore country 
to enforce from its Raja the payment of a bond executed by him in 
1750 to Chanda Sahib for 56 lakhs of rupees which had been handed 
over to Dupleix. He proceeded to Karikal, ravaged the country 
along his march to Tanjore, and after fruitless negotiations, began a 
regular siege of the fort. But after some days, on account of lack of 
ammunition and provisions, and because the English fleet now ac¬ 
tually threatened Karikal, which was his base, he spiked his guns 
and retreated in haste to Pondicherry, closely followed and harassed 
by the enemy (July-August, 1758). D’Ache after fighting an in¬ 
decisive engagement with the English, decided to quit the Coroman¬ 
del Coast for Mauritius, against the united opinion of Lally and the 
Pondicherry Council. From this time (August 1758) the English 
had the undisputed command of the sea. In April 1759, D’Ache ap¬ 
peared again on the Coromandel Coast, but his stay was short, and 
after a feeble encounter with the English fleet, he quitted never to 
appear again. 

Lally’s ineffective entry into the Tanjore country discredited 
him very much. Another great mistake he committed was the re¬ 
call of Bussy and Moracin, the Governor of the Northern Sarkars, 
to join him with all their troops, leaving at Masulipatam only a small 
force under the capable Conflans. 33 

A few days before the battle of Condore, Lally began the long- 
pending siege of Madras (December 12), which was defended by 
Colonel Lawrence and Colonel Draper under the invigorating inspi¬ 
ration of Pigot. The French occupied the Black Town to the north 
of the fort and indulged in a continuous cannonade of the fort for ten 
weeks. Meanwhile Caillaud, joined by Muhammad Yusuf and 
‘Abdul Wahab Khan, repulsed a French force in the neighbourhood 
(December). When the English fleet under Admiral Pocock was 
sighted off the coast, Lally precipitately raised the siege and moved 
to Arcot which he had captured previously and wherein he was 
joined by Bussy and proclaimed Kaza Sahib as the rightful Nawab. 

The war in the Karnatak dragged on. The French troops be¬ 
came utterly demoralised. The garrisons in some forts even made 


334 


ENGLISH, FRENCH AND OTHER EUROPEAN COMPANIES IN INDIA 


overtures to the enemy. After D’Ache’s departure from the coast in 
April 1759, there was absolutely no hope of further reinforcements 
from France, while the estrangement between Lally and the Pondi¬ 
cherry Council grew rapidly worse. Kaveripauk was evacuated in 
July. But the English capitulated at Tyagadurg. Colonel Eyre 
Coote, now in command, resolved to strike a blow at the fort of 
Wandiwash which, with the exception of Arcot, was now the most 
important place. Lally made an attempt to recover it. In the battle 
which followed, Coote won a decisive victory, while Lally lost 
heavily in men and guns, Bussy himself being among the prisoners 
taken (January 1760). 34 The moral effect of the English victory was 
great. Lally was forced to fall back on Pondicherry with a demo¬ 
ralised army and disabled from attempting any operation in the open 
field. Coote followed up his victory by capturing most of the re¬ 
maining fortresses in French hands, like Arcot, Tiruvannamalai, etc. 
Even Pondicherry would have fallen easily, but for the unexpected 
emergence of a new ally to Lally in the shape of Haidar ‘Ali of 
Mysore. 

Towards the end of August 1760 an English fleet appeared on 
the coast. With its co-operation, Coote proceeded to an active in¬ 
vestment of Pondicherry. He soon captured all its outposts and in¬ 
stituted a strict blockade. After more than four months of desperate 
resistance, Lally, sick and worn out with despair and exhaustion, 
surrendered unconditionally (January 1761). The English ruth¬ 
lessly demolished all the fortifications of the city. Tyagadurg and 
JinjI, the two remaining fortresses of the French in the Karnatak 
speedily surrendered and Mahe was also reduced. By April 1761, 
not a single place remained to the French in India. They never re¬ 
covered from the ruin into which they were plunged. The treaty 
of Paris restored to them Pondicherry and other settlements. But 
they were restored “dismantled and defenceless, with their trade 
annihilated, with their influence gone, with the curse of their defeat 
and failure stamped upon their habitations.” The English had by 
this time, become dominant in Bengal and firmly rooted in the Kar¬ 
natak. There were later attempts of the French made from time to 
time to regain their dominion till the era of Napoleonic wars. Finan¬ 
cial weakness, slack trade, lack of sea-power and of protection against 
naval attack and communications with home, were the main causes 
cf the defeat of the French. The English displayed a commendable 
military superiority and in all the phases of the struggle their fleet 
came to their rescue. Clive’s services in the most critical situations 
of the struggle should be remembered. Bengal gave them after 


335 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


1757 an invincible strength of force and an overwhelming superio¬ 
rity in finance. 


NOTES 

1. The Ostend Company’s trade was vigorous during the few years that it lasted 
and it managed to pay good dividends to its shareholders. Its settlement at 
Bankibazar in Bengal was destroyed by the Nawab at the instigation of the 
English and the Dutch. 

2. The rule of Nawab Sa’adatullah as Nawab (1710-32) is praised in the Tuzuk-i- 
Walajahi of Burhanuddin. (Pt. I, tr. by S. M. H. Nainar, 1934), p. 68. 

3- Conflicting versions are given of the course of events that led to the extinction 
of the Nayak line by the indigenous chronicles—that of Narayana Kone and the 
Telugu History of Karnatak, and by writers like Wilson ( The Pandian Chro¬ 
nicle ), Orme and Wilks. 

4. Great uncertainty prevailed as to what the Marathas would do. One view was 
that the Hindu chiefs and the Tanjore Raja who assisted the Marathas stipu¬ 
lated that Trichinopoly should not be left in Muslim hands. Both the English 
and French letters graphically describe the anarchy prevailing in the country 
and the poverty and impotence of Nawab Safdar ‘AH. The adventurer, Murar 
Rao, was left in charge of Trichinopoly till he was forced by Nizam-ul-Mulk 
to evacuate it in the latter part of 1743. The Maratha campaign enabled RaghujI 
Bhosle to secure over the mind of Raja Shahu, as' powerful a hold as that en¬ 
joyed by BajI Rao Peshwd himself. 

5. The contemporary letter from Fort St. George (dated Sept. 5, 1744), absolved 
Anwar-ud-din from all share in the guilt though he had an idea of settling the 
succession to the Nawabship after himself in favour of his son Mahfuz Khan. 
It says that Murtaza ‘Ali hired Pathans to assassinate Anwar-ud-din also. 

6- Paupaya the Younger, who was the Company’s interpreter at Madras and who 
prepared a manuscript history of the Karnatak in 1749 (now preserved among 
the Orme Manuscripts in the India Office) held the rule of Anwar-ud-din in 
scanty estimation and declared that it was “the most spiritless, covetous, severe 

and unjust_ among all the late governors of the Carnatic.” (Orme, MSS, 

Pt. II: India, Vol. 1(2), pp. 5a-100 (1-50): History of the Carnatic to 1749 hy 
Paupa Bramin. 

7- John Surman was accompanied on his mission by an Armenian, Khwaja Sarhad. 
The plan of the embassy was originally conceived by Governor Thomas Pitt of 
Madras. See Diary of Messrs. Surman and Stephenson, Pt. II in C R. Wilson’s 
Early Annals of the English in Bengal, Vol. II, ed. by W. Irwin, 1911. 

*8. For the Nawab’s relations with the English and other Europeans, see Chap. V 
of K. K. Datta’s Alivardi and His Times (1939) based on the records and on 
the observations of Jean Law, Scrafton, Hill and others, and on the Siyar-ul- 
Mutakherin. 

9. “The constant depredations, frequent piracies, naval fights, sporadic hostilities 
of these Europeans amongst themselves and with the Asiatic powers, intimi¬ 
dated Indian merchants and shippers. A positive discouragement was the re¬ 
sult of the stringent measures which were deliberately adopted, to monopolise, 
comer and control the purchase and sale of important merchandise, so that 
Indians and generally all Asiatics were excluded from every lucrative branch 
of the foreign trade of the country. Along with these are to be counted the 
great concessions .of lower customs duties, freedom from transit dues, as well 
as from harassment and delay on the way at the numerous toll-houses. These 
three categories of causes narrowed down the activities of Indian merchants to 
the inland trade alone.” Balakrishna, Commercial Relations between India 
and England, pp. 163-74. 

10- He was able to transmit to Europe 31 lakhs of rupees of merchandise and 
carried out those improvements in the town which had been in contemplation 
from the time of Martin. 

11. Karikal gave the French a port on the rich Tanjore coast. 

12. In September 1745 the Nawab made a state entry into Pondicherry and was 
royally received by Dupleix. 

13 • This struggle lasted for about 16 years, from the French capture of Madras in 
1746 down to the English capture of Pondicherry in 1761. 

336 


ENGLISH, FRENCH AND OTHER EUROPEAN COMPANIES IN INDIA 


The whole course of the struggle may be divided into three periods. The 
first of these divisions lasted from the commencement of active hostilities in 
1746 down to the conclusion of the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1748, which 
restored, for both’the combatants, the conditions existing before the war. The 
second period began almost immediately after the conclusion of the treaty and 
was terminated by the Treaty of Pondicherry in 1754. This period saw the 
contest waged in another form, that of an indirect struggle in which both the 
nations, nominally at peace in Europe, were allies of warring native powers, 
but scarcely less vital. It ended with the French Company’s recall of Dupleix 
and its attempt to reverse his policy. The third stage began with the declara¬ 
tion of the Seven Years’ War in Europe in 1756 and lasted until the final des¬ 
truction of French power in 1761. 

14. Early English historians were inclined to exonerate La Bourdonnais from all 
blame; afterwards opinion changed and Dupleix was praised, arid La Bourdon¬ 
nais blamed as the chief cause of the quarrel. Truth lies probably in a middle 
course— See for a detailed discussion—Misunderstandings between Dupleix and 
La Bourdonnais, pp. 32-37 of C S. Srinivasachari’s Ananda Ranga Pillai: The 
Pepys of French India (1940). 

15. One reason that he assigned for his hasty departure was that the north-east 
monsoon rains were approaching and had already damaged some of his ships. 
La Bourdonnais had studied the memorandum and plan prepared by . Paradis, 
who had made a secret visit to Madras under instruction of Dupleix and he 
had early explained his project to capture the place when war should be de¬ 
clared. He found the plan of Paradis feasible even before his earlier return 
from the coast to Mauritius after re-establishing the French Factory at Mahe. 
Dupleix himself had had Madras once more thoroughly inspected and produced 
a plan of the place from his step-daughter, who had married an Englishman. 
(G. W. Forrest: The Siege of Madras in 1745 and the Action of La Bourdonnais 
1908). 

16. The battle is regarded by Malleson as a most memorable one. The same signi¬ 
ficance was expressed by Dupleix himself in his own Memoires. It reversed 
the relative position of the Nawab and the French; and every subsequent battle 
of the Europeans with the Indians was half won even before it was fought. 

17- The European treaty made a direct attempt to place the English and French 
Companies in India in the positions which they occupied before the war, arid 
to persuade the rivals to settle down peacefully to commerce. 

It is of course true that the French had the best of it in the late war. 
Their capture of Madras, their victory over Mahfuz Khan and their successful 
defence of Pondicherry raised their military prestige. Dupleix had trained on 
the European model a considerable number of spoys, and his political ambi¬ 
tion now soared higher than ever. 

18 For the identification of the Tanjore pretender, see Note 18, pp. 93-95 of Ananda 
Ranga Pillai: The Pepys of French India. 

19. Dupleix’s close attachment to Chanda Sahib through all the vicissitudes of his 
fortune, is a well rooted idea, but must be modified in the light of facts. 

20 In fact, the English learnt Dupleix’s lesson with greater promptness than they 
have usually been credited with. They saw at a glance the advantages which 
would accrue to the French from the establishment of a French Nawab. They 
also saw the advantages that the English would obtain if they assisted in the 

overthrow of the usurper (Chanda Sahib) -The English governor sent help 

to Muhammad ‘Ali, confident that at Nasir Jang’s coming, the rebellion (of 
Chanda Sahib arid Muzaffar Jang) would collapse with hardly a struggle.... 

They did all in their power to hasten the coming of Nasir Jang_ When 

Nasir Jang at last arrived in the Kamatak they sent Lawrence to join him with a 
body of troops. ( Anand Ranga Pillai s Diary, Vol. VI; Dodwell’s Introduction, 
pp. xvii and xviii). 

For the English seizure of San Thome, see Extract from Despatch from. 
Fort St. David, October 18, 1749, in Vol. II of Forrest’s Bengal and Madras 
Papers (1688-1757). 

21. Orme, Hindostan (Vol. I, pp. 151-52); and A. Martineau’s Dupleix et VInde 
Francaise, Vol. Ill, 1749-54, pp. 134-38. 

22. A. Lehuraux’s La decouverte de Dupleix Fathabad (1944) on the place of Nasir 
Jang’s death. 

337 


M.S.— 22 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


23- See The Indian Historical Quarterly, Vol. XIV, pp. 545 et seq: (Nawab Muham¬ 
mad ‘Ali and the Siege of Arcot by C. S. S. Chari); and The Proceedings of 
the All India Modem History Congress, Poona, 1956, Pt. II, pp. 10-23; also 
Percival Spear, Master of Bengal, (1975), pp. 50-51. 

24. Fort St. George, Diary and Consultation Book—Military Department, 1752, pp. 51; 
Tuzuk-i-Walajahi, Vol. I; Orme, Vol. I,* pp. 236-42 and Wilks, Vol. I, p. 177; 
also R C. Cambridge, War on the coast of Coromandel, 1761, p. 28. 

25- Madras Military Consultations, 1752, p. 41. The date of his death is 16 October, 
1752. 

26- The settlement was: (1) that four districts near Masulipatam should be 
assigned to the French for the maintenance of their army; (2) the Nizam’s 
person should be protected by a French bodyguard; (3) the Nizam should, in 
no \way, interfere with the Karnatak, and (4) all the affairs of the state should 
be \carried on with Bussy’s advice. The districts newly ceded to the French 
together with those already possessed by them, were known as the Northern 
Sarkars, and extended from Guntur to the neighbourhood of the Chilka Lake. 
They were about 450 miles long and varied in breadth from about 30 to 80 miles 
and possessed an area of 17,000 sq. miles. Their situation made them 
very convenient to an European power and they contained a population of three 
million and yielded an annual revenue of over half a million pounds sterling. 
Moreover they were protected on the interior by natural barriers of jungles and 
mountains. 

27- Martineau, Dupleix et ITnde Francaise , Vol. Ill, .pp. 308-09 and p. 310. 

28- Martineau writes that “it is not to be doubted that Dupleix was thinking of 

Trichinopoly on his own account, if chance should favour him.” 

29. The English insisted as a preliminary basis for negotiations that Muhammad 

‘AH should be recognised as the Nawab of the Karnatak and the Raja of 
Tanjore should be guaranteed in his kingdom. The French demanded that 

Salabat Jang should be recognised as the Nizam and should be left free to 

arrange for the government of the Karnatak. The conference failed. 

30. The Directors of the French Company were filled with delight and admiration 
at Dupleix’s successes in the first years of the war. They procured for him in 
1752 the title of Marquis and promised him liberal support. But the failure 
of the French before Trichinopoly in 1752 and the surrender of Law shook 
their confidence in Dupleix. 

30a. Edw Ives, (1773), A voyage from England to India, p. 46. 

31 • Bussy could not get the removal of Shah Nawaz Khan from office, nor the 
surrender of Muzaffar Khan who had left him. 

32. The tragedy of Bobbili (January 1757) was a momentous historical event in 
the annals of the Northern Sarkars and still survives in the popular ballad, 
entitled ‘ ‘Rangardyacharitamu. ,> 

33- No sooner did Bussy depart for Pondicherry, than Ananda Raj, the Raja of 
Vijayanagaram revolted, assaulted Vizagapatam and sent urgent appeals to the 
English at Calcutta and at Madras for assistance in expelling the French. The 
Madras authorities were not in a position to lend him any effective assistance; 
but Clive decided to send from Calcutta a strong force under Captain Forde! 
Forde quickly joined the rebel chief, attacked the French who were strongly 
posted at Condore about 40 miles from Rajahmundfy, and secured a decisive 
victory. The battle of Condore is one of the most important fought by the 
English in India; it struck the first severe blow to the ascendancy of the French 
in the Deccan and finally destroyed the confidence that the Nizam reposed in 
them. Forde pushed forward his success and got possession of the fort of Rajah- 
mundry; while Conflans fell back on Masulipatam with the wreck of his forces. 
Forde was unable to proceed further owing to want of funds and vacillation 
on the part of Ananda Raj (October 1758). 

34. Muirland’ Baillie-ki-Paltan, (1759-1930), p. 80; Wyllie, Life of Sir Eyre 
Coote (1922), pp. 72-78. The victory caused in Madras “joy almost equal to 
that of Calcutta on the victory of Plassey”. 


338 


CHAPTER X 


CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH POWER 
IN BENGAL (1757-1772) 

PART I 

On 23 June, 1757, took place one of the decisive events in 
world history. Nawab Siraj-ud-Daulah, the Subdhdar of Bengal, 
found himself deserted in the field of battle by the general under 
whom was ranged the major part of his forces, discovered that he 
was the victim of a conspiracy, lost his nerves and fled, leaving the 
field to the English as victors and to the traitor Mir Ja‘far as an ab¬ 
ject suppliant for Col. Clive’s favour. From the military point of 
view the battle of Plassey was an insignificant engagement. The 
English gathered an undeserved victory on account of the Nawab’s 
order of recall to his attacking troops at a moment when he should 
have seen that, even without Mir Ja‘far, his victory was certain. 
Nor could it be said that Bengal lay at the feet of the English by 
right of conquest. A revolution had been effected at the centre and 
the English were just one of the conspirators who had taken part in 
it. For their participation in the conspiracy they got their reward 
according to the terms of their agreement. They were entitled to 
nothing further. Apart from their position as mere traders, they 
were no more than one of the Zamindars under the Subdhdar of 
Bengal. Before Plassey, they were Zaminddrs of the three villages 
of Kalikata, Sutanati and Govindpur paying an annual rent of 
Rs. 1,200 a year. After Plassey, the 24 Pargands were added to their 
Zamindari. J 

Whatever their apparent position, in fact, they had become as a 
result of the sequence of events which culminated in Plassey, the 
real masters of Bengal. They had overthrown one Nawab and set 
Up another in his place. They had backed Mir Jaffar as he seemed 
to them to have the largest public support. They might as well 
have set up Yar Lutf Khan, the nominee of the Seths, and managed 
to keep that bete noire on the masnad of Bengal. Mir Ja'far did not 
dare to seat himself on the throne till Clive arrived at Murshidabad 
and conducted him to the masnad. And then Mir Ja‘far had to pay 
the price with which he had purchased his position. The treasury 
was exhausted in satisfying the English demands. The specie was 


339 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

inadequate, and the English did not hesitate to accept jewels and 
plates instead. Even these were not sufficient to fulfil the promises 
made and it was agreed to receive the remainder in instalments and 
assignments were obtained on the future revenues. The Nawab of 
Bengal was financially crippled and his army, for want of regular pay, 
became a mutinous rabble. Mir Ja‘far had no other alternative than 
to lean on the help of the English. 

Bengal was in a condition of anarchy, and a strong military force 
was needed to restore order. The English were the only party which 
had such a military force and it was only with Clive’s assistance that 
Mir Ja‘far could quell the rebellion of the Raja of Midnapur and the 
insurrection at Dacca. There was trouble at Purnea. But when the 
troops were ordered to march they refused to do so unless their 
arrears were paid. It was only after partial payments that their 
reluctance was overcome. 

Mir Ja‘far weakened his position considerably by conceiving 
hostile designs against the two most powerful Hindus of the time, 
Raja Ramnarayan of Bihar and Raja Durlabh Ram, and thereby 
throwing these Hindus on Clive’s protection. Ramnarayan had been 
appointed deputy governor of Bihar by ‘All Vardi Khan and there 
were reports of his intriguing with the Nawab Vazir of Awadh to 
overthrow Mir Ja‘far. As such there were grounds for action against 
Ramnarayan. But to Raja Durlabh Ram, the Dhvdn, Mir Ja‘far was 
under the deepest obligation and it is difficult to understand his re¬ 
solve to crush him. Anyway Raja Durlabh soon found conspiracy 
gathering round him, and finding his personal safety threatened, con¬ 
signed himself to the care of the English. Similarly Clive also took 
Ramnarayan under his wings and procured for the Bihar governor 
an assurance of security of tenure so long as he paid his revenue and 
did not intrigue with foreign powers. Clive found the means of 
benefiting the English out of this last transaction. He secured for 
the East India Company the monopoly of the trade in saltpetre which 
was produced in North Bihar. 

Thus, thwarted in his wanton acts of aggression, Mir Ja‘far grew 
restless of English protection. He is reported to have declared “that 
if a French force would come into the province he would assist them, 
unless the English released him from all their claims of money, ter¬ 
ritory and exemptions”, and actually entered into relations with the 
Dutch. But events proved his absolute dependence on the English. 
The Shahzada with the assistance of Muhammad Qull Khan, subah- 
dar of Allahabad, and the encouragement of the Nawab Vazir of 


340 


CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH POWER IN BENGAL (1757-1772) 

, > 

Awadh advanced towards Bengal. Mir Ja‘far was unable to with¬ 
stand an invasion, unaided and his only hope of succour lay in Clive. 
A joint army of the Company’s and the Nawab’s troops marched to 
Patna, which had been besieged by the Shahzada. At this time for¬ 
tune favoured both Clive and M3r Ja‘far and the invaders withdrew 
for their own reasons. Mir Ja‘far, grateful for his deliverance, bes¬ 
towed on Clive the rent which the Company as Zamindar was bound 
to pay the Nawab for the lands which they held around Calcutta 
(June 1759). 

The significance of Clive’s participation in the opposition to the 
Shahzada’s entry into Bengal was indeed very great. He had op¬ 
posed the legal heir to the Mughul throne in his claim to the submis¬ 
sion of one of the provinces of his empire. This was rebellion. But 
Clive knew that “there will be no difficulty in obtaining the abso¬ 
lute possession of these rich kingdoms”. As to what should be the 
right course of action at this critical juncture, Clive had not as yet 
been able to make up his mind. It was possible for “the Company 
to take the sovereignty upon themselves” of. these provinces. This 
he thought could be confirmed by securing a sanad from the emperor 
on promise of payment of annual tribute. He had been offered the 
high dignity of Diimn of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa. “But this high 
office” Clive wrote to Pitt, “I have been obliged to decline for the 
present, as I am unwilling to occasion any jealousy on the part of 
the Subdh, especially as I see no likelihood of the Company’s pro¬ 
viding us with a sufficient force to support properly so considerable 
an employ and which would open a way to securing the Subdhship 
to ourselves”. At the moment however it seemed to him that thfc 
best course was for the ministry in England to take upon itself 
the government of the territories over which the Company exercised 
its control on payment of an annual tribute to the emperor. 1 This 
was what he actually suggested to Pitt, but Pitt was afraid that this 
anight lead to infringement of the legal rights of the Company and 
kept silent. 

As yet it was necessary that appearances must be kept up and 
the real power in Bengal must remain in disguise. The danger of 
arousing the jealousy of the other European powers was soon 
demonstrated by the Dutch invasion of Bengal. The Dutch, envious 
of the recent successes of the English and solicitous for the future 
of their trade interests in this province, became anxious to supplant 
English influence in Bengal. As has been already noted, they start¬ 
ed negotiations with Mir Ja‘far and received encouragement from 
him. An expedition was despatched from Batavia, but delayed so 


341 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


long at Negapatam and at the mouth of Hughli that Clive got suffi¬ 
cient time for preparations and to bring up reinforcements, with the 
result that the Dutch were badly defeated and humbled (December 
1759). 

While the position of the English in Bengal was thus still un¬ 
certain and depended on the adroitness with which Clive managed 
the self-seeking cowards at the helm of affairs in Bengal, an important 
change took place in the Company’s government at Fort William. 
Clive suffering from indifferent health and, angry with the Court of 
Directors, left India in February 1760. It was at his request that 
two of the Company’s Madras servants were brought over to Bengal 
to take charge of the military command and the civil administra^ 
tion. Caillaud arrived before Clive left, to take the command of 
the troops, but Vansittart did not reach Bengal till July 1760. In 
the meanwhile Holwell acted as Clive’s successor in the civil 
government. 

The Shahzada had again invaded Bihar, and Caillaud with Miran 
had taken the field against him when Clive left Bengal. The 
Shahzada was beaten in an engagement at Sirpur, but Miran would 
not follow up the victory and withdrew to Patna to nurse some slight 
wounds which he had received. This gave the Shahzada the oppor¬ 
tunity to raid into Bengal but he was so closely followed by Caillaud 
that he had to withdraw. Not only was Miran reluctant to support 
Caillaud but Mir Ja‘far entered into correspondence with the Shah¬ 
zada “declaring, it was believed, that his resistance was solely due 
to the insistence of the English”. 

As we have seen, the relations between Mir Ja‘far and the English 
under Clive had been far from friendly. The situation grew worse 
with Clive’s departure. Holwell could not secure “that deference 
to his advice which the Nawab had yielded to Clive’s commanding 
talents”. 2 The Nawab allowed the payments for the maintenance 
of the Company’s troops to fall into arrears and the English had to 
take a loan from the Seths for the purpose. To the English who 
found the Nawab so difficult to manage, their policy of controlling 
Bengal politics through a protected prince seemed to have failed. 
We have already noticed Clive’s letter to Pitt suggesting that the 
state could take upon itself the sovereignty of Bengal, Bihar and 
Orissa. Within a year and a half from the battle of Plassey, he had 
felt that the revolution of 1757 could not be a permanent arrange¬ 
ment. The reasons for thinking so are clearly stated by Clive him¬ 
self in the course of that letter. He wrote: “The reigning Subah, 


342 


CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH POWER IN BENGAL (1757-1772) 

whom the victory at Plassey invested with the sovereignty of these 
provinces, still, it is true retains his attachment to us, and probably 
while he has no other support, will continue to do so, but.... should 
he ever think it his interest to break with us, the obligations he owes 
us would prove no restraint; and this is very evident from his having 
lately removed his Prime Minister, and cut off two or three principal 
officers, all attached to our interest, and who had a share in his 
elevation. Moreover he is advanced in years; and his son so cruel, 
a worthless young fellow, and so apparently an enemy to the English, 
that it will be almost unsafe trusting him with the succession.” 3 
After Clive’s departure the need for a change was more keenly felt. 
Hoi well was of opinion that “the country will never be in a settled 
peaceful state whilst this family is at the head of it”, but that^ no 
useful purpose will be served by replacing the present Nawab by 
another. His solution was to secure a farman from Delhi appointing 
the Company “perpetual subah of the province”. 4 This was an anti¬ 
cipation of the settlement of 1765. Had this plan been carried out 
the Mir Qasim episode in the history of the English conquest of* 
Bengal would not have taken place. But Mir Qasim’s stars were 
ascending and he so successfully exploited the differences between 
the English and the Nawab that Hoi well and his associates changed 
their views so far as to bring about a revolution, not in order to 
assume the responsibility for the administration of Bengal, Bihar 
and Orissa on themselves, but to set up Mir Qasim—no weakling 
like his father-in-law—on the masnad and thereby virtually effected 
a counter-revolution. 

At first Mir Qasim’s ambition was limited to securing the deputy- 
ship of Bihar in place of Ramnarayan. But in July 1760 Miran was 
killed by lightning. This event at once brought into prominence 
the question of succession to Mir Ja‘far. Mir Qasim’s ambitions 
were now raised. He had already ingratiated himself with Holwell 
who was supporting his pretensions, and he now desired that he 
should be named the Diwdn and Mir Ja‘far’s successor. At this 
juncture, the new governor Henry Vansittart arrived from Madras. 
He was a believer in the policy of non-intervention and he agreed to 
Holwell’s schemes of supporting Mir Qasim. No wonder, therefore, 
that on 11 September, 1760 the Select Committee at Fort William 
resolved that it was not desirable to seek any independent powers 
from the Shahzada. They declared: “Our views in adopting this 
system should be directed rather to strengthen than weaken or over¬ 
throw the present nabob. All we desire is to see the powers remove 
ed out of the hands of that sort of men who now rule and direct his 


343 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

affairs”. 5 On 27 September a treaty was signed between Mir Qasim 
and the English by which the English agreed to appoint Mir Qasim 
to the post of Diwan and promised him the succession to Mir Ja‘far, 
while Mir Qasim agreed to cede to the English the districts of 
Burdwan, Midnapur and Chittagong. So far the intentions of the 
English were only to substitute the Nawab’s advisers, by Mir Qasim. 
But Mir Ja‘far, who saw clearly that the appointment of Mir Qasim 
as his Diwan would mean complete loss of his powers, could not be 
persuaded to give effect to the new arrangement. When persuasion 
failed, force was applied and Mir Ja‘far after some hesitation resign¬ 
ed his office altogether and placed himself at the mercy of the Eng¬ 
lish. He came down to reside at Calcutta under English guard and 
Mar Qasim was installed on the masnad. The presents which the 
Governor and his Councillors accepted as the price of installing Mar 
Qasim casts a sordid shadow over the whole business. But the 
English paid dearly for it. From the English point of view the step 
taken was a blunder. It was, in fact, a retrograde one which delay¬ 
ed the slow process of the consolidation of English power in Bengal 
and prolonged the sufferings of the people of this province by pro¬ 
tracting the struggle of the two opponents for mastery of their 
land. The position of the English in Bengal and their relation to 
the Nawab remained undefined as before, while the masnad went 
to a man who was endowed with far greater personal capacity than 
Mir Ja‘far. Mir Ja‘far, as we have seen, had felt the English as 
very uncomfortable friends. He had obstructed them, and on more 
than one occasion sought the alliance of their enemies. Neverthe¬ 
less he had always yielded, especially to the far superior personality 
of Clive. With smaller men now to cdntend with and possessing 
greater talents than his predecessor, Mar Qasim could easily defy the 
English and aim at complete independence of their control. In this 
he was not a little assisted by Vansittart’s weak policy. 

The Shahzada was still in Bihar and military Operations were 
afoot against him. Caillaud was recalled to Madras and Major Car- 
nac took command of the English troops at Patna. On 15 January, 
1761, Carnac inflicted a severe defeat on the Shahzada who soon 
offered terms and accompanied Carnac to Patna. Before his eleva¬ 
tion to the masnad Mir Qasim had agreed to the proposal of the 
English to make peace with the Shahzada and assist him to establish 
himself as emperor at Delhi. 53 Mir Qasim now became greatly sus¬ 
picious of English designs. He felt nervous that the English might 
obtain for themselves the subahdari of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa from 
the Shahzada, and he hastened to Patna to take part in the negotia- 


344 


CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH POWER IN BENGAL (1757-1772) 

tions. At Patna however Mir Qasim refused to visit the Shahzada in 
his camp and an interview had to be arranged between the two in the 
hall of the English factory. Mir Qasim promised to pay annually 
twenty four lakhs of rupees to the Shahzada as his sovereign on con¬ 
dition of receiving investiture as subfihdar of Bengal, Bihar and 
Orissa. Mir Qasim however refused to proclaim him as the emperor. 
After sometime the Shahzada, at the invitation of the Nawab Vazlr 
of Awadh and some Afghan chiefs retraced his steps towards Delhi. 
Major Carnac escorted him to the borders of the province. 

It was only after the Shahzada had left the province that Mir 
Qasim declared him emperor. Even this was done under threat from 
Coote who had in the meanwhile superseded Carnac. Mir Qasim 
was perhaps justly afraid of the friendship between the Shahzada and 
the English., The Shahzada had, it seems, actually offered at diffe¬ 
rent times to grant the Subahdari and the Diw&ni of the provinces 
to the English whenever they should ask for it. Whether Mir 
Qasim’s suspicions were right or wrong, he had his way and it was 
mainly owing to his disinclination that the English had not been 
able to render the Shahzada that assistance to recover the throne of 
Delhi which they had intended to give. The English would have 
acted foolishly if they had embroiled themselves in the politics of 
northern India by championing the cause of the Shahzada, but they 
we re prevented from doing so, not because of their foresight; but on 
account of what may be called a' lucky defeat before the superior 
will of the new Nawab. 

Mir Qasim had thus successfully overcome the first hurdle in 
the race for consolidation of his position. Unlike Mir Ja‘far he was 
clear sighted enough to see that he must appease the army and rid 
himself of his financial obligations to the English. He found the 
treasury practically empty. However, by systematic spoliation of 
the office-holders of the old regime on the ground, right or wrong, 
of embezzlement of public money, and also by stringent economy in 
the administration and in the expenses of his household, Mir Qasim 
was so far able to improve his financial position that he had within 
a few months of his accession, p^id up the arrears of thje English 
troops and, to a large extent, met the debts of his predecessor and his 
own. He also paid five lakhs to the Company in discharge of his 
promises and also made presents of large sums to the members of 
the Select Committee. He- suppressed with a strong hand the 
zaminddrs of Birbhum and Burdwan who had taken up arms in fur¬ 
therance of the Shahzada’s plan to invade Bengal simultaneously 


345 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


with a band of Marathas, and also expelled the Marathas from the 
province. 

Mir Qasim felt that he could not establish his control over the 
administration of Bihar so long as Ramnarayan was there in charge. 
Here was a subordinate of the Nawab who enjoyed a peculiar posi¬ 
tion. He was an official whom the English had always used as a 
powerful counterpoise against the NawSb of Bengal. The protection 
he had received from Clive had prevented Mir Ja‘far’s attempt to 
ruin him. And the same protection had been guaranteed to him by 
Vansittart. Unless removed, Ramnarayan would be a perpetual 
source of danger to Mir Qasim. The loyalty of Ramnarayan to the 
subahdar was always open to question.. His opposition to the Shah- 
zada had often been half-hearted. Mir Qasim had been from the first 
hostile to Ramnarayan. One of his earliest plans in his adventurous 
career had been to supplant Ramnarayan in the administration of 
Bihar, and he now decided to crush him altogether. The method 
which the Nawab followed was to call on him to account for his re¬ 
venues. Only the accounts of the last three years had not been set¬ 
tled. During this time it had been extremely difficult for Ram¬ 
narayan to collect the revenues on account of the constant depreda¬ 
tions of the Shahzada.. Besides, his coffers were drained by the neces¬ 
sity of keeping an army in the field to cope with the invaders. Mir 
Qasim however insisted on his pound of flesh, and sent his complaints 
against Ramnarayan to Governor Vansittart. Vansittart informed 
the Nawab that Ramnarayan was a friend of Clive and the Nawab 
should settle affairs amicably with him (22 April 1761). At the 
same time Coote was instructed that “Ramnarayan was to be pro¬ 
tected from injustice and preserved in his government.” But the 
Nawab was unceasing in his complaints, and in May 1761 Vansittart 
though urging a friendly settlement, permitted the Nawab to act 
as the best interests of the government might require. In June, the 
Nawab suspended Ramnarayan from his office, to which the Select 
Committee agreed. In despair, Ramnarayan sought Coote’s protec¬ 
tion, to secure which he began to influence Coote against the Nawab. 
But in July Coote was recalled and Ramharayan found himself alone 
and friendless. In August Raj Ballabh was appointed Naib in place 
of Ramnarayan with Vansittart’s approval. Ramnarayan’s property 
was then confiscated, he was imprisoned and subsequently put to 
death. Thus Mir Qasim demonstrated to his subjects that English 
protection counted no longer and that their lives and properties de¬ 
pended on his goodwill. 


CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH POWER IN BENGAL (1757-1772) 


By the end of 1761 and the beginning of 1762, Mir Qasim was 
so far established in his position as to regard infringements on his 
sovereign rights as unbearable. He had removed himself from too 
close a proximity to the seat of English authority and had made his 
headquarters at Sasaram and Monghyr. And what was far more im¬ 
portant, he had disbanded the useless rabble of 90,000 men known as 
the Nawab’s army and created a new army of much smaller size 
trained along western lines by the Armenian,. Gurgin Khan, and in¬ 
dependent of foreign supply by reason of having its own factories for 
casting cannon and manufacture of muskets. 

The time had now come for an open challenge and the arbitra¬ 
ment of the sword to decide whether Bengal, Bihar and Orissa be¬ 
longed to the English by virtue of Plassey or the Nawab was to be 
supreme in his own territories. 

The final phase in the story of the Nawab’s assertion of com¬ 
plete independence of English interference began with his resent¬ 
ment at the conduct of the Company’s servants in connection with 
their claim to take part in the inland trade free of duties. This 
claim was an unjustifiable application of the jarman which the 
English had obtained from the emperor Fafrukh-siyar to trade duty¬ 
free throughout the empire. Murshid Qull Khan, Subahdar of 
Bengal, had insisted that the privilege conferred should be restric¬ 
ted to the Company’s export and import trade, and the E. I. Company 
not interested in the internal trade, had acquiesced in this limita¬ 
tion. However, the Company’s servants had occasionally engaged 
themselves in the internal trade and abused the Company’s passes' to 
trade free of duty and even sold them to other merchants to the de¬ 
triment of the Nawab’s revenues and the trade of the province. On 
his accession to the masnad in 1757 Mir Ja‘far re-affirmed the right 
of the Company to trade free of duty. Mir Ja‘far’s sanad added 
“Whoever acts contrary to these orders, the English have power to 
punish them”. The sanad which was vaguely worded did not ex¬ 
pressly authorise the inland trade and Clive seems to have held that 
the English had obtained no new privileges from Mir Ja‘far. But the 
Company and its servants continued to participate illegally in the 
inland trade and to abuse the free passes for the export and import 
trade. Mir Ja‘far complained, but his protests were of little avail, 
and the Company’s servants continued to amass fortunes with re¬ 
markable rapidity. 

Mir Qasim acquiesced in this situation until he felt himself 
strong enough to thwart the English, and then he set himself to stop 


347 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


the abuses. Mir Ja'far’s concession to the English that cases of dis¬ 
pute in trade matters arising between the Nawab’s officers and the 
Company’s agents were to be decided by the English, was in¬ 
consistent with the independence of the Nawab of Bengal, and Mir 
Qasim justly claimed the right to administer justice himself. The 
constant complaints of the Nawab against English agents and the in¬ 
terference of the Nawab’s officials in the legal and illegal trade of 
the English, created a strained situation which made it necessary for 
Vansittart to visit Mir Qasim at Monghyr at the close of 1762. The 
Nawab agreed to levy not more than 9 per cent on the inland trade 
of the English while as much as 25 per cent or more were to be paid 
by native merchants. Vansittart, on his side, conceded that cases 
of disputes arising on trade matters were to be decided by the 
Nawab’s officials. The Council at Calcutta was indignant, refused to 
ratify the agreement and resolved that the English would pay only 
2\ per cent on salt and that the agents of English traders were to be 
tried by the English alone. Mir Qasim replied by abandoning all 
transit duties on inland trade and thus placing the native traders 
on the same footing as the English. The Council, Vansittart and 
Hastings dissenting, took up the absurd position of denying the right 
of the Nawab to abolish all inland duties and interpreted this as an 
act of enmity to the English nation. Among these members of the 
Cduncil the predominant feeling was that either Mir Qasim must do 
what they dictated or he must be overthrown. With the object of 
taking stock of the situation by direct conversation with Mir Qasim, 
a deputation consisting of Mr. Amyatt and Mr. Hay was sent to 
Monghyr (4 April 1763) In the meanwhile the attempt of Mir 
Qasim to stand forth as the Nawab was leading to cases of violence. 
The whole atmosphere had changed. The English no longer receiv¬ 
ed that deference to which they had become accustomed since the 
revolution of 1757. The spirit of independence flowed downwards 
from the Nawab to his officials. The English trade was being in¬ 
terfered with, sometimes rightly and sometimes wrongly, and the 
English gomastas were being harassed. The English were replying 
by seizing, binding and beating the Nawab’s officials. The atmos¬ 
phere was surcharged with the smell of war. The Council discussed 
military measures that were to be adopted in the event of the out¬ 
break of war, and Mir Qasim realising that the two years had not 
been enough time to consolidate his position sufficiently for a con¬ 
test with the English, sought the assistance of the emperor and the 
Nawab Vazir of Awadh. In such an atmosphere the deputation 
could not hope for success. Mir Qasim rejected all the demands of 
the Council as designed to deprive him of his authority and permit- 


348 


CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH POWER IN BENGAL (1757-1772) 


ted Amyatt and his suite to commence the return journey only on 
condition of leaving Hay behind as a hostage for the Nawab’s offi¬ 
cials whom the English held as prisoners in Calcutta. This was in 
the last week of June 1763. Few weeks ago some boats laden with 
arms for the English garrison at Patna had arrived at Monghyr. 
Mir Qasim had allowed them to pass after retaining them for some 
time, but he was extremely nervous about Ellis, the chief of the 
English factory at Patna, whose attitude towards him was known 
to be inimical. On 21 June, Mir Qasim sent some troops to Patna. 
On the news of their arrival Ellis took the precipitate step of seizing 
the city by a coup de main and the killadar of Patna fled. The war 
had thus begun. 

Mir Qasim issued orders that Englishmen wherever they were 
found, were to be seized and imprisoned. In consequence Amyatt 
and his party were stopped near Murshidabad. Amyatt attempted 
resistance and in the struggle he and some of his men were killed. 
Patna was recovered with ease by Mir Qasim’s troops in no time 
and the factory at Kasimbazar was plundered and the English made 
prisoners. The English army now took the field. The Nawab’s 
army was routed at Katwa, at Murshidabad and at Udaynalla and 
the English then laid siege to Monghyr. Mir Qasim had withdrawn 
to Patna. Overcome with despair and anger at his defeat he caused 
Gurgin Khan, his Armenian Commander-in-Chief, the Seths and 
then his English prisoners, to be murdered in succession, and when 
the English army carried Patna by storm, Mir Qasim escaped into 
Awadh. Here the treasures that Mir Qasim carried, purchased for 
him the alliance of Shuja-ud-daulah, the Nawab of Awadh, and the 
emperor Shah ‘Alam joined the allies. Had the motives of Shuja- 
ud-daulah been sincere the English would have had to contend with 
a serious situation. This could have been treated as the first alli¬ 
ance of Indian powers against the political ambitions of the British 
in India. But Shuja-ud-daulah was not honestly espousing Mir 
Qasim’s cause and even opened negotiations with the English for 
personal gains. 6 Anyway, after long delay on the border of Bihar 
the English army under Major Munro invaded Awadh and on 22 
October, 1764, completely defeated the allies at Buxar. Before the 
battle Mir Qasim had been imprisoned and deprived of his posses¬ 
sions by Shuja-ud-daulah. The hapless prince was therefore not 
even interested in the issue of the battle. However he was allowed 
to escape from the battle-field, led a wandering life for some years 
till he met with his end near Delhi in 1777. Thus ended the last 


349 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


efforts of a Bengal prince to maintain his independence of English 
control. 

On the outbreak of the war with Mir Qasim, the choice of the 
King-makers at Calcutta had fallen for the second time on Mir Ja‘far. 
For this favour Mir Ja‘far confirmed Mir Qasim’s grant to the English 
of the revenues of Burdwan, Midnapur and Chittagong, exempted 
the trade of the Company’s servants from all duties except 2\ per 
cent on salt and agreed to cancel Mir Qasim’s ordinance remitting 
all commercial imports, to pay the Company 30 lakhs of rupees as 
compensation and 5 lakhs per month towards the expenses of the 
war, to reimburse individuals for personal losses and to allow no 
Europeans except the English to erect fortifications in Bengal. In 
spite of these very generous concessions the financial demands on 
Mir Ja‘far were continually increased in the most shameless manner. 
“The Company”, said Clive, “became possessed of one half of the 
Nawab’s revenues”. He was allowed “to collect the other half for 
himself, but in fact he was no more than a banker for the Company’s 
servants who could draw upon him as often and to as great an amount 
as they pleased.” 7 Indeed, finding Bengal at their mercy, the Com¬ 
pany’s servants spared nc occasion to suck her life-blood and the in¬ 
stalment of a Nawab was a splendid chance every time for a fresh 
draw. Not only was the Nawab embarrassed with financial demands 
which he could not meet, but the Company’s servants carried on 
their private trade in a manner which ruined the commerce and in¬ 
dustry of the province. In this orgy of spoliation, the importance 
of determining the relationship between the Nawab and the Com¬ 
pany was forgotten and the only step taken was to appoint Samuel 
Middleton as Resident at the Darbar to safeguard English interests 
there. The choice of his ministers still rested with the Nawab and 
the English devised no means of controlling his government. That 
they were likely to be in the same difficulty which they had experi¬ 
enced in the period of Mir Qasim’s rule was shown when in spite of 
information that Maharaja Nandkumar, whom Mir Ja‘far had ap¬ 
pointed as his chief minister, was carrying on negotiations with Shah 
‘Alam, the Nawab Vazir of Awadh and Mir Qasim, they were unable 
to secure his removal. 

Mir Ja‘far who was old and very ill died in February 1765. The 
English now decided to establish their control definitely over the 
government at Murshidabad. Four councillors were deputed to 
Murshidabad to instal Mir Ja‘far’s son Najm-ud-daulah and to get 
him to sign a treaty in accordance With their new plan. A deputy 
sub&hdar who was to be a nominee of the English was to be appoin- 


350 


CON SOLID ATION OF BRITISH POWER IN BENGAL (1757-1772) 


ted and he was to have immediately under the Nawab, the chief 
management of all affairs. Nandkumar was deprived of his great 
position and Muhammad Reza Khan, naib of Dacca, was appointed 
deputy subdhdar. The business of revenue collection was divid¬ 
ed into two branches and Nandkumar and Rai Durlabh were 
appointed in charge of each with equal powers. The appointment 
and dismissal of the principal revenue officials and the allotment of 
their districts were to be made by the Nawab .but with the approval 
of the governor and council. The new Nawab was not allowed to 
maintain any troops except such as were required “for the dignity 
of his person and the business of his collections throughout the pro¬ 
vinces”. Further the Nawab was to make no application to the em¬ 
peror for sanads except through the English. 

The Nawab’s hesitation to accept the treaty and his unwilling¬ 
ness to agree to Reza Khan’s appointment were of no avail and he 
found that there was no other alternative but to agree. The man 
who stood to the last behind the young prince before he was re¬ 
duced to a mere figurehead was Nandkumar, and the counter-actions 
to the English plans came from this 1 quarter. In order that he might 
preserve his de jure position, Najm-ud-daulah had applied, on Nand- 
kumar’s advice, to the emperor of Delhi for a parvjidnah. The mem¬ 
bers of the deputation however did not allow the Nawab to receive 
the parwdnah and themselves proceeded to instal him publicly. 
Nandkumar then tried his best to prevent the English from obtain¬ 
ing an idea of the state of the collections. He continued t6 exercise 
the powers of the chief minister and the officers of the cutchery 
would not make their usual acknowledgements to Reza Khan. The 
members of the deputation reported to Fort William, “.... all the 
people about the Nawab’s person are absolutely devoted to Nand¬ 
kumar and enemies to this change...”. The English therefore re¬ 
vived the old charge against Nandkumar of conspiring with the 
Nawab Vazfir of Awadh and removed him in spite of the utmost un¬ 
willingness of the Nawab. They also proceeded to establish a large 
number of their own nominees in the collection of the revenues. 8 

In May, 1765 Clive arrived at Calcutta to commence his famous 
second administration. Najm-ud-daulah met him at Calcutta and 
laid before him his grievances. Clive thereupon proceeded to modify 
the arrangements made by Spencer’s government. The newly crea¬ 
ted post of deputy subdhdar was abolished. A sort of a cabinet con¬ 
sisting of Muhammad Reza Khan, Rai Durlabh and the Seths was 
set up to assist the Nawab in the administration. Muhammad Reza 
Khan was to be naib, Rai Durlabh the Diumn and the Seths were to 


351 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


act as chiefs of trade. It was decided that each should enjoy an equal 
share of power and authority. The appointment and dismissal of 
the officers and the management of the entire revenue administra¬ 
tion were to be in their hands. If they disagreed among themselves 
or failed to keep law and order, the governor and council were to 
take measures that were found to be necessary. Further, a mem¬ 
ber of the council was to reside at Murshidabad, paid suitably accord¬ 
ing to his rank out of the Nawab’s treasury and “the accounts of the 
receipt and expenses for the business of the government, etc. shall 
be laid before him monthly for his perusal.” 9 Najm-ud-daulah also 
agreed to make over all the revenues to the Company, accepting a 
pension of 50 lakhs of rupees for himself. Thus nothing was left to 
the Nawab but “the name and shadow of authority”. The adminis¬ 
tration was to be carried on by nominees of the English, subject to 
English supervision, though in the name of the Nawab. 

It was practically this position which Clive legalised when he 
met Shah ‘Alam at Allahabad in August 1765 and obtained from him 
a formal grant of the Diwdni of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa. 

Clive strengthened the position of the English in Bengal still 
further by a wise settlement with the Nawab of Awadh. Spencer 
had promised Awadh to Shah ‘Alam. But Clive realised that it was 
not possible for Shah ‘Alam to maintain himself in Awadh without 
English assistance. Bengal was more than what the English could 
manage at the time and it would have been dangerous for them to 
get embroiled in the affairs of northern India by taking such a step. 
Clive therefore restored Awadh to Shuja-ud-daulah. Shuja-ud- 
daulah agreed to pay 50 lakhs to the Company by instalments and en¬ 
tered into a defensive alliance with the English. Thus the English 
got a grateful ally on the border of Bihar. Handsome provision was 
made for the emperor, to whom were given the districts of Kora and 
Allahabad taken from the Nawab of Awadh. 

For the first time since Plassey the position of the English in 
Bengal had come, within some definition. By assuming the office of 
the Diwdn they had become servants of the Great Mughul. In the 
Mughul imperial system the Nawab was the Nazim. He was respon¬ 
sible for law and order and the administration of criminal justice. 
The Diwan’s office was separate. He was responsible for the collec¬ 
tion of the revenues and for the administration of civil justice. There 
was obvious advantage in theoretically being the Diwdn. It served 
as a mask for the political power wliich the Company actually wield¬ 
ed and guarded the Company not only against the jealousy of the 


352 


CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH POWER IN BENGAL (1757-1772) 

French and the Dutch, who had possessions in Bengal, but also pro¬ 
tected them from the interference of Parliament. 

As yet the English had neither the inclination nor the capacity 
to take upon themselves the administration of the province. They 
had only devised a method of holding safely their power in Bengal, 
so that, as Clive fixed the desideratum, they may “always have it in 
our power to overcome the very Nawab we are bound by treaty to 
support”. 10 In consequence, power was divorced from responsibility 
and all the evil results thereof followed. The Nawab’s administra¬ 
tive organisation was paralysed; a new one was not set up in its place, 
and Bengal lapsed into a state of anarchy with attendant suffering 
for her people. 

Having effected the political settlement, Clive proceeded, to re¬ 
form his own house. It is easy to realise the extent to which the 
Company’s officials had been demoralised by the atmosphere in 
which they worked. Their salaries were low, but easy wealth could 
be had by the game of Nawab-making and by participation in trade. 
The Court of Directors had prohibited the acceptance of presents. 
But this had remained unheeded. Clive made the Company’s ser¬ 
vants, civil and military alike, to sign covenants agreeing not to 
accept presents in future. Clive realised that it was not possible to 
prevent the Company’s servants from taking part in the internal 
trade unless adequate salaries were paid to them. But he knew 
that the Directors could not be persuaded to do it. He therefore, 
hit upon a novel device. He instituted a society of trade for carry¬ 
ing on the trade in salt which was a government monopoly. This 
trading company was to be under the control of the council. Shares 
were issued to the principal civil and military servants. Clive in¬ 
tended that the profits from these shares were to be allowances, 
though in an indirect form, to supplement their salaries. The 
Directors disapproved of this scheme and ordered that the internal 
trade was to be abandoned entirely. So far, Clive was dealing with 
illicit gains. But when he came to deal with acknowledged allow¬ 
ances because their payment strained the Company’s purse, he met 
with serious resistance. The military officers had been accustomed 
to receive a ‘batta’ or field allowance to cover the extra cost when 
they were not living in garrison. These allowances had been paid 
by the Indian princes and now it had become a charge on the Com¬ 
pany. The Directors ordered the payment of the field allowance to 
be stopped. When Clive proceeded to give effect to these orders, 
several army officers combined to resist by throwing off their com¬ 
missions simultaneously. Clive met the situation with firmness, and 

353 


M.S —23 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


the resistance melted away. Severe measures were taken against 
some of the officers and others were pardoned. 

Clive finally left India in February 1767. The five years be¬ 
tween the departure of Clive and the assumption of the office of 
governor by Warren Hastings witnessed the failure of the dual 
system of government which Clive had brought into being in Bengal. 
Under the terms of the treaty of Allahabad, the English as Diwdn 
had guaranteed to pay out of the revenues 26 lakhs of rupees to 
the emperor, 50 lakhs to the Nawab of Bengal and keep the remain¬ 
der to themselves. The Company received their revenues but left 
the work of collection to the existing machinery. In his parting 

4 ". _ 

advice to the Calcutta Council Clive said: “To appoint the Company’s 
servants to the offices of the Collector, or indeed to do any act by 
an exertion of the English power, which can be equally done by the 
Nabob at our instance, would be throwing off the mask, would be 
declaring the Company subdh of the provinces. Foreign nations 
would immediately take umbrage and complaints preferred to the 
British Court might have very embarrassing consequences.” 11 The 
Court of Directors also enjoined their servants not to interfere with 
the business of government. Their views of the new position were 
clearly expressed in their despatch to Calcutta dated 17 May, 1766. 
They wrote: “We conceive the office of Diwdn should be exercised 
only in superintending the collection and disposal of the revenues; 
which office, though vested in the Company, should officially be ex¬ 
ercised by our Resident at the Durbar, under the control of the Gov¬ 
ernor and Select Committee, the only bounds of which control should 
extend to nothing beyond superintending the collection of the 
revenues and receiving the money from the Nawab’s treasury 
to that of the Dewnnah or the Company. .. . This we conceive to 
be the whole office of the Dewanny. The administration of justice, 
the appointment to offices or Zemindaries, in short, whatever comes 
under the denomination of civil administration we understand is to 
remain in the hands of the Nawab or his ministers”. Thus the 
English as Diwdn contented themselves with receiving the revenues 
through the existing Diwdni executive headed by a deputy for each 
part of the province—Muhammad Reza Khan for Bengal, Shitab Roy 
for Bihar and Rai Durlabh for Orissa. Not only were the English 
unwilling to exercise their responsibilities as Diwdn, but they had 
crippled the Nizdmat side of the administration by paralysing the 
source from which all authority emanated. The result was complete 
absence of government and consequent anarchy. The situation is 
well summarised by Monckton Jones. “The whole horde of minor 


354 


CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH POWER IN BENGAL (1757-1772) 

officials, Muttasaddis, Kanungos, Amils, Zemindars, etc. were let 
loose to raise what they pleased from the cultivators and traders. 
If the victims appealed to the Ndib Nazim or his faujddrs, these had 
not the land servants or peons by means of whom they had formerly 
enforced justice and if complaints were addressed to the only man 
who heard them, the English Resident, he could not tell right from 
wrong, and was besides peremptorily forbidden to interfere. The 
peasants were without appeal, and many in despaiir deserted their 
holdings, became vagabonds or dacoits or were merely starving”. 12 
After nearly four years’ operation of the dual system, Becher, Resi¬ 
dent at Murshidabad, made the most crushing comment when he 
wrote, “. .. . this fine country which flourished under the most des¬ 
potic and arbitrary government, is verging towards its ruin while 
the English have really so great a share in the administration”. 
(Becher to, Select Committee of the Council at Calcutta, 24 May, 
1769). 

Gradually the contrast between the wretched condition of the 
diwdni lands and the comparative prosperity of the English zamin- 
dari of 24 Parganas and the ceded districts of Burdwan, Midnapur 
and Chittagong, where the English had started direct administration, 
became apparent to the Court of Directors. In their famous despatch 
dated 30 June 1769 they wrote: “The like abuses which have been 
corrected in these districts are still severely felt through all the pro¬ 
vinces of Bengal and Bihar.... To correct abuses of so long a 
growth will require much time and industry and above all a patient 
and moderate exertion of the powers invested in us by the grant of the 
Diwdni, for we do not mean by any violent and sudden reform to 
change the constitution, but to remove the evil by degrees by re¬ 
ducing the immense number of idle sycophants who.... are placed 
between the tenant and the public treasurer....”. Accordingly 
they suggested a plan for a Committee at Murshidabad and another 
at Patna to look after the diwdni revenues of Bengal and Bihar res¬ 
pectively. 

Before these instructions could reach India the Calcutta Council 
had sown the first seed of the English administrative organisation in 
the diwdni provinces. In August, 1769 they appointed European ser¬ 
vants of the Company throughout the whole country to superintend 
native officers in their work of revenue collection and administra¬ 
tion of justice. These new officials were called Supervisors. Their 
first task, it was pointed .out to them, was to secure information. 
They were to prepare a history and make a complete economic 
survey of the districts assigned to each. It was essential for a 


355 



THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


foreign nation, whether starting a new administrative machinery or 
supervising the old, to know all the facts relating to the lands, viz., 
what was the amount of the cultivated lands, to whom they belong¬ 
ed, what was their yield, the customary demands on the ryots, the 
method of collecting the revenue, etc. This information they wanted 
the Supervisors to compile. But it was not to the interests of the 
Zamindars and the Qanungos to let their new masters have the 
knowledge and the Supervisors never had the correct information 
they needed. The best way of knowing the facts was to undertake 
a general survey of the lands, but this the Company never did, be¬ 
cause they never had the European staff necessary for the super¬ 
vision of such a huge project. In consequence they remained in 
ignorance and their land revenue arrangements were always open 
to objections. 

In order that the Supervisors might be free to engage them¬ 
selves in the important researches they had been directed to make, 
they were to have in the first instance, as little to do with the collec¬ 
tions as possible. However, they were to have a controlling power 
over the collections; that is to say, the revenue officials were to “con¬ 
sult and mutually act on every occasion with, and report all trans¬ 
actions to the Supervisors, and in case any points of difference should 
arise, the Supervisor must have a negative voice until he can re¬ 
port his reasons for such negative to the Resident at the Durbar, 
and receive from him the orders of the ministry on the occasion. 
The Supervisors should also have the same negative voice in all 
judicial proceedings/’ 13 In the exercise of these powers also the 
Supervisors met with opposition. The revenue collectors had been 
entirely without control since 1765. The interference of the Super¬ 
visors seemed to them to be intolerable and they now protested that 
it was impossible to collect the revenues. In many cases their pro¬ 
tests must have been genuine, for the Supervisors were young ser¬ 
vants of the Company with little or no experience of the revenue 
system and it is not unlikely that they often misused their checking 
powers. Anyway, a deadlock ensued. The Resident at Murshida- 
bad reported that, “the Zamindars, amils and farmers appear un¬ 
willing to enter into any engagements for the revenues of the 
approaching season unless they can be assured of being supported 
in their authority in the province and offered to make their collec¬ 
tions without interruptions from the Supervisors or their people.” 14 
Further, “On the footing you have directed the Supervisors to re¬ 
main, the business of the collections cannot proceed.... You must 
either proceed further and have the Supervisors to make the settle- 


356 


CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH POWER IN BENGAL (1757-1772) 


merits in the different districts or you must recede in part for the 
present.” 15 As a result the controlling powers of the Supervisors 
were withdrawn, except in the case of four experienced men who 
held the posts. These men were not only continued in their office, 
but they were allowed to make the revenue settlements themselves 
in their districts. At this point an unfortunate quarrel arose bet¬ 
ween the Select Committee and the Council at Fort William over 
their respective powers and functions. As against the Select Com¬ 
mittee, the Council contended that they were competent to deal with 
Diwfini matters and accordingly gave effect to the orders of the 
Directors conveyed in their letter of 30 June, 1769 by appointing 
Councils of Revenue at Murshidabad and Patna. In contradiction 
to the orders of the Select Committee restricting the powers of the 
Supervisors, the Council confirmed their controlling powers and even 
directed the Councils of Revenue to “represent what addition to that 
authority you think necessary.” According to the Council the 
Supervisors were to act under the Council of Revenue. The Select 
Committee, not recognising the Council’s authority, instructed the 
Supervisors to act independently. The Directors to whom this 
quarrel was referred upheld the steps taken by the Council, express¬ 
ed their disfavour of the members of the Select Committee, and 
directed the Governor, Mr. Cartier, to resign, appointing Mr. Hastings 
in his place (1772). 16 

While the servants of the Company were thus wrangling over 
fine points of jurisdiction, one of the worst tragedies of human his¬ 
tory befell Bengal. This was the Begal famine of 1770 in which 
nearly a third of the population is said to have been swept away. 
The absence cf a government, properly speaking, and the action of 
self-seeking men in cornering grains, intensified the severity of the 
famine. 

The next year the Directors took the momentous step of decid¬ 
ing that they could not shirk their responsibility any longer. Clive’s 
dual system had failed, the failure of the Supervisors was apparent, 
and decreased revenues and lower profits on their investment 
brought home to the Directors the conviction that they must go a 
step forward and take upon themselves actively the administration of 
these provinces. In their letter dated 28 August, 1771, the Directors 
ordered the Governor and Council at Calcutta “to divest Muhammad 
Reza Khan and every person employed by or in conjunction with 
him, or acting under his influence, of any further charge or direc¬ 
tion in the business of the collections” and announced their famous 
resolution “to stand forth as duan, and by the agency of the Com- 


357 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


pany’s servants, to take upon ourselves the entire care and manage¬ 
ment of the revenues.” Mill describes this change as “a revolution 
much greater probably than any previous conjuncture—than even 
the change from Hindu to Mahomedan masters had been able to 
create.” 

The Directors had recommended a total change, but they had 
not laid down the details of the future system of Government. This 
was left to the judgment and discretion of the new governor Warren 
Hastings. The reforms in Bengal that followed are therefore in 
their details the work of Hastings. For Hastings to proceed with, 
there was nothing but the administrative structure of a commercial 
corporation and the remnants of a broken-down government. His 
task was to build up a new structure on the remains of the old. The 
enormity of such a task can easily be realised. 

Hastings proved that he was a man of insight and vision. He 
did not attempt to* introduce a purely English system, as perhaps 
others less gifted might have done. He saw that the new scheme 
must not involve a break with the past, and that the administration 
must continue to be in form and in principle Indian. Discussing the 
measures which he proposed to adopt, Hastings wrote in a letter to 
Colebrooke, Chairman of the Board of Directors: “Many other cor¬ 
respondent regulations will be necessary, but not one perhaps which 
the original constitution of the Moghul Empire hath not before esta¬ 
blished and adopted and thereby rendered familiar to the people. 
But it is unnecessary to mention them because none of them can be 
now carried into execution. All that can be attempted at this time, 
will be to alleviate the effects of the present system. To change 
so much of it as shall be found hurtful to the country or prejudicial 
to the interests of the Company, and to establish such partial or tem¬ 
poral regulations as the letter and evident spirit of the Company’s 
orders shall admit of, for the ease of the inhabitants and the im¬ 
provement of the revenue.” 17 

Actively administering the provinces “by the agency of the 
Company’s servants” meant not only drastic changes in internal gov¬ 
ernment, but also throwning off the mask by which power in Bengal 
was held, which in its turn involved a readjustment of foreign rela¬ 
tions. If Clive’s dual system of government had to be abandoned, 
it only followed logically that his external engagements required 
modification. The emperor was at this time practically a prisoner 
in the hands of the Marathas. To continue to pay homage to him by 
sending the annual tribute had become dangerous. The tribute was 


358 



CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH POWER IN BENGAL (1757-1772) 

not only a financial loss to Bengal but a gain to the Marathas. Hast¬ 
ings decided that ‘‘not a rupee should pass through these provinces 
till they had recovered from the distresses which lavish payments 
to him had principally contributed”, and refused to pay the tribute 
when demanded. 18 At the same time Hastings strengthened Awadh 
as a buffer state by returning to the Nawab Vazir the districts of Kora 
and Allahabad and by lending a brigade of the Company’s troops to 
protect his territories. The emperor’s enmity was secured against 
Shuja-ud-Daulah, and with the Marathas and Rohillas menacing his 
border, his position as a suppliant for English help was assured. As 
to the Nawab of Bengal the stipend of 50 lakhs which Najm-ud- 
Daulah had enjoyed had been reduced already to 32 lakhs after 
Mubarak-ud-Daulah’s accession. This was now further reduced by 
order of the Court of Directors to 16 lakhs. The Company no longer 
needed to pose as humble servants of the Nawab. Moreover, the 
Nazim had become powerless, and the new policy formulated by the 
Directors implied that the English were to be responsible for the 
whole administration. It was, therefore, decided that the Nawab 
could do with very much less than he had enjoyed before. The 
management of the minor Nawab’s household had been in the hands 
of Muhammad Reza Khan who was now to be tried. The charge of 
the household, therefore, was given by Hastings to Munni Begam, 
widow of Mir Ja‘far. As a lady could not be expected to transact all 
the business in this connection, Raja Gurudas, son of Maharaja Nand- 
kumar, was appointed to act under her. 

As regards internal changes, the first to take place was the aboli¬ 
tion of the office of naib diwdn of Bengal and Bihar. The two de¬ 
puties were by order of the Court of Directors prosecuted and tried 
for peculation. Their only fault, it seems, was that they were res¬ 
ponsible for carrying on administration under a system which had 
failed. The Directors need not have indicated their recognition of 
the failure of a system by making scapegoats of those whom they had 
charged with operating it. They were subjected to the ignominy of 
a long trial and were then acquitted. Like the offices of the deputy 
diwdn , the Councils of Revenue at Murshidabad and Patna were also 
done away with. The revenue administration was placed under the 
direct control of the Governor and Council who formed themselves 
for the purpose into a Commitee of Revenue. This Committee of 
Revenue was to audit the accounts of the Diwdni assisted by an Indian 
Officer called the Rdy-rdyan. The salary of this post was Rs. 5,000 
a month and the first holder was Raja Raj Ballabh. The “Super¬ 
visors” were to be called “Collectors” and they were to be helped 


359 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


and checked in their work by Indian officers appointed for each dis¬ 
trict styled diwans, The work of these diwans was to be supervised 
by the Ray-rayan who was to receive from them the accounts in the 
Bengali language and to transmit to them copies of such orders as 
the Committee of Revenue might issue to the Collectors. The Khdlsa 
or Exchequer was removed from Murshidabad to Calcutta, which 
not only strengthened the Council’s direct control over the revenues, 
but openly declared the English as masters. The Governor and four 
members of the Council constituted themselves a Committee of Cir¬ 
cuit to tour the districts and form the revenue settlements. It was 
felt that the best method of finding out the real value of the lands 
was to farm them out to persons making offers. At the same time 
the principle was' laid down that “a settlement with established 
zemindars and talukddrs, on conditions similar to those required 
from the farmers was preferable to letting the lands to other per¬ 
sons”. Accordingly as the Committee toured from place to place 
advertisements were put up, offers received and the lands settled for 
a period of five years. In many places settlement was made with 
the existing zaminddrs and talukddrs who were in those places either 
the highest or the only bidders. 

The entire system of the administration of justice required 
to be overhauled. Courts situated at a distance from Murshidabad 
had fallen in abeyance. In their places justice was being dealt out 
by revenue officers of the zaminddrs and local magnates without any 
legal authority to do so. This was of course better than total an¬ 
archy, but a very rough and ready sort of justice could be obtained 
in these courts. There was enough room for bribery and corrup¬ 
tion and for the rich to oppress the poor. Hastings set himself to re¬ 
vive and reform the native system of justice. He established two 
courts in each district, the M>ofussil Diwani Addlat, to decide civil 
suits, and the Faujdari Addlat to try criminal cases.. The Diwani 
Addlat was to be presided over by the Collector who was to be assis¬ 
ted by the Diwdn and officers of the cutchery. The Faujdari Addlat 
was to be presided over by the Kdzi or Mufti of the district and two 
maulvis, but their proceedings were to be supervised by the Col¬ 
lector. In order that it might not be necessary for the peasants to 
leave their lands and travel to the district headquarters for justice 
in small matters, it was laid down that cases up to the value of ten 
rupees were to be decided on the spot by the head farmer of each 
pargand. Collectors were to avoid summoning cultivators to the 
District Court during the harvesting months. In all cases of dis¬ 
puted accounts, partnerships, debts, non-performance of contracts, 


360 


CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH POWER IN BENGAL (1757-1772) 

etc., the Collector was to encourage the parties to submit their dis¬ 
putes to arbitration. In order that the injured might prefer their 
complaints to the Collector without fear or. hindrance, it was pro¬ 
vided that “a box shall be placed at the door of the Cutchery in 
which the complainants may lodge their petitions at any time or 
hour they pleased”. While Hastings sought in this manner to make 
justice cheap and easily available to rich and poor alike, he took 
steps to discourage useless litigation. The broad principle adopted 
by him was that justice should be administered with the advice and 
help of Indians and according to the laws and customs of the coun¬ 
try. He specially enjoined that “in all suits regarding inheritance, 
marriage, caste and other religious usages and institutions, the laws 
of the Koran with respect to Mahomedans and those of the shaster 
with respect to Jentoos shall be invariably adhered to; on all such 
occasions the Moulvies or Brahmins shall respectively attend to ex¬ 
pound the law, and they shall sign the report and assist in passing 
the decree”. 19 

Two superior courts were established at Calcutta. The Sadr 
Diwdni Addlat heard appeals from the mofussil Diwdni Addlats. 
The Governor and two members of the Council assisted by the Rdy- 
rayan and officers of the cutchery constituted the court. 

There was also to be a Sadr Nizdmat Addlat to hear criminal 
appeals and to investigate into capital sentences passed by the dis¬ 
trict courts before they could be referred to the Nazim, who was to 
be assisted by the Chief Kdzi, the Chief mufti and three capable 
maulvis. 

The Company as Diwdn had nothing to do with the administra¬ 
tion of criminal justice. The Company’s servants, therefore, did not 
form a part of the criminal courts. As in the districts the criminal 
courts were supervised by the Collector, so also at the Sadr Hastings 
provided that the Governor and Council would only watch the pro¬ 
ceedings of the Nizdmat Addlat, “so that the Company’s administra¬ 
tion in the character of the king’s dew\an may be satisfied that the 
decrees of justice on which both the welfare and safety of the coun¬ 
try so materially depend, are not injured or perverted by the effects 
of partiality or corruption”. 

In effect, Hastings had only revived some of the native courts 
which had fallen into desuetude, required the Collectors to preside 
in the local civil courts, and to prevent miscarriage of justice in the 
local criminal courts, transferred the appeal courts from Murshi- 
dabad to Calcutta and provided for the same control as in the dis- 


361 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


tricts. This was in accord with his policy of remedying the defects 
without destroying the traditions of the indigenous system. The 
native magistracy was retained as well as the laws to which the 
people were accustomed. 

The judicial reforms of Hastings have received a very high mea¬ 
sure of praise, but his revenue reforms have met with severe criti¬ 
cism. The two main grounds of such criticism are, first, that by 
adopting the farming system he had placed the ryot at the mercy 
of unprincipled speculators and second, that the lands had been very 
much over-assessed. 

We have Hastings’ own defence on record. He wrote: “It is 
true that the lands were let in general too high. . . The exact value 
of the lands was known only to the zamindars and old farmers from 
whom it was not to be expected that they should part with their 
knowledge. To find out the real value the, most probable method 
was to let them to the highest bidders”. Where lands were over¬ 
rated, he added, “abatements have been allowed. ... and a competent 
knowledge has been obtained of the stated capacity of the lands 
throughout the provinces which will be of great advantage in form¬ 
ing the next settlement when the term of the present shall have ex¬ 
pired”. 20 Again he asks his opponents: “Are they certain that they 
would have considered themselves better qualified to judge of the 
real value of the land than those who offered to farm them? Would 
they have informed a zamirtdar or farmer who proposed to pay a 
revenue of 20 lakhs of rupees that he had offered five lakhs too much? 
When they declare that they would have proportioned their demands 
to abilities of the people, I have a right to ask them by what rule 
their ability could have been ascertained. When they assert that 
they would have collected a less revenue, I have a right to expect 
that they will point out how the service of government might have 
been reduced in the same proportion?” 21 Mr. Ramsbotham’s re¬ 
marks may be quoted here with profit. “The revenues had been 
farmed long before the Company’s days but the farmers had been 
selected by government from men of position, who knew the land. 
The new regulations.... made it possible for any man to bid for 
the land.... the land revenue was placed at the mercy of every 

kind of disreputable gambler.If farming was necessary, it 

could have been carried out on different lines, working with the 
assistance of men of substance and with the existing zamindars, 
many of whom found themselves ousted.... The problem was very 
difficult. Hastings and his Committee tried to solve it by concen¬ 
trating power at headquarters and by an efficient control of the 


362 


CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH POWER IN BENGAL (1757-1772) 

Khalsa; experience was to show that efficient district Officers and 
a judicious decentralisation were the real solution. .. .” 22 

When all is said, the fact remains that Hastings faced boldly and 
with the best of intentions a problem which presented enormous 
difficulties. He laid down as a fundamental for the quinquennial 
settlement which he made in 1772 that, as far as practicable, settle¬ 
ments were to be made with the existing zaminddrs and tolukddrs 
and in many cases this was done. A large number of vexatious 
levies were abolished and deductions allowed on their account. 
Where the hustabood was fixed at the same amount at which it had 
stood before the famine, reductions were considered. Nevertheless, 
it is true that in their anxiety to have the lands, farmers as well as 
zaminddrs in many places settled at so high a value that the amount 
could not .be realised and modified settlements had to be made. 
Hastings’ anxiety for the protection of the ryots from undue ex¬ 
action and the encouragement of cultivation is manifest in the leases 
given to the farmers in 1772. The lease ran: “should it be known 
that you exact more, you will net only have to repay the ryots the 
sum which you have so exacted but also to make a proportional for¬ 
feit to government, and if it is represented that you a second time 
are guilty of any oppression on the ryots, your farm shall then be 
made Khas and you shall pay a fine to government.... On the 
other hand, if by promoting cultivation and agriculture you can by 
any legal means reap any advantage from your farm you have no¬ 
thing to pay to government, exclusive of the medguzzary, that ad¬ 
vantage will be your own.” 23 That these leases failed to protect 
the ryots, that many of the salutary regulations passed by the Com¬ 
mittee of Circuit in 1772 remained pious wishes, and the fact that 
the settlement of 1772 was open to serious objections, do not deprive 
Hastings of his right to be praised for an honest attempt to solve 
a very intricate problem. He, like his colleagues, was groping in 
the dark. In the next few years alternative schemes were tried, 
none of which could be said to have succeeded until the English 
grew tired of this vexed problem and shelved it permanently in 
1793. 

Before assuming his office as Governor, Hastings had protested 
against the despotic powers which the Supervisors exercised ill the 
districts and the want of control over them by the Council at Cal¬ 
cutta. To Mr. Purling, Chairman of the Court of Directors, he had 
written in March 1772: “The obvious remedy to these evils is to re¬ 
deem the authority of the government by abolishing the Boards of 
Revenue, recalling the Supervisors, and bringing the collections to 


363 


1HE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Calcutta”. When later on in the year he carried out the reforms of 
1772 in accordance with the orders of the Directors, he abolished 
the Boards of Revenue and centralised the revenue administration, 
but he could not dispense with the district officers, though he sought 
to check abuse of their powers. In January 1773, Hastings wrote 
to Dupre: “We have suffered one capital defect to remain in our con¬ 
stitution—I mean the collectors. ... It was once intended to with¬ 
draw the collectors entirely. They monopolise the trade of the 
country. .... They are most of them agents of their banyans and 
they are devils.... It appeared that there were among them so 
many sons, cousins, or relatives of directors and intimates of mem¬ 
bers of council, that it was better to let them remain than provoke 
an army of opponents.... They continue, but their power is re¬ 
trenched and the way paved for their gradual removal, and the Court 
of Directors have sufficient arguments furnished them to order their 
recall immediately.” 24 

The Directors in their letter to the Governor and Council at 
Fort William dated 7 April, 1773, ordered that the Collectors may 
be withdrawn as soon as possible and asked them, “to substitute 
some other plan for making yourselves acquainted with the exact 
value of every district and for giving relief to the inhabitants, till 
we shall be able to send you complete regulations for conducting this 
branch of our affairs which we have now under consideration.” 
Hastings realised that the immediate recall of the Collectors and a 
drastic change following so soon after the changes of the previous 
year, would not be wise. So it was decided to adopt certain tem¬ 
porary measures preparatory to the introduction of the change. 
The final plan was to leave the districts entirely in charge of Indian 
subordinates and to exercise control by means of a Committee of 
Revenue at Calcutta assisted by occasional inspectors. This was not 
applied before 1781 and will be discussed in the next chapter. In 
the meanwhile as a temporary measure the three provinces were 
divided into six divisions, each under a provincial council. A diwdn 
was appointed to each of the provincial councils. As soon as the 
Collectors had adjusted their accounts, they were to hand over charge 
to naib diwans who would be appointed by the provincial councils 
to take charge of the collectorate. These naib diwans were also like 
the Collectors to preside over the district diwani addlats. To keep 
the judicial administration in line with the revenue, provincial 
diwani addlats as Intermediate courts between district and Sadr 
courts had been constituted. Appeals from the district courts were 
to lie to these provincial diwani addlats. 


364 


CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH POWER IN BENGAL (1757-1772) 


Such changes only touched the surface of the problem and failed 
to improve the condition of the people of the country. The very 
basis of a satisfactory settlement, viz., exact information of what 
was due from the ryots and what was actually levied from them by 
the farmers remained to be collected. Soon the Regulating Act of 
1773 came into operation. As a result, a new Board of Revenue took 
charge. Their attempts to tackle the problem will be reviewed in 
the next chapter. 


NOTES 

1. Malcolm, Sir John, Life of Clive, Vol. II, pp. 119 et seq., Clive to Pitt, 7 Jan. 
1759. 

2. Dodwell, H. H., Dupleix and Clive, p. 194. 

3- Malcolm, op. cit., p. 120. 

4. Dodwell, op-, cit., p. 197. 

5. Dodwell, op. cit., p. 203. 

5a. His father had been murdered on 29 November, 1759, by his Vazir. 

6- Chatterji, N. L., Mir Qasim, (1935), pp. 252-58. 

7. Mill, History of British India, Vol. Ill, p. 316-17. 

8. Dasgupta, A. P., Studies in the History of the British in India, pp. 36-45. 

9. Ibid, pp. 50-53. 

10. Ibid, p. 55. 

11. Monckton-Jones M E., Warren Hastings in Bengal, p. 62. 

12. Ibid, pp. .63-64. 

13. Resolutions of the Select Committee, Calcutta, Dec. 15, 1769, see Monckton 
Jones, op. cit., p. 89. 

14. Monckton-Jones, op. cit., p. 90; Resident at Murshidabad to Select Committee, 
Calcutta, 9 June, 1770. 

15. Ibid, pp. 90-91. Resident at Murshidabad to Select Committee, Calcutta, 21 
June 1770. 

16- Dasgupta, op. cit., pp. 12-32. 

17 . Monckton-Jones, op. cit., p. 151; Hastings to Colebrooke, 26 March, 1772. 

18. Monckton-Jones, op. cit., p. 169. 

19. Proceedings of the Committee of Circuit at Kasimbazar 15 August, 1772 (Pub. 
Govt, of Bengal, 1926). 

20. Minutes of 8 March, 1775, 

21. Minutes of 29 Mlay, 1776. 

22. Ramsbotham, Studies in the Land Revenue History of Bengal (1769-1787), 
pp. 30-31. 

23. Proceedings of the Committee of Circuit at Krishnagar (Pub. Govt, of Bengal, 
1926), pp. 17-18. 

24. Gleig, G. R., Memoirs of Warren Hastings, Vol. I, p. 268. 


365 


CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH POWER 
IN BENGAL (1773-1784) 

PART II 

The consolidation of the British position in Bengal depended 
largely on a successful frontier policy. In order to understand the 
frontier policy of Warren Hastings, it is necessary to recount the 
political settlement made by Clive after Buxar. The battle of Buxar 
had placed Awadh at the disposal of the English Company, and Shah 
‘Alam had thrown himself on their protection. How could the 
English utilise this situation to their best advantage. They had be¬ 
come the virtual rulers of Bengal and Bengal needed protection from 
the attack of other Indian powers—especially the Marathas. The 
English decided that the best way to protect themselves from the 
jealousy of Indian and foreign powers was to conceal their real posi¬ 
tion and to pretend to be a servant of the emperor of Delhi. The 
English, therefore, by the Treaty of Allahabad (12 August, 1765) and 
by subsequent arrangements with the emperor, secured from him a 
jarmari ’to act in perpetuity as his Diwdn for the collection and admi¬ 
nistration of the revenues of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa. As Diwdn , 
the Company stipulated to pay the emperor a tribute of 26 lakhs of 
rupees a year. Two Awadh districts, namely Kora and Allahabad, 
were given to the emperor for the support of his dignity and expense 
and a brigade of the Company’s troops was stationed at Allahabad 
for the protection of the emperor. With the exception of Kora and 
Allahabad, Awadh was restored to Shuja-ud-daulah. Though Shuja- 
ud-daulah had acted inimically to the English even after Buxar, the 
English were shrewd enough to see that Awadh under Shah ‘Alam 
would never serve as an efficient buffer against Maratha encroach- 
ments. Raja Balwant Singh of Banaras who had befriended the 
English in their campaign against Mir Qasim and his allies, was to 
be maintained in his zaminddri though it was still to remain parf of 
Awadh. Shuja-ud-daulah was to pay an indemnity of 50 lakhs of 
rupees for the Company’s expenses in the late war and as soon as 
the last instalment of this indemnity was paid the English would 
withdraw all troops from Awadh, with the exception of a garrison 
at Chunar and the troops for the emperor’s protection at Allahabad. 


366 



CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH POWER IN BENGAL (1773-1784) 

The alliance with Shuja-ud-daulah was a defensive one. The Com¬ 
pany would assist him in any war for the defence of his dominions, 
but they were not bound to go to his aid if he waged war for the ex¬ 
tension of his dominions. The settlement had two points of weak¬ 
ness. It was necessary for Awadh to have Rohilkhand in order to 
obtain a strategic frontier and it would have been better to keep 
Kora and Allahabad with Shuja-ud-daulah as the handing over of 
these districts to the emperor was unsound from the military point 
of view. Both these points cropped up during the administration of 
Warren Hastings. 

For the first few years this arrangement worked well. Then it 
was upset by the Marathas. In 1769, the Marathas who had with¬ 
drawn into the Deccan after the disaster at Panipat, again advanced 
into northern India and in 1771 occupied Delhi. In May of that year 
Shah ‘Alam left the protection of the English and proceeded towards 
Delhi where he was installed on the imperial throne by the Mara¬ 
thas. Shah ‘Alam soon found that he was virtually a prisoner in the 
hands of the Marathas who forced him to make over to them the‘dis¬ 
tricts of Kora and Allahabad. This situation made the continuation 
of the settlement of 1765 concluded by Clive, impossible. Both the 
Rohillas and Shuja-ud-daulah became nervous at the advance of the 
Marathas. In June 1772 Shuja-ud-daulah entered into a treaty with 
the Rohillas which stipulated that if the Marathas entered Rohilkhand, 
Shuja-ud-daulah would go to the help of the Rohillas for which he 
was to get 40 lakhs from them. Sir Robert Barker, Commander-in- 
Chief of the British army in Awadh, was present at the signing of 
this treaty which led Shuja-ud-daulah to believe that the treaty had 
the approval of the English. 

Therefore, when early in 1773 the Marathas crossed the Ganga 
into Rohilkhand, Shuja-ud-daulah was pledged by the treaty to go to 
the assistance of the Rohilla chiefs. The boundary between Rohil¬ 
khand and Awadh lay in an open plain without natural defence and 
Hastings, who was then Governor of Fort William, became con¬ 
cerned for the safety of the frontier. Barker was given instructions 
to enter into a treaty with the Rohillas for the protection of the part 
of Rohilkhand, lying on the same side as Shuja-ud-daulah’s territories. 
Barker was not to cross the Ganga in the Rohilla districts beyond that 
river. He was to avoid embroiling the Company in any offensive 
war with the Marathas. In March of the same year the combined 
forces of the English and .Shuja-ud-daulah entered Rohilkhand and 
advanced in the direction of the Maratha camp. The Maratha forces 
hastily retreated. For the time being, the Marathas ceased to be a 


367 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


menace. With the melting of the snows the Ganga became unford- 
able. Moreover the murder of Peshwd Narayan Rao and the inter¬ 
nal dissensions which followed at Poona again obliged the Marathas 
to withdraw from northern India. 

This temporary freedom from danger, however, was no reason 
for indefinitely postponing plans for strengthening the defence of 
Awadh. The political settlement of 1765 needed revision in the light 
of changed circumstances. Moreover, the arrangements had proved 
a heavy drain on the financial resources of Bengal. Shuja-ud-daulah 
was paying only the extraordinary expenses of the Company’s troops 
employed by him. Hastings argued that he should bear all expenses 
of such troops, not merely the extraordinary. The Company had 
kept a considerable part of their army at Allahabad for the protec¬ 
tion of the emperor. This had cost the Company nearly eighty lakhs 
of rupees in three years, all of which had been remitted in specie 
from Bengal. 

In June 1773 Hastings left Calcutta for Banaras for conference 
with Shuja-ud-daulah. The result of this conference was the treaty 
of Banaras signed on 7 September, 1773. Shuja-ud-daulah was given 
Kora and Allahabad for which he was to pay 50 lakhs of rupees. 
If Shuja-ud-daulah required the use of the Company’s troops he was 
to pay at the rate of 2 lakh ten thousand rupees per month. This 
was calculated on the basis of all expenses for the troops including 
pay, batta, stores, and all contingencies. The Nawab of Awadh 
agreed to receive a servant of the Company to be deputed by Hast¬ 
ings to reside near his person. The Company was to cease to pay 
tribute to Shah ‘Alam. By a special agreement Chait Singh was con¬ 
firmed in his father’s zammddri. There was also a verbal agree¬ 
ment by which Hastings was to assist Shuja-ud-daulah against the 
Rohillas for which the Company Was to receive forty lakhs of 
rupees. 

Hastings had been always opposed to the payment of the tribute 
to the emperor and the Company did not pay any tribute to Shah 
‘Alam after he became Governor at Fort William. Now that Shah 
‘Alam had gone over to the Marathas, the continuation of the tribute 
was dangerous. On this subject Hastings wrote: “. . . his late con¬ 
duct has forfeited every claim to it, and made it even dangerous to 
allow it. . . It is unjust to argue in support of his pretensions on 
the Company, that the tribute is no more than a reasonable acknow¬ 
ledgement for the favour which they received from him in the grant 
of the Diwdni. They gave him all, they received nothing from him 


368 


CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH POWER IN BENGAL <1773-1784) 

but a presumptuous gift of what was not his to give, but what they 
had already acquired by their power, the same power to which he 
was indebted fdr his crown, and even for his existence.” 1 

As regards Kora and Allahabad, Hastings rightly argued that 
these districts had not been given in exchange for the grant of the 
Diwdni. They were given without any consideration, for the sup¬ 
port of his dignity and expenses. Moreover, Shah ‘Alam had made 
them over to the enemies of the Company by- which act a powerful 
force had been placed on the borders of Awadh thus facilitating their 
attack on Bengal. Again the English had recovered them not from 
the emperor, but from the Marathas and, therefore, had the right to 
dispose of these districts as they liked. In selling Kora and Alla¬ 
habad to Shuja-ud-daulah Hastings’ object was two-fold. He wanted 
to strengthen Shuja-ud-daulah, as he rightly believed that a strong 
ally was a better one than a weak ally. Besides, he had the shrewd 
feeling that the addition of these districts to Awadh would be an 
additional cause of friction between the Marathas and Shuja-ud-daulah 
and increase his dependence on the Company. Hastings explains his 
action thus: 

‘By ceding them (to Nawab of Oudh) we strengthen our 
alliance with him, we make him more dependent upon us, as he 
is more exposed to the hostilities of the Marathas; we render a 
junction between him and them, which has been sometimes ap¬ 
prehended, morally impossible, since their pretensions to Kora 
will be a constant source of animosity between them; we free 
ourselves from the expenses and all the dangers attending either 
a remote property or a remote connection; we adhere literally 
to the limited system laid down by the Honourable Court of 
Directors.... 

We provide effectually for the protection of our frontier, 
and reduce the expenses of our army, even in employing it, and 
lastly we acquire a nett sum of 50 lacs of rupees most reason¬ 
ably obtained for the relief of the Company’s necessities.” 2 

Soon there were other developments. The Rohillas had not paid 
the forty lakhs promised to the Nawab of Awadh for his assistance. 
Added to this cause of grievance was the attempt of the Rohillas to 
take advantage of the confusion in the affairs of the Marathas and 
occupy the Doab, on which region Shuja-ud-daulah also had his eyes. 
The Nawab, therefore, called upon Hastings to assist him as pro¬ 
mised at Benaras, in expelling the Rohillas from Rohilkhand. Hast¬ 
ings and the Select Committee decided that they were bound by pro- 

369 

M.S.— 24 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


mise to help him. Hastings made it clear to Shuja-ud-daulah that 
though he was pledged to assist him in Rohilkhand he would not 
take any part in the operation in the Doab which would involve him 
in a war with the Marathas. Withqut English assistance Shuja-ud- 
daulah expelled the Maratha garrisons from Etawah and the neigh¬ 
bouring Doab districts. Shuja-ud-daulah then decided to march into 
Rohilkhand. The English now ordered Col. Champion, who was 
then Commander-in-Chief, to march to the Nawab’s assistance (Feb¬ 
ruary, 1774). On 17 April, 1774, took place the battle of Miranpur 
Katra in which the Rohilla chief, Hafiz Rahmat Khan, was killed and 
the Rohillas were totally defeated. About twenty thousand Rohillas 
were driven out of the country. Rohilkhand was annexed to Awadh 
with the exception of only a small portion including Rampur which 
was given to Faizullah Khan, son of the founder of the Rohilla power, 
who entered into a treaty with Shuja-ud-daulah agreeing not to form 
any alliance with surrounding powers, not to retain more than 5,000 
troops in his service and to provide Shuja-ud-daulah with two to 
three thousand troops when he went to war. 

Hastings has been severely condemned by some historians for 
the Rohilla war, while others have put forward strong arguments in 
his defence. The charges against Hastings and the points in his 
favour have been ably summarised by P. E. Roberts in the Cambridge 
History of India (Vol. V) and by Davies in his excellent work en¬ 
titled Warren Hastings and Oudh and need not be repeated here. 
The chief object of Hastings was to provide Awadh with an easily de¬ 
fensible frontier. If money had been the main consideration, he 
would have accepted the offer of Faizullah Khan to pay the Company 
eighty lakhs of rupees, double of what Shuja-ud-daulah was to give, if 
he was given Rohilkhand. Before the acquisition of Rohilkhand 
Shuja-ud-daulah had been exposed to attack not only from the Rohil¬ 
las but also from the Marathas. Now a constant source of uneasi¬ 
ness to Shuja-ud-daulah and therefore to the English had been re¬ 
moved and Shuja-ud-daulah had obtained, in the words of Hastings, 
“a complete state, shut in effectually from foreign invasion by the 
Ganges, all the way from the frontier of Behar to the mountains of 
Tibet.” 3 

So long Warren Hastings had wielded unquestioned supremacy 
in directing the affairs of the presidency. The Regulating Act of 
1773 however altered the position and Hastings found himself criti¬ 
cised and thwarted in every direction. The Rohilla war came in for 
severe criticism by his new colleagues in the Council and his Awadh 
policy was partially reversed. 


370 


CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH POWER IN BENGAL (1773-1784) 


The circumstances under which a bill for better regulation of 
the affairs of the East India Company had been introduced in the 
English Parliament need not be discussed in detail here. The East 
India Company was no longer only a chartered company of traders. 
It had in fact established an empire in India whatever might have 
been the legal status of its possessions. It had become impossible 
for the Home Government to allow, at the risk of a dangerous shift¬ 
ing of the centre of political gravity, this empire to remain outside 
the sphere of its control. The result was Lord North’s Regulating 
Act of 1773. 4 The monopoly of trade, the disposal of patronage and 
details of administration were left to the Company, but the state was 
to exercise a control over all the higher affairs of government. The 
principal provisions of the Act with which we are concerned were 
the following. 

The Governor of the Presidency of Fort William was renamed 
the Governor-General. The Governor-General was to be assisted by 
four Councillors. Decisions were to be taken by a majority of votes. 
The Governor-General was to have a casting vote in case of equal 
division of opinion. The Governor-General and Council was given 
a very limited amount of control over the subordinate presidencies 
of Madras and Bombay. The Governments at these presidencies 
were forbidden from issuing orders commencing hostilities or de¬ 
claring war against, or concluding any treaty with, any Indian power 
without the previous consent of the Governor-General and Council. 
This restriction was not to apply in case of imminent necessity and 
the receipt of special orders direct from the Court of Directors. In 
case of violation of these restrictions a President and Council could 
be suspended by the Governor-General and Council. The subordi¬ 
nate presidencies were to transmit regularly to the Governor-General 
intelligence of all transactions relating to the Government, revenues 
or interests of the Company. The Crown was empowered to esta¬ 
blish by a Charter a Supreme Court of Justice consisting of Chief 
Justice and three puisne judges. All the above provisions of the 
Regulating Act were mischievous in their effects as they led to the 
most unseemly quarrels between the different organs of the Govern¬ 
ment. The Governor-General and members of the Council were 
soon at loggerheads. Disputes ensued in no time between the newly 
created central authority and the subordinate presidencies endanger¬ 
ing the safety of the Company’s possessions. The Supreme Court 
arrogated to itself a position which led to serious conflicts with the 
Council and brought about a situation in Bengal akin to anarchy: 


371 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

The story of Warren Hastings’ Governor-Generalship is largely 
woven around the conflicts generated by the Regulating Act. 

The Governor-General and the four members of the Bengal 
Council were named in the Act. Warren Hastings became the Gov¬ 
ernor-General. Philip Francis, Sir John Clavering, Colonel Monson 
and Richard Barwell .were appointed Councillors. They were ap¬ 
pointed for five years. Any casual vacancy in the membership of 
the Council could be filled by the Directors with the assent of the 
Crown. After five years the Company was to have the full 
patronage. 

Francis, Clavering and Monson were men without Indian ex¬ 
perience. They came out with a preconceived and unaltering notion 
that everything in the conduct of affairs here was vicious and de¬ 
served to be condemned. Barwell was the only new Councillor who 
was already resident in India. He was at first critical of Hastings, 
but later became his staunch supporter. 

The majority of the Council being hostile to Hastings, the Gov¬ 
ernor-General found himself counteracted in every, direction and a 
bitter struggle between him and the majority ensued, which for six 
years seriously endangered the affairs of the Company in India. 
The quarrel was embittered by acute personal enmity and things 
came to such a pass that for four days in June 1777, Clavering con¬ 
tested with Hastings for the Governor-General’s chair and in July 
1781 Hastings forced Francis to a duel in which Francis was badly 
wounded, and after sometime, returned to England. 

One of the first acts of the new Council was to condemn the 
Rohilla war, to order the withdrawal of the Company’s troops from 
Rohilkhand, at the same time to demand from the Nawab of Awadh 
the forty lakhs which he had promised and to reverse the arrange¬ 
ment made by the former administration in Awadh. Middleton, who 
had been appointed by Hastings as Resident in Awadh in terms of 
the Treaty of Banaras, was recalled and Bristow, a protege of Francis, 
was appointed in his place. In January 1775 Shuja-ud-daulah died 
and was succeeded by his son Asaf-ud-daulah. The majority in the 
Council forced a treaty on the new Nawab imposing fresh conditions 
on him different from the treaty of Banaras. This treaty was set¬ 
tled by Bristow, acting under orders of the Council, with the Nawab 
in May 1775 and is known as the treaty of Fyzabad. The Council 
guaranteed to Asaf-ud-daulah the possession of the subdh of Awadh 
and subject to ratification of the treaty of Banaras by the Court of 
Directors, the possession of Kora and Allahabad. The Council was 


372 


CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH POWER IN BENGAL (1773-1784) 

unwilling to accept responsibility for the defence of the Rohilla coun¬ 
try and the recent conquest in the dodb, though they finally agreed 
to send troops to defend these unguaranteed parts of his dominions. 
Asaf-ud-daulah ceded to the Company in full so.vereignty all the terri¬ 
tories of Chait Singh together with the mint and the Kotwdli of 
Banaras. The subsidy for a brigade of British troops which was 
Rs. 2,10,000 was now raised to Rs. 2,60,000 per month. All 
foreigners in the employ of Asaf-ud-daulah were dismissed and the 
Company’s consent was made essential to the employment of any 
European. Thus the majority showed themselves to be more greedy 
than Hastings by increasing the tribute from Awadh and forcing the 
Nawab to cede a part of his dominions. 

The acquisition of the new territories comprising the zamindari 
cf the Raja of Banaras made it necessary for the Company to enter 
into an arrangement with Chait Singh. Francis Fowke, son of 
Joseph Fowke, who was co-defendant with Nandkumar in a suit 
brought by Hastings, was chosen by the majority to proceed to Bana¬ 
ras and deliver to Chait Singh his sanads of investiture as zaminddr, 
amin, and faujdar of Banaras and certain other districts. Chait 
Singh was to have the mint i.e., the privilege of coining and Kotwdli 
of Banaras for which he was to pay a fixed annual compensation in 
addition to the tribute that he was to pay as zaminddr. The total 
annual tribute was fixed ultimately at 22J lakhs of rupees. The 
Raja was to pay nazrana to the Company and issue a proclamation 
explaining his actual position to the inhabitants of his zamindari. He 
was forbidden, on the point of forfeiture of his zamindari, to carry 
on negotiations with the enemies of the Company and he was to 
maintain a body of 2,000 cavalry, disciplined and equipped after the 
European fashion, for the protection of his territories. It will be 
seen from the above that Chait Singh was left free to mint coins and 
to collect revenues and exercise police jurisdiction within his zamin¬ 
dari , but the exercise of these functions rested on grants from the 
Company in whom vested the sovereignty over these territories. It 
would not be correct, therefore, to describe him as an independent 
prince. 

One very unfortunate result of the quarrel in the Council was 
the use made by the majority of Maharaja Nandkumar and his victi¬ 
misation by Warren Hastings. In March 1775 Nandkumar brought 
against Hastings the charge of having received from Munni Begam 
a bribe of Rs. 3,54,105 for appointing her guardian of the young 
Nawab. When the majority of the Council entertained the charge, 
Hastings was furious. In April Hastings, Barwell and Vansittart 


373 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


charged Joseph Fowke and Nandkumar for endeavouring to coerce 
one Kamal-ud-din to accuse Hastings and Barwell of having received 
other bribes. In May one Mohan Prasad brought a charge of for¬ 
gery against Nandkumar, and two judges of the Supreme Court 
sitting as magistrates committed Nandkumar for a trial on the for¬ 
gery charge. Nandkumar was tried by the Supreme Court, and a 
jury entirely consisting of Eurasian inhabitants of Calcutta under 
English law which was of doubtful application at the time in India, 
and was sentenced to death on the charge. Nandkumar appealed pite¬ 
ously to Francis from prison, but neither Francis nor his friends, 
Monson and Clavering, raised a finger to come to Nandkumar’s assis¬ 
tance and back an application for reprieve. Hastings had made no 
secret of his detestation of Nandkumar and was glad that he was 
being removed from his way. One of his dependants even exerted 
himself to prevent a petition of reprieve from being presented. Thus 
ended the life of a true patriot as the victim of a conspiracy. 

One of the reasons for parliamentary interference in the affairs 
of the Company was the desire of the people in England to check 
the abuse of authority by the servants of the Company in this coun¬ 
try. For this purpose the existing judicial arrangement in Bengal 
was considered unsatisfactory. The Mayor’s Court which adminis¬ 
tered English law, had authority only over the town or district of Cal¬ 
cutta and its subordinate factories. There were many British sub¬ 
jects resident in Bengal who did not fall under the jurisdiction of 
English law. Again, the fact that the judges of the Charter Courts 
were subject to removal by the Governor-General and Council made 
it difficult for them to punish the Company’s servants without fear 
of consequences. The Regulating Act, therefore, provided for a judi¬ 
ciary emanating directly from the Crown. The Act, however, failed 
to define clearly its jurisdiction or its relations to the Governor- 
General and Council and the existing judiciary. The Supreme 
Court was constituted of a Chief Justice and three puisne judges ap¬ 
pointed by the king from barristers of five years’ standing, to hold 
office at pleasure. The Court had authority over all European and 
British subjects resident in Bengal, Bihar and Orissa. It could de¬ 
cide suits brought against any British subject in Bengal, Bihar and 
Orissa as well as suits against any person employed by or in the ser¬ 
vice of the Company. It could also decide any suit brought by a 
British subject against any inhabitant of India within Bengal, Bihar 
and Orissa on any contract in writing agreeing that in case of dis¬ 
pute the matter should be determined in the Supreme Court, pro¬ 
vided the cause of action exceeded five hundred rupees. The rules, 


374 


CGI^ouU-DATTON OF BRITISH POWER IN BENGAL (1773-1784) 

ordinances and regulations for the good order and civil government 
of Fort William and the subordinate factories were not to have effect 
until registered in the Supreme Court with its approval. Thus the 
Court was to serve as a check on hasty legislation. 5 

The Parliament, says Mills “saw not that they were establish¬ 
ing two independent and rival powers in India, that of the Supreme 
Council and that of the Supreme Court, they drew no line to mark 
the boundary between them; and they foresaw not the consequences 
which followed, a series of encroachments and disputes, which un¬ 
nerved the powers of government and threatened their destruction”. 6 
The Supreme Court started to exercise its powers pedantically. The 
Court was a king’s court and the judges were the king’s judges. 
They derived their power from a source which was superior to the 
power from which the position of the Governor-General and Council 
emanated. ‘They claimed that they were here to afford protection to 
whomsoever sought it and went so far beyond the vaguely defined 
limits of their jurisdiction that they paralysed the work of the Com¬ 
pany’s Government and even challenged the Nawab’s authority over 
the nizdmat. Though, in April 1775, Hastings seemed so pleased with 
the Court as to mention to Lord North “the protection which it 
affords to the weak against oppression”, he did not hesitate to tell 
the sponsor of the Act as follows: 

“It appears to me defective only in the inadequacy of its natural 
powers to the extent of its jurisdiction. I much fear that it will 
be found scarce possible in practice to make the distinction intended 
by the Act, and Charter, between such persons as are employed in 
the service of the Company, or of British subjects, and other native 
inhabitants. The mutual concerns and connexions of two classes so 
formed of the same people will bring about every man of property 
within the sphere of the Supreme Court, independently of the'neces- 
sity to which it seems unavoidably liable of exercising a temporary 
authority, even over those not subject to it by the Act for the pur¬ 
pose of ascertaining their exemption from it. The geographical mea¬ 
surement of the provinces of Bengal exceeds, perhaps that of Great 
Britain, and the number of litigable disputes is at least as great. 
Judge then, my Lord, how incompetent a single court, however com¬ 
posed, must be for the efficient distribution of justice to such a 
nation?” 7 

To remedy the defect. in the Act, Hastings suggested to Lord 
North that the Company’s Civil Courts may be made dependent on 
the Supreme Court and the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court may 


375 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


be given a seat on the Council Board . 8 Firminger correctly inter¬ 
prets the intentions of the framers of the Act when he says: 

‘‘That the Court was not intended to hold an unlimited jurisdic¬ 
tion throughout the province is clear from the repeated references 
to European and British subjects, to natives under the protection or 
in the employment of British subjects. The Supreme Court was in 
fact to occupy the position of the Mayor’s Court and its institution 
was believed to be necessary because the Mayor’s Court had been 
found an insufficient deterrent to wrong doings on the part of the 
company officials. ... It was not intended to supersede or trespass 
upon the judicature deriving their authority from the Moghul Sove¬ 
reignty by practically edging it into limbo. The establishment of 
the Supreme Court enabled the Directors to take the trial of alleged 
offences of its servants out of the hands of a complacent Council 
Board and have such cases determined by the Court of puisne justices 
of the Crown .” 9 

Again what law the Court was to administer was not settled in 
the Act, probably because the assumption was that the Court was 
meant for those who were actually or constructively British subjects 
and therefore required English law. There was no idea of intro¬ 
ducing English law with all its technicalities throughout the whole 
of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa. 

Soon the defects in the Act pointed out by Hastings became ap¬ 
parent. The Court gave the widest interpretation to the word 
‘British subjects’ and persons in the employment of the Company 
and all persons connected with the collection of rents and Indians 
imprisoned by those collectors were all brought within their juris¬ 
diction. As a matter of fact, writs of habeas corpus were freely 
granted to public debtors so imprisoned. 

The work of revenue collection and administration of civil 
justice was nearly brought to a standstill. The Governor-General 
and Council declared, “By the several acts and declarations of the 
judges, it is plain that the Company’s office of Dewan is annihilated; 
that the country government is subverted and that any attempt on 
our part to exercise or support the powers of either, may involve us 
and our officers in the guilt and penalty of high treason”. 

For the judges of a Court in the constitution of which the 
sovereignty of the king of England over Bengal might be construed, 
it was difficult to understand the peculiar status of the Nawab of 
Bengal and the de jure position of the Company in this province. 


376 


CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH POWER IN BENGAL (1773-1784) 

The anxiety of the Company to keep up the appearance of the 
Nizdmat was not understood by them and they claimed jurisdiction, 
civil as well as criminal, over the whole of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa. 
Mr. Justice Hyde declared publicly on the bench, ‘The Act of Parlia¬ 
ment does not consider Mubaruck-ud-Dowla as a sovereign prince; 

\ 

the jurisdiction of this Court extends over all his dominions.” 

Let us now illustrate the effects of the interpretation given by 
the judges of the Supreme Court of their powers and functions. The 
Patna case illustrates how a thirst for enlarging its jurisdiction led 
the Supreme Court to interfere with the administration of justice by 
the Company’s Civil Courts. On the death of a rich Mahommedan, 
both his widow and his nephew claimed his whole property. The 
Provincial Council at Patna, before whom the case came up in 
January, *1727, deputed, according to usual practice, a Kdzi and two 
Muftis to enquire into the claims of the parties according to Mahom¬ 
medan Law. The Kdzi and the Muftis reported that the property 
should be divided into four parts and one part given to the widow and 
three parts given to the brothers of the deceased and father of the 
nephew. The Council considered the report, heard the parties and 
ordered the distribution of the property as recommended. The widow 
refused to submit to the decision of the Provincial Council and to 
accept her share and brought an action in the Supreme Court against 
the nephew, the Kdzi and the Muftis for the part they had taken in 
carrying out the orders of the Council. The objection raised by the 
nephew to the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court was overruled by 
the judges who declared that every renter was a servant of^the Com¬ 
pany. The Kdzi and the Muftis pleaded that they had acted re¬ 
gularly in their judicial capacity in obedience to the lawful orders 
of their legal superiors. The judges decided On the maxiin of 
English law that the provincial council could not delegate any autho¬ 
rity to the Kdzi and the Muftis, even as their agents, and therefore 
all that they had done was without authority. The nephew and the 
Kdzi were arrested at Patna. The bail demanded was four lakhs 
of rupees. The Council of Patna decided to offer bail for the prise** 
ners. The Governor-General and Council resolved that “they he 
supported and indemnified by Government from all consequences 
from which they can be legally indemnified”. The Supreme Court 
gave judgment against the defendants who were to pay to the widow 
3 lakhs of rupees as damages and 9,208 rupees as costs. The defend 
dants except the Kdzi who was an old man and expired on the way^, 
were then conveyed to Calcutta under a guard of sepoys and lodged 
in jail. They were released in 1781 by the interference of the firs* 


377 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


tish Parliament and granted a pecuniary compensation. The Muftis 
were mot only reinstated but promoted. 

Not satisfied, the widow also brought an action against the mem¬ 
bers of the Provincial Council in the Supreme Court and obtained 
damages amounting to 15,000 rupees which money was paid from the 
Company’s treasury. 

The Dacca case is an example of the interference of the Supreme 
Court with the jurisdiction of the Criminal Courts functioning under 
the Nizdmat. A ‘Paik’ or messenger had been convicted in the 
Faujddri Court at Dacca for a misdemeanour and put into jail. This 
man brought a suit before the Supreme Court against the diwdn of 
this Court for trespass and false imprisonment. One of the judges 
of the Supreme Court issued a process of arrest against the diwdn 
(1777). An attorney of the Supreme Court residing at Dacca de¬ 
puted his bailiffs for executing the process of arrest. The bailiffs 
proceeded to the faujddr’s house and attempted in a violent manner 
to seize the diwdn who was present there. The faujddr refused to 
allow the diwdn to be arrested, whereupon the attorney proceeded 
to the house in person with a large number of attendants, broke down 
the gate and forcibly entered the house. The result was an affray 
in which the fcqujddr’s father was wounded in the head with a sword 
by an attendant of the attorney and the attorney himself shot the 
faujddr’s brother-in-law with a pistol and wounded him dangerously. 
Justice Hyde highly approved the conduct of the attorney and pro¬ 
mised him the Court’s support. The Provincial Council bailed the 
diwdni and wrote to the Governor-General and Council that “all cri¬ 
minal justice is at a stand, and seems not likely to be resumed until 
the decisive consequences of the present disputes shall be publicly de¬ 
clared and known.” 

The Supreme Court was at open war with the Supreme Council 
when in 1779 it proceeded against a zaminddr of Midnapur, the Raja 
of Kasijora, on the corfiplaint of Kasinath Babu, his agent at Calcutta. 
When the Raja evaded arrest by absconding, the Court issued a writ 
to sequester his land and effects. The Sheriff despatched to Kasijora 
an armed force for the execution of the writ. Under orders of 
the Governor-General and Council their party was seized and detain¬ 
ed by the officer commanding the troops at Midnapur. The Supreme 
Council notified all zamindars and tahsildars in Bengal, Bihar and 
Orissa that except in the two cases of being the Company’s servants 
or bound by their own agreement, they were not to consider them¬ 
selves subject to the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. The pro- 


378 


CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH POWER IN BENGAL (1773-1784) 

vincial Chiefs were forbidden to lend any military force to assist in 
the execution of the orders of the Court. The Supreme Court took 
revenge by committing the Company’s attorney to jail and serving 
summons individually on the members of the Supreme Council to 
answer to Kasinath Babu for trespass. The members of the Council 
refused to submit to the Court in any proceedings brought against 
them as individuals. 10 

Hastings was anxious to put an end to this intolerable situation 
and at the same time to improve the judiciary. The Sadr Dhvani 
Addlat had been kept in abeyance because the Governor-General and 
Council had no time for judicial duties. The Provincial Courts also, 
it was admitted, had not been working satisfactorily. On 11 April, 
1780, the Governor-General and Council passed a series of regula¬ 
tions for the administration of justice. The six provincial councils 
which were supervising the district diivdni adalats were to remain 
courts of justice for the trial and decision of cases relating to public 
revenue only. There were to be six divisional diwdni courts to try 
all other civil suits. These courts were to be presided over by a 
covenanted servant of the Company with the title of the Super¬ 
intendent of the Diwdni Addlat. Provisions were laid down to avoid 
clashes between the Superintendents of the Adalats and the Provin¬ 
cial Councils. The Sadr Diwdni Addlat was now revived and it was 
laid down that in cases of sums exceeding Rs. 1,000 appeals were to 
lie to “The Governor-General and Council in their department of 
Sadr Diwdni Addlat. Such appeals must go through the Chief of the 
provincial council of revenue.” 

Though the Sadr Diwdni Addlat frad been revived, the pressure 
of business prevented the members of the Council from actually 
sitting as a court and important cases were decided on the recom¬ 
mendation of the Keeper of Khalsd Records without the members 
hearing the evidence at all. 

On 29 September, 1780, therefore Hastings brought forward his 
famous scheme for the revival of the Sadr Diwdni Addlat. The Sadr 
Diwdni Addlat was a Court of Appeal. It had also to exercise a 
general supervision over the inferior courts. This authority the 
Board was incapable of exercising. Therefore, he suggested that the 
Chief Justice be requested “to accept of the chargq and superintend¬ 
ing of the office of the Diwdni Adala!t f1 and be styled the judge of 
the Sadr Diwdni Addlat. Wheler and Francis objected to the pro¬ 
posal, and Hastings supported by Sir Eyre Coote carried the proposal 


379 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


with his casting, vote and in October Impey accepted the post offer¬ 
ed him. 

Wheler was right in contending that the appointment would be 
contrary to the spirit of the Regulating Act. The Supreme Court 
had been set up to deal with complaints against the Company’s 
servants. The Chief Justice would be now in the pay of the Com¬ 
pany and at the head of the Company’s judiciary which was staffed 
by those very servants. Obviously Impey had placed himself in an 
invidious position. He was open to the charge that he had been 
bribed by Hastings and had forfeited his judicial independence. 

Impey’s appointment was looked upon with disfavour in England 
and the Court of Directors and the House of Commons petitioned the 
Crown for his recall. Impey left India in 1783 to answer charges 
against him. In the meanwhile orders from the Directors arrived 
instructing the Council to resume its jurisdiction. 

In the meanwhile a petition had been sent by the principal Bri¬ 
tish inhabitants in Bengal to Parliament against the exercise of their 
powers by the Supreme Court. The Governor-General and Council 
had also petitioned the Directors. These together with a petition 
from the East India Company were placed before the House of Com¬ 
mons and were referred to a Select Committee. The result was the 
Att of 1781 amending the Constitution of the Supreme Court. The 
Act provided that: 

(i) The Governor-General and Council were not to be subject 
to the Supreme Court*for acts done by them in their official 
capacity. 

(ii) The Supreme Court was to have no jurisdiction in matters 
concerning the revenue or its collection. 

(iii) Mere employment by the Company or by a native of Great 
Britain should not render a person subject to the jurisdic¬ 
tion of the Supreme Court except in actions for wrongs and 
trespasses and also except in any civil suit by written 
agreement of parties to submit to the Court’s decision. 

(iv) Persons exercising judicial offices in the Indian adalats 
and persons acting under such authority were not to be 
amenable to actions for wrong or injury in the Supreme 
Court. 

(v) The Supreme Court was to have jurisdiction over all in¬ 
habitants of Calcutta, but Hindu or Muhammadan laws 
were to be administered in cases of inheritance, contract 
and succession. 


380 


CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH POWER IN BENGAL (1773-1784) 

Thus the powers of the Supreme Court were at last defined and 
the court was kept away from mischief. The need of a central 
authority to^control the dealings of the British Presidencies with the 
Indian powers, with a view to secure a uniform policy, had been felt 
for sometime before the Regulating Act and Lord Clive had suggest¬ 
ed that such an authority should be established in Bengal. 11 The 
Regulating Act provided that the Goyernor-General and Council of 
Bengal shall have “power of superintending and controlling the 
Government and management of the Presidencies of ^Madras, Bombay 
and Bencoolen respectively so far and insomuch as that it shall not 
be lawful for any President and Council of Madras, Bombay or Ben¬ 
coolen to make any orders for commencing hostilities or declaring 
or making war against any Indian Prince or power, or negotiating 
or concluding any treaty of peace or other treaty with any such 
Indian Princes or powers, unless the consent and approbation of the 
said Governor-General and Council had been obtained first, except 
in such cases of imminent necessity as would render it dangerous to 
postpone such hostilities or treaties until the order of the Governor- 
General and Council might arrive; and except in such cases where 
the said presidents and councils shall have received special orders 
from the said United Company. . . .” A penalty was prescribed for 
disobedience of the orders of the Governor-General and Council, 
which was suspension from office. The Presidencies were to trans¬ 
mit regularly to the Governor-General and Council advice and in¬ 
telligence of all transactions and matters whatsoever that shall come 
to their knowledge relating to the Government, revenues, or interests 
of the said United Company.’' 12 It will be seen that no* positive 
power was given to Bengal. The Governor-General and Council 
could only say ‘Yes’ or ‘IVo’ when matters relating to commencement 
of hostilities or negotiations of treaties were referred to them. The 
pleas of imminent necessity and orders from the Directors could be 
preferred at every step by the subordinate presidencies, leaving the 
central authority powerless while the subordinate presidencies 
brought the affairs of the Company to a critical position. On the 
other hand, a responsibility for “the security of the possessions and 
revenues of the Company’’ had been thrust upon the Governor- 
General and Council by the Directors. This made it necessary for 
the Governor-General and Council to intervene in the affairs of the 
subordinate presidencies even in matters in which their legal powers 
could be questioned. The financial resources of Bombay and Madras 
were meagre and they depended for men, money and supplies on 
Bengal in times of war. The Supreme Council could be asked to 
finance a war for which they were not responsible. There would 


381 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

be the natural temptation, after help had been sent, to seek to re¬ 
gulate the conduct of the war and to decide when, how and on what 
terms a treaty was to be concluded, for which the Supreme Council 
had no legal power. This absurd position led to the most unfortu¬ 
nate relations between the Central Government and the Govern¬ 
ments of Bombay and Madras and on occasions endangered the safety 
of the British possessions in India. A detailed discussion of the re¬ 
lations between the Central Government ( and the subordinate pre¬ 
sidencies under the Regulating Act of 1773 is beyond the scope of 
this chapter. It is sufficient to say that the Company’s possession of 
so rich a province as Bengal enabled it to finance the wars under¬ 
taken by the Bombay and Madras presidencies and to save the Bri¬ 
tish position in India. When the revenues of Bengal were not en¬ 
ough to make up the money required for these wars, Hastings had to 
adopt questionable methods of extortion of money as in the case of 
Chait Singh and the Begams of Awadh. 

We have now to resume the account of the efforts made by the 
Company’s servants towards devising an efficient system of land re¬ 
venue collection at the point at which it was left in the preceding 
chapter. The results of the quinquennial settlement of 1772 were 
proving more deplorable each year. The necessity of devising some 
fresh method had become imperative. Accordingly in March 1775 
Hastings invited the opinions of the members of the Council on the 
subject. Hastings and Barwell presented a joint plan in which they 
practically adopted the principle of a permanent settlement by re¬ 
commending leases for life or for two joint lives, forming such settle¬ 
ments with zaminddrs wherever possible. Francis opposed this 
plan and in January 1776 brought forward his own plan. He pro¬ 
posed that the new settlement was to be based on an estimate of the 
actual requirements of the Company instead of being based on an 
estimate of what the lands could bear. The amount Government 
needed to raise by way of land revenue was to be ascertained. The 
contributions of the districts would be settled accordingly and fixed 
for ever. This fixed settlement was to be made with the zaminddrs, 
who he argued were the lawful owners of the soil. To guard against 
deficits he proposed that the zaminddris which defaulted were to 
be sold. As to the machinery of revenue collection, Francis contend¬ 
ed that the institution of the Provincial Councils was fundamentally 
wrong and recommended the reappointment of Supervisors. 
Francis’ views, which he publicised in England, exercised a great in¬ 
fluence in preparing the revenue policy dictated by Pitt’s India Act 
of 1784. 


382 


CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH POWER IN BENGAL (1773-1784) 


The quinquennial settlement was coming to an end in 1777 and 
a fresh settlement had to be made. Before the settlement could be 
made it was essential to obtain accurate information as to the real 
value of the lands, as an assessment based on faulty information 
would be disastrous. Hastings proposed the appointment of a com¬ 
mission to undertake the task. An additional object of the pro¬ 
posed commission was “the better and more effectual regulation of 
pottahs for the security of the ryots in the perpetual and undisputed 
possession of their lands”. David Anderson, George Bogle and 
Charles Croftes were appointed members of the Commission. Henry 
Vansittart was the Persian translator and Ganga Govind Singh was 
appointed Peshkar. The Governor-General was to be in direct con¬ 
trol of the proceedings of the Commission. 

As in the case of all other proposals put forward by Hastings, 
Francis came out with his objections to the appointment of this 
Commission and was supported by Clavering and Monson. Hast¬ 
ings was obliged to get the matter through the Council by means of 
his casting vote. The Commission immediately got to work and sent 
out amins into all the districts to collect necessary accounts and 
papers. The report of this Commission, known in history as the 
Amini Commission, was completed in March 1778. 

“The Amini Report was the first technical and professional ex¬ 
planation of the system employed in collecting the land revenue of 

Bengal that was placed before the Company. The various 

classes of landlords and the different forms of land tenure are set 
forth, together with a description of the hereditary and temporary 
agencies that existed for administering and collecting this revenue at 
the time when the Company assumed the Diwani. The accounts of 
a district are explained in detail, their modus operandi and their in¬ 
terdependency. The decline in administrative efficiency, resulting 
in oppression of the ryots and the defrauding of Government is re¬ 
lated with comments showing how the zaminddrs trusting to the 
want of information in Government had deliberately increased the 
areas of land alleged to be free from taxation, because they were 
ostensibly used for religious uses. The report lays stress on the 
necessity of expert and continual supervision by responsible officers 
of the revenue collections, and concludes by suggesting a few gene¬ 
ral principles to be observed in assessing the land revenue of a 
district.” 13 

Unfortunately the Directors disapproved of the appointment of 
the Commission as they saw no reason why after so many years 


383 



THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


of investigation further information should be still required. Con¬ 
fused as they were by the conflicting opinions of their servants on 
the spot, they were unable to take any definite decision and decided 
to mark time. Accordingly in December 1778 they sent orders for 
the land revenue to be settled annually. 

It will be remembered that the machinery for revenue collec¬ 
tion which was in operation was a temporary arrangement pending 
the application of a more permanent plan kept in readiness. The 
essence of this permanent plan was ‘that all the collections of the 
provinces should be brought down to the Presidency and be there 
administered by a Committee of the most able and experienced of 
the Covenanted servants of the Company under the immediate in¬ 
spection of, and with the opportunity of constant reference for in¬ 
struction to, the Governor-General and Council.’ 14 In February 
1781, it was decided to give effect to this plan. Accordingly— 

(i) A Committee of Revenue consisting of four Covenanted 
servants of the Company was constituted. The first to be 
appointed to the Committee was David Anderson, John 
Shore, Samuel Charters and Charles Croftes. Ganga 
Govind Singh was appointed diwan. The Committee was 
to be entrusted with the charge and administration of all 
the public revenues under the control of the Governor- 
General and Council. 

(ii) The Provincial Councils were dissolved, but the chiefs 
of the Councils were to remain in the temporary charge 
of the respective divisions under the authority of the 
Committee. 

(iii) The office of the Superintendent of the Khalsa records was 
abolished and the functions of Khalsa were transferred to 
the Committee of Revenue. 

(iv) The office of the Rciy ray an was placed under the Supreme 
Council and its holder was forbidden to interfere in the 
business transacted by the diwan of the committee. 

(v) The Collectors were replaced in all the districts. 

(vi) The Kanungos were reinstated. 

Though the collectors were reappointed, they were denied any 
interference with the new settlement of the revenues. Even as the 
collecting agencies, the local collectors were not trusted. The new 
collectors were mere figureheads. The mofussil Kanungos who 


384 


CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH POWER IN BENGAL (1773-1784) 

were reappointed to assist the Collectors were under the control of 
the Sadr Kanungos who bowed at the feet of the Committee of Re¬ 
venue. This extreme centralisation led to the failure of this scheme. 
The Committee of Revenue became a tool in the hands of the diwdn. 
It could not discover the real state of any district, nor could it dis¬ 
tinguish truth from falsehood. Without an effective local agency, 
the ryots could not be protected from oppression, and regular reaiisa- 
sation of the revenues could not be secured. 

The settlement of 1781 was made principally with the zaminddrs 
for varying periods, not exceeding three years in different districts. 
For the years 1784-86 annual settlements were concluded by special 
officers deputed by the Committee. 

Warren Hastings left India in February 1785. With his depar¬ 
ture, the coming into operation of Pitt’s India Act of 1784 and the 
arrival of Lord Cornwallis as Governor-General, a new epoch in the 
history of the East India Company’s administration of its possessions 
in India begins. It is, therefore, necessary at this stage to examine 
how far the English had consolidated their position in Bengal at the 
end of Hastings’ period of rule. The security of the province of 
Bengal had been obtained by the judicious, creation of Awadh as a 
buffer state. The English had stopped payment of the tribute to the 
Mughul emperor and no longer felt it necessary to masquerade as 
mere servants of the Great Mughul. The process of erosion of the 
sovereignty of the Nawab of Bengal was almost complete and he 
was now only a pensioner of the Company. The Company’s autho¬ 
rity over Bengal had been firmly established. The task of revenue 
collection and the administration of civil justice was fully exercised 
by the Company, and the administration of criminal justice and the 
police of the districts was under their control, though still in 
theory with the Nawab. It was left for Cornwallis to do away 
with the small remnants of the rights vested in the Nawab as 
Nazim . 

No account of the administration of Warren Hastings can be 
complete without a reference to the spirit in which he approached 
his great task of governing a subject people. The voluminous re¬ 
cords of his administration evince his solicitude for the people he 
was called upon to govern, his desire to respect their customs and 
past traditions and to associate the natives of the soil with the ad¬ 
ministration. In the copious minutes and notes relating to local re¬ 
venue administration, Hastings’ concern for the security of the ryots 
is evident. The affection and esteem for the people of Bengal which 

385 


M.S.—25 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


he developed while he lived among them as a humble clerk of the 
Company survived his elevation to a position of great power. 

Hastings knew Bengali and Persian very well. He had a work¬ 
ing knowledge of Urdu and knew a little Arabic. Though he never 
learnt Sanskrit, he associated with the welLknown pundits of his 
time and his unbounded admiration for the philosophy of the Gltd 
and for Sanskrit learning is brought out abundantly in his introduc¬ 
tion to Wilkins’ translation of the Gita, where he says that “the 
philosophy of the Gita has a permanent value and will continue to 
influence the world long after the British empire will have been 
forgotten.” Hastings’ interest in the civilisation, thought and lan¬ 
guages of India led him to encourage the study of Persian at Oxford. 
He established the Calcutta Madrasah in 1781. Inspired by his res¬ 
pect and zeal for oriental learning; a number of the servants of 
the Company began to take to oriental studies. Halhed translated 
the Digest of Hindu Law from Persian into English. Halhed's gram¬ 
mar of the Bengali language was printed in 1778 with type cast by 
Wilkins. Wilkins was proficient alike in Persian and Sanskrit and 
translated the Bhagavad Gita from Sanskrit. The great orientalist 
Sir William Jones arrived in 1783 and with the assistance of Pundit 
Jagannath Tarkapahchanan began the translation of the Laws of 
Manu. Hastings, Jones, Wilkins and Halhed joined in founding the 
Asiatic Society for the furtherance of the knowledge of the East. 
Thus it will not be inaccurate to say that the Indian Renaissance 
which blossomed in the 19th century had its roots in this period of 
Hastings’ administration. 

NOTES 

1. Davies, C. C., Warren Hastings and Oudh (19390,, p. 36. 

2. Forrest, G. W., Selection from State Papers, etc., Vol. I, p. 30. 

3 Cambridge History of India, Vol. V, p. 219. 

4. Keith, A. B., Speeches and Documents on Indian Policy, Vol. I, pp. 49-59. 

5 Keith, A. B., Constitutional History of India, p. 75. 

6 Mill, History of British India, Vol. V, Chap, xxx, p. 268. 

7 • Gleig, Memoirs of the Life of Warren Hastings, Hastings to Lord North (2 

April, 1775), Vol. I, pp. 540-41. V 

8. Ibid, pp. 541-42. 

9 Firminger, Introduction to the Fifth Report. 

10 Mill, op. cit., Bk. V, Chap. VI, pp. 282-96. 

11 Dasgupta, A. P., The Central Authority in British India, 1774-84, pp. 2-4. 

12. Keith, A. B., Speeches and, Documents on Indian Policy, Vol. I, pp. 46-47. 

13 Ramsbotham, Studies in the Land Revenue History of Bengal , pp. 96-97. 

14 Cambridge History of India, Vol. V, p. 427. 


386 



CHAPTER XI 


MARATHAS AND THE NORTH INDIAN STATES 

( 1772 - 1799 ) 

Confusion in Mughul Court: 

Northern India had passed through a series of political convul¬ 
sions and moral degeneracy during the reigns of Farrukh-siyar and 
Muhammad Shah. Masters of Gujarat, Malwa and Bundelkhand, 
the Marathas had demonstrated the weakness of the empire by sud¬ 
denly appearing in the environs of Delhi in 1737. Nadir Shah’s in¬ 
vasion of 1739 was a mighty blow, but the empire survived it, some¬ 
how. In 1748 the Mughuls exhibited a flicker of their former 
strength by scoring a victory over the Afghans at Sirhind. But in 
1752 the resourceful Afghan—Ahmad Shah Abdall—annexed the 
two frontier provinces of Lahore and Multan. The helpless Mugfiul 
emperor Ahmad Shah craved Maratha protection and entered into 
an agreement with Malhar Rao Holkar and Jayappa Sindia in May 
1752; The Marathas gained from the emperor the chauth of the 
Punjab, Sind and the Doab, in addition to the sub&hdari of Ajmer 
and Agra; in exchange the Marathas agreed to protect the, emperor 
against external enemies and recalcitrant subjects. This agreement 
has been described as “a defensive subsidiary treaty”. 1 

The risky commitment to which Sindia and Holkar agreed could 
only have been successfully carried out had they acted in close co¬ 
operation and received adequate support from Poona. It was, there¬ 
fore, no wonder that the Marathas had to succumb to the combina- 
tion of Indian Muslim chiefs and the Afghan adventurer, Ahmad 
Shah Abdall, on 14 January, 1761, on the fatal field of Panipat, des¬ 
pite the extension of their power up to the river Chenab, effected 
mainly through the agency of the Peshwd’s brother, Raghunath Rao. 
The battle of Panipat left the Rohilla chief, Najib-ud-daulah, Abdall’s 
Indian supporter, as the undisputed master of Delhi during the next 
nine years. The Marathas were so emasculated that everywhere in 
Hindustan—in the Gangetic Doab, in Bundelkhand, in Rajputana and 
in Malwa—the dispossessed rulers and petty landlords raised their 
heads. 

From this perilous situation the Marathas recovered slowly. A 
spasmodic start had been made by Malhar Rao Holkar who defeateu 


387 



THE MAHATHA SUPREMACY 


Madho Singh of Jaipur at Mangrol near Kota (29 November, 1761). 
An indirect recognition of the continuity of Maratha power in north 
was provided by the formal acceptance of status quo by Ahmad Shah 
Abdall in 1763. Three years later the Marathas—led by Raghunath 
Rao, Malhar Rao Holkar and Mahadji Sindia—reappeared on the nor¬ 
thern political spectrum but only to withdraw a year later follow¬ 
ing a revival of the Abdall menace. 

Najib’s death in 1770 induced the Mughul emperor, Shah ‘Alam, 
who had been living in exile at Allahabad as a pensioner of the East 
India Company, to think seriously of coming back to Delhi, where he 
could regale himself with the yet visible symbol of imperial sove¬ 
reignty. He had been repeatedly duped by the British promises of 
help; he, therefore, turned expectantly towards the Marathas. On 
12 February, 1771, the emperor ratified a formal agreement with the 
Marathas and left Allahabad two months later. Mahadji Sindia met 
him at Anupshahar and the exiled emperor entered Delhi on 6 
January, 1772, as a Maratha protege. At last Peshwd Madhav Rao 
had the satisfaction of having effaced the ignominy of Panipat and 
restored Maratha power once more to its unenviable position. The 
policy laid down by BajI Rao I and extended by his son now seemed 
to be reaching fulfilment. 

No sooner did the Marathas begin to reassert their power in 
Hindustan than they were diverted to momentous issues in the 
south which engulfed the Marathas following the murder of Peshwd 
Narayan Rao (30 August 1773) and the outbreak of the first war 
with the English. The emperor was a mere puppet in the hands of 
the all-powerful chieftain, Mirza Najaf Khan. But this chief died 
on 6 April 1782, and the emperor once more exhibited a pathetic pic¬ 
ture of indolence and vacillation. 

Confusion reigned supreme in the Mughul Court and there was 
no semblance of law and order in the city of Delhi. “The Sikhs 
have plundered the country close to the city, and the Mewatis and 
Gujars, who are common robbers, so totally infest the country on 
every side. .. that travellers cannot pass from any one city to an¬ 
other; this, joined to the failure of the harvest, has produced a 
famine at Delhi; so that the distresses of that capital are extreme”.? 

The British were not slow to take advantage of the emperor’s 
miserable plight. Warren Hastings, now emerging from the Mara¬ 
tha War, sent Major Browne to the emperor, in the summer of 1782, 
on an exploratory mission. He was asked to study the character, 
connection, influence and power of the several competitors for the 


388 


MARATHAS AND THE NORTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 

possession of the King’s favour or the exercise of his authority, and 
the views of foreign powers. His offer of military aid was condi¬ 
tional and limited.' 

Having reached Delhi early in 1783, Browne warmly advocated 
the emperor’s cause and tried to quicken Hastings’ zeal by his elo¬ 
quence. He observed: “The whole Mughul empire looks tp you for 
redemption from the utmost distress and confusion”. 3 But Hastings 
did not wish to be drawn into a situation by any. unwise or wrongful 
action; even Browne’s request in early 1784 to form an alliance with 
Shah ‘Alam and Afrasiyab Khan, the adopted son of Mirza Najaf 
Khan, met with no response from Hastings. In April, 1784, the 
whole situation took a sudden turn by the flight of Prince Jahandar 
Shah (Jawan Bakht), the emperor’s son and heir to the tlirone, to 
the protection of the vazlr and the British in Lucknow. Mahadji 
Sindia, who had now been able to consolidate his position in Malwa, 
suggested to Hastings that the British should dissociate themselves 
from the Prince and the latter be restored with Maratha assistance. 
Meanwhile ‘Abdul Ahad, the emperor’s minister and a henchman of 
the British, had been imprisoned by Afrasiyab Khan on 30 May 1784. 
Hastings had to give up with reluctance his cherished desire of turn¬ 
ing the Mughul emperor into a stooge of British imperialism. He 
refused to undertake fresh commitments, exhausted as the Company 
had been by the Maratha-Mysore wars. To Hastings it also appear 
ed that Sindia, through whose mediation the treaty of Salbai had 
been concluded, would be too preoccupied in numerous difficulties to 
embark On any adventure either against the English or their ally the 
Nawab-Vazlr of Awadh. 

Mahadji becomes Supreme: 

Meanwhile the imperial court was riven by two factions—one 
headed by Afrasiyab Khan, mentioned above, and the other by 
Muhammad Beg Hamdani, Governor of the Province of Agra. 
Mahadji was sensitive to British infiltration in Delhi politics and ask¬ 
ed Afrasiyab Khan to remain vigilant and to keep the emperor under 
his control. Mahadji apprised Afrasiyab that the emperor should 
be arrested if necessary but must not be allowed to seek British 
sanctuary. 4 Proceeding from Gwalior on 5 October 1784, Mahadji 
advanced towards Agra where 4he emperor was halting. Oh 23 
October, Mahadji met Afrasiyab in the vicinity of Fatehpur Sikri. 
But hardly had Afrasiyab conferred with Mahadji when he was 
murdered by Zain-ul-abdin on 2 November. Mahadji acted prompt¬ 
ly and succeeded in capturing the fugitive. By this stroke Sindia 


389 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

established his unquestioned supremacy in imperial politics. Browne 
reported from Delhi on 12 November: 

“From Gujarat to Jammu, and from Attock to Rohilkhand, 
there is no power but Sindhia and the Sikhs, every thing else 
is but a name. If they should dispute, the contest will be 
serious and important: should they unite, their strength will be 
irresistible”. 5 

The death of Afrasiyab Khan left the emperor with no capable 
deputy and he looked to Mahadji as the deliverer from ail misfor¬ 
tunes. The emperor met Mahadji at Fatehpur Sikri (14 November, 
1784) and appointed the Peshwd as his deputy ( Naib-i-Munaib ) as 
well as Commander-in-Chief ( Mir Bakhshi). Mahadji, on behalf of 
the Peshwd, should discharge the actual functions of these exalted 
offices. The emperor also honoured Mahadji Sindia with the title 
of Vakil-i-Mutlaq , or Regent Plenipotentiary, the highest post in the 
imperial government.* The importance of this momentous step was 
emphasised by Browne who wrote as follows: 

“This office being superior to even that of Vizier, Sindia 
by this step raised the Mahratta power above every other in the 
empire; and by taking this office for the Peshwd, he has given 
himself good ground to expect the support of the whole Mah¬ 
ratta state, in case of any attempt of any of the neighbouring 
states to reduce his power; while from the Peshwd’s youth, and 
the weak state of his ministry, Sindia is pretty certain of en¬ 
joying all the benefit of the office himself for many years”. 6 

Sindia’s difficulties: 

All these seemingly impressive grants brought little gain to 
Mahadji. The two nerve centres—Delhi and Agra—were still held 
by Afrasiyab’s men. The imperial territories had been sucked dry 
and could contribute but little either in military strength or 'in re¬ 
venues. The Mughul nobles looked sulkily towards Mahadji and 
were eager to throw off their present thraldom. The Sikhs were 
no less troublesome and were harrying the environs of Delhi and 
northern parts of the Doab. The Rajputs were trying to shake off 
the Maratha yoke. 

Mahadji faced the new situation with stubborn resolution. He 
struck first against the fortress of Dig which surrendered on 30 
December, 1784. Agra also capitulated on 27 March, 1785, after a 
feeble resistance. The subdhdari of Agra province was conferred on 


390 


MARATHAS AND THE NORTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 

Akbar Shah, the emperor’s second son, and the deputyship on Ladoji 
Beshmukh, Sindia’s son-in-law. Rayaji Patil was appointed gover¬ 
nor of the fortress. But Sindia found it difficult to reduce the fort 
of Aligarh as its commandant Jahangir Khan received secret en¬ 
couragement from Cummings, British General at Anupshahar. 
Mahadji protested against this and the Governor-General recalled 
Cummings. Rayaji besieged the fort which surrendered on 20 
November. 

Sindia now turned towards the Sikhs whose friendship he valu¬ 
ed most. A preliminary treaty of peace was concluded between 
Ambaji and the Sikh chiefs through the intervention of the Macheri 
Raja, Pratap Singh The Sikh chiefs agreed to receive one-third of 
the territories jointly conquered with the Marathas. The friends 
and enemies of both would be mutual. The preliminary treaty cry¬ 
stallised into a final agreement between Mahadji and the Sikh .chiefs 
on 10 Mays On joining Sindia with 5,000 cavalry the Sikh Chiefs 
were to receive a jdgtr worth 10 lakhs. 7 They were not to create 
any disturbance in the dominions of the English and the Nawab of 
Awadh who were friends of Sindia. The treaty was an event of 
great significance: directly it strengthened Sindia as the latter 
hoped to utilise the Sikhs against Jaipur and Marwar and indirectly 
afforded the Maratha chief an opportunity for territorial aggrandise¬ 
ment in the Sikh dominions as their leaders were engaged in mutual 
dissensions. The English could not view the newly established 
friendship between the Indian powers with equanimity. They ex¬ 
pected the break-up of the union and in that event they could count 
upon Sikh support. To a certain extent the British assumption was 
proved right. Though some Sikh chiefs like Bhangel Singh, Ray 
Singh and Goordut Singh became friends of the Marathas, the others 
continued to create troubles for them. Mahadji, therefore, had h to 
take preventive measures against the malcontent Sikhs by deploying 
forces under Dharrao Sindia. 

Throughout 1785 Mahadji had to struggle against heavy odds. 
His troops were engaged in different places like Aligarh, Raghogarh, 
Jaipur and. Panipat. Even the British Resident, Anderson,- appre¬ 
hended that Sindia might be involved in difficulties from which it 
would well nigh be impossible for him to extricate himself. Anderson 
expressed his misgivings on 8 September in no uncertain terms: 

“In setting on foot so many distant expeditions, Sindia 
seems to have departed from his usual wisdom.... and a defeat 
of any of these detachments to which they are at all times liable, 
might involve the ruin of all his schemes”. 8 


391 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Mahadji’s primary concern was to secure the territory of Ragho- 
garh as it commanded the strategic areas of northern and central 
India. His next objective was to subjugate the Khichi Rana Bal- 
want Singh who had helped the British in the first Maratha War and 
whose ancestors had long acknowledged Maratha overlordship by 
paying tribute. After a prolonged siege in which Ambaji Ingle play¬ 
ed a conspicuous role, Raghogarh surrendered and the Rana was kept 
a prisoner in Gwalior fort. In June 1785 Mahadji had to deal with 
two powerful unscrupulous nobles—Gosavi Umraoglr and Anupgir 
(the latter being popularly called Himrpat Bahadur). For ten 
mdnths they harassed the Marathas and when Devji Gauli was sent 
to chastise them their spirit of resistance wore down. They at last 
found refuge with the Nawab -Vazlr of Awadh. Some other chiefs 
in Bundelkhand, who had created troubles were also quickly put 
down. 

It was against this backdrop of Maratha supremacy in North 
India that the Governor-General Macpherson thought it wise to re¬ 
call Browne from Delhi. For the time being, the British had to 
reconcile themselves to the changed pattern of political set-up in 
north India. They maintained a dignified aloofness in north Indian 
politics and the British ambassador Anderson repeatedly discouraged 
the Nawab-VazTr of Awadh from entering into any hostility with 
Sindia. He wrote to Macpherson on 8 May, 1785: 

“There is no pretext on which the English could take a part 
with him (Nawab Vazir of Oudh) in any offensive war at pre¬ 
sent and whether we should be successful or miscarry in it, 
effects almost equally fatal would be the probable result of it. 
Were we to take up arms in vindication of the rights of the 
King with the professed intention to free him from his present 
thraldom we might soon succeed in this object; but incapable as 
he is of governing himself we should be under the necessity of 
either abandoning him again to the usurpation. of others or of 
keeping a large body of troops constantly employed for his sup¬ 
port at a great expense and subject to many risks.” 9 

Rajput war: Battle of Lalsot: 

Throughout 1785 the question that dominated the thoughts of 
Mahadji was the reduction of Jaipur. The Raja of Jaipur, PrithvI 
Singh (7 March, 1768-16 April, 1778) was succeeded by his dissolute 
brother, Sawai Pratap Singh, although the former had left behind 
a son named Man Singh, then about six months old. Matters be- 


392 


MAEATHAS AND THE NORTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 

came complicated when the erstwhile Jaipur vassal Rao Raja Pratap 
Singh Naruka made himself independent at Macheri in the vicinity 
of Alwar. He bore implacable enmity to the Jaipur ruler, ingra¬ 
tiated himself with the emperor and Sindia and offered his help in 
replacing Pratap Singh by Man Singh. 

Mahadji’s interference in Jaipur affairs stemmed from its ruler’s 
vassalage to the emperor and to the Marathas. As the Jaipur Raja 
could not repay the tributes which he owed to both these powers, 
Mahadji, on becoming supreme administrator in the imperial gov¬ 
ernment, claimed payment of these arrears. But the Raja was not 
in a complaint mood. Instead he enlisted the support of Raja 
Bijay Singh of Mar war and made frantic attempts to obtain armed 
assistance from the emperor, the Nawab-Vctztr and the English. 

Early in 1786 Mahadji took up the challenge. Arriving with 
the emperor at Sanganer, seven miles south of Jaipur, he demanded 
the arrears of tribute amounting to 3 crores and 40 lakhs of rupees. 
Discussions commenced on 10 March through intermediaries and 
after considerable exacerbation it was agreed that the Jaipur Raja 
should pay 63 lakhs of rupees. Rayaji Patil was left in the Jaipifi: 
territory to recover the dues, while Mahadji and the emperor re¬ 
turned to Mathura and Delhi respectively. 10 

Despite his apparent submission the Jaipur Raja had no wish to 
honour the settlement. Apart from forming a defensive alliance 
with Jodhpur, he endeavoured to secure British assistance to over¬ 
awe Sindia. In April 1786, Anand Ram, his agent at Lucknow, made 
an attempt to rouse the British feelings against the Marathas, but 
failed as the Company’s Government had already been wedded to a 
policy of neutrality in Indian affairs. Even the arrival of *Daulat 
Ram, ex-Diwan of the Jaipur Raja, at Lucknow in May did not affect 
the policy of the Company already decided upon. Harper, the Bri¬ 
tish agent at Lucknow, reminded Daulat Ram of the traditional 
bravery of the Rajputs and dispelled the illusion of entertaining any 
hope of assistance from foreign powers. In an allegorical style 
Harper observed: “Sindia’s name only may be literally said fo be 
as great a bugbear to the different powers of Hindustan, as the stories 
of Hobgoblins which nurses use in our country to frighten children”. 11 

Mahadji’s settlement with the Jaipur Raja proved to be illusory. 
The Raja had no intention of paying anything. Instead he remain¬ 
ed entrenched in his capital and asked his countrymen to * resist 
the Marathas by force. Mahadji also prepared for. the coming 
struggle by effecting junction with the emperor, by subjugating the 


393 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Mewatis and taking suitable steps to curb the Sikhs. Proceeding 
by way of Dig, Sindia reached Daosa, 38 miles east of Jaipur, on 24 
March, 1787. In early April he advanced further and lay encamped 
at Moti hill, 14 miles from Jaipur. Diplomacy now became active to 
avert the threatened conflict. Agents of Jaipur met Sindia on 5 April 
and proposed to pay the tribute amounting to 12 lakhs; 4 lakhs im¬ 
mediately, 2 lakhs afterwards, and the remaining 6 lakhs in assign¬ 
ments. The envoys conducted the negotiation with an air of superio¬ 
rity and continued it with so much vehemence that Sindia at last re¬ 
fused to treat with them. 

On 8 April Sindia proceeded to Bhankri, only 13 miles from Jai¬ 
pur, his agent, Rayaji Patil, having already advanced to the gates of 
Jaipur. Sindia reopened the negotiation. The Jaipur agents offer¬ 
ed to pay 4 lakhs of the dues and demanded the surrender of Khush- 
hali Ram Bohra, the dismissed prime minister of Jaipur. Sindia re¬ 
jected the proposal outright. 

From the beginning the prospects of Mahadji looked grim as his 
Hindustani troops began to Waver in their allegiance. His army lack¬ 
ed efficient artillery and was composed of disparate elements and 
was disaffected owing to arrears of pay. Sindia, therefore, fell back 
from his advanced position and began to harass the Rajputs by seizing 
the fortresses in the neighbouring areas. On 6 May Zu’lfiqar ‘Ali 
Khan and Manzur ‘Ali Khan, two Hindustan Captains, defected to 
the enemy; but the worst disaster that happened was the desertion 
of Muhammad Beg Hamdani on 27 May. 

Taking advantage of the weakness of Sindia, the Rajputs boldly 
came out of their entrenched position. This was Sindia’s opportunity 
to strike at his opponents in the open country. He, therefore, ad¬ 
vanced on 15 June, 1787, to Lalsot, situated about 30 miles south-east 
of Jaipur. By the middle of July, Sindia had been strengthened by 
the arrival of Khande Rao’s division from Bundelkhand, the two 
battalions of infantry trained under De Boigne and Ambaji Ingle’s 
army. The two parties manoeuvred for a vantage position for win¬ 
ning success. At last the trial of strength between the Marathas and 
the Rajputs took place on 28 July on the plain of Tunga, about 14 
miles north-east of Lalsot. The battle commenced with the usual 
cannonade, but the Rajput guns being bigger in size, played havoc on 
Sindia’s army. Four thousand Rathors flung themselves desparate- 
ly before the artillery of Khande Rao Appa. Even De Boigne with 
his sepoys fell back in confusion. The cool Savoyard reformed the 
survivors and opened small arm fire. After a sanguinary contest, the 


394 


MARATHAS AND THE NORTH INDIAN STATES (17724799) 

Rajputs retired. The death of Hamdani who was struck by a can¬ 
non shot, broke the spirit of Rajput resistance. The Marathas could 
not pursue the fugitive Rajputs as it started raining in the afternoon. 

But Mahadji could not afford to rejoice on his victory over the 
Jaipur Raja. Seven thousand Hindustani troops whose loyalty had 
long been wavering, now demanded their arrears of pay at gun¬ 
point, and refused to listen to any appeal. Instead of yielding to 
the request lest it should encourage other troops to make similar 
demands, Mahadji disbanded the rebel troops and allowed the latter 
to join the Rajputs. It was an anxious moment for Mahadji as any 
hasty action at this stage might create another Panipat. He extri¬ 
cated himself from this critical situation with uncommon ‘ fortitude 
and began his retreat on 1 August after destroying his baggage. 
“Throughout the ten days following the battle of Tunga, the phan¬ 
tom of Panipat kept haunting the memory of every Deccani in his 
camp. But if Lalsot did not prove a second Panipat, it was because 
Mahadji Sindia was no Sadashiv Rao Bhau and he had better sub¬ 
ordinates than that hero of the Chitpavan tragedy”. 12 Retiring from 
Lalsot, Sindia at first proceeded to Dig from where he went to 
Macheri territory. Here he remained from the end of August to the 
beginning of November 1787 as an impotent spectator of his deeds 
being undone by vicissitudes of fortune. 

Ghularn Qadir’s brutalities: 

Lalsot emboldened Ghularn Qadlr to resume his offensive opera¬ 
tions. Suddenly he appeared before Delhi. LadojI Deshinukh arid 
Shah Nizam-ud-din, the Maratha agents at Delhi, fled precipitately 
on 24 August. Deprived of Maratha tutelage, the emperor became 
helpless and had to invest Ghularn with the dignity and office of 
Amir-ul-umara and Mir Bakhshi in the beginning of September. 
The emperor could thus postpone the impending danger, but the day 
of reckoning was soon to follow. Sindia’s star had now sunk to the 
lowest ebb while Ghulam’s was on its way to meridian. Forster, an 
acute observer, described the political scene with candour: 

“Ghularn Qadlr is now the established master of Delhi, 
having obtained by a bold effort and peremptory language, the 
office of Amir-ul-umara or Captain General. His military spirit, 
his station in the upper part of India, with the aid of family pre¬ 
tensions, have elevated him to the rank made vacant by the 
misfortunes of Sindia. I am here, prompted, my Lord, to draw 
your attention to a view of the effects of the late Revolution 


395 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


which conspicuously exhibit the miserable policy of an Hindus¬ 
tan Government, its instability, and the rapid transition of for¬ 
tune, which involve its rulers. Sindia, who, but yesterday, 
possessed a numerous respectable army, with funds for its sup¬ 
port, who had absorbed in himself the executive administration 
of the empire, is now stripped of power, sheltering the remains 
of a broken, disspirited army in the territory of a chief, branded 
throughout the country for his treachery, cruelty and private 
vices”. 13 

Misfortunes which enveloped Mahadji after Lalsot continued un¬ 
abated for a few months more. On 16 September Isma‘il Beg, who 
was acting in co-operation with Ghulam Qadir, occupied the city of 
Agra, while Lakhba Dada continued to maintain a desperate resist¬ 
ance to save the fort from Mughul forces. Ajmer was similarly 
occupied by the Raja of Jodhpur on 27 August. Ambaji Ingle who 
had been commissioned to ravage Jaipur territory, was severely de¬ 
feated and forced to retire to Alwar. Mahadji made a spasmodic 
effort to free the emperor from his abject condition by himself mov¬ 
ing from Alwar on 28 October and by deputing Ambaji Ingle with 
necessary forces to Delhi. But the situation became so unpropi- 
tious that he had to abandon his designs for the time being. 
The emperor, expecting to be relieved of his distress by Prince 
Jawan Bakht, invited the latter who had been living at Banaras on 
British pension. He arrived at Delhi in December, but instead of 
relieving the situation, became a source of irritation to the emperor. 
In order to avoid his unwelcome presence, the emperor conferred on 
him the subahdari of Agra which was in possession of Isma‘il Beg. 
The Shahzada tried unsuccessfully to get the city of Agra and even 
tried to befriend Ghulam Qadir. But an effeminate adventurer like 
him could hardly expect assistance from any quarter and the Prince 
had to go back in despair to British protection in February, 1788. 

Maratha overlordship in Hindustan seemed to be threatened not 
only by Rohillas, Rajputs and Mughuls, but also by the Afghans. 
Raja Bijay Singh, of Jodhpur requested Timur Shah Abdali to take 
up arms against the Marathas and offered passage through his terri¬ 
tory if the Sikhs should obstruct Abdali at Lahore. Even if Timur 
Shah could not come personally, the Jodhpur Raja said, Shahzada 
Humayun Shah should be allowed to take up the project of invading 
India. But the danger blew over as quickly as it had come as Timur 
Shah expressed his inability to spare himself or Humayun Shah owing 
to preoccupations elsewhere. 14 All these sombre developments 
could not escape the attention of ever-observant Hingne, the Mara- 


396 


MARATHAS AND THE NORTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 

tha envoy at Delhi. He could not feel comfortable about the British 
despite their rigid adherence to neutrality in the imperial concerns. 
He had reasons to feel chary about the British as the latter had tried 
earlier to infiltrate into Delhi politics. His words of wisdom to Nana 
go to prove that the Marathas were not oblivious of the importance 
of imperial politics in the north: 

“The two enemies of the emperor are Abdall and the 
English. Abdall is far away and is not likely to come to Delhi. 
The English are near-by and very clever too. But they are 
awaiting instructions from London. If they enter Delhi politics, 
India is lost to us. We should therefore control Delhi so that we 
can assert our right over Bengal”. 15 

Nana Phadnis was not impervious to the dangers that had over¬ 
taken Mahadji after his retreat from Lalsot. War with Tipu had just 
been concluded and Nana arranged the despatch of forces under 
TukojI Holkar and ‘Ali Bahadur. He also remitted 5 lakhs of rupees 
to replenish the depleted resources of Sindia. But it is doubtful whe¬ 
ther Nana sincerely wished to help the cause of Mahadji. It was 
rightly suspected that Nana’s seeming concern for Maratha affairs in 
the north by sending two leaders from the south was in reality a 
camouflage to circumvent Mahadji’s growing power. 

Having failed to rescue the emperor from the clutches of Ghulam, 
Sindia had retreated to the south of the Chambal at the end of Decem¬ 
ber 1787. He was not prepared to imperil his position unless rein¬ 
forced by men and unless he could consolidate his position in Malwa. 
By the end of March 1788, he had gathered strength to respme his 
offensive operations north of the Chambal after subduing the rebel 
chiefs in the Gwalior region and after receiving reinforcements from 
Jamgaon under the command of Devji Gauli on 16 March. 

Sindia’s first attempt after a lull of one year was to recover the 
city of Agra then under Isma‘il Beg. Ghulam Qadir’s sudden appear¬ 
ance in Agra completely changed the situation and the Maratha 
troops under Rana Khan and Rayaji Patil fled towards Bharatpur. 
From the middle of March to the end of April 1788 sharp encounters 
took place between the opposing forces in the neighbourhood of 
Bharatpur in which the Marathas were at a disadvantage. Isma‘il 
Beg and Ghulam Qadir thereafter unsuccessfully attacked Bharatpur 
and Dig, the latter being heroically defended by the Jats and the 
Marathas. 

After being strengthened by the much-awaited reinforcements 
from the south, Mahadji adopted the strategy of dividing the enemy 


397 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


by attacking the Rohilla possessions in the Doab and by intercepting 
their supply lines. The Marathas occupied Mathura and Vrindaban 
and dispersed the Rohillas at Mot and Mahaban. The city of Koil 
v/as also plundered. Ghulam, therefore, hastened back to secure the 
safety of his own dominions. Isma'il Beg, who was left alone at 
Agra, found it hard to maintain his position and in a decisive en¬ 
counter on 17 June he was defeated. Isma‘il first went to Ghulam 
and thence to the emperor at Delhi to ci;ave the latter’s indulgence. 
But he was forced back from Delhi by Himmat Bahadur. 

Sindia was now in the saddle and tried to ensnare Ghulam 
Qadir. Rayaji Patil with his forces was closely pursuing him. 
Ghulam was defeated when he came out of Aligarh; from there he 
retreated with a slender force to Khurja, many of his soldiers de¬ 
serting him on the way for non-payment. On 1 July, 1788, he 
arrived in the vicinity of Delhi and formed a pact with Isma'il for en¬ 
riching themselves by plundering the royal treasury. 

The emperor was in great alarm. In his predicament he im¬ 
plored Sindia to come to Delhi. Sindia could spare only a small 
force of 2,000 under Ravloji Sindia and Bhagirath Sindia. Isma‘il 
successfully won over some of the Mughul nobles, and Himmat 
Bahadur along with his forces, fled to Faridabad, 17 miles south of 
Delhi. The Marathas thus completely lost grip over the situation 
leaving the emperor to his fate. On 15 July the emperor was forced 
to.grant an audience to Xsma‘il and Ghulam. On 18 July they oc¬ 
cupied the city and on 30 July took possession of the fort and the 
palace inside. Ghulam Qadir deposed the emperor and on 1 August 
placed Bidar Bakht, the son of Ahmad Shah, on the throne. Shah 
‘Alam and his nineteen children were imprisoned. Isma‘il Beg did 
not approve of Ghulam Qadir’s action as the former contemplated to 
put Mirza Sulaiman Shukoh, the son of the deposed monarch, on the 
throne. Ghulam Qadir’s chief object was to appropriate the em¬ 
peror’s wealth and to achieve this object he unleashed indescribable 
cruelties on the Begums and the princes. On 10 August when he 
persisted in demanding money from the emperor the latter replied 
bitterly: “I have kept it in my stomach. Whatever was in my 
house, you have taken”. 16 At last on the same fateful day the hap¬ 
less emperor was blinded. But Ghulam Qadir was not destined to 
enjoy the fruits of his ghastly crime; estrangement grew between 
him and Ismafll over the division of the spoils. Isma‘il began to feel 
that Ghulam Qadir was a dangerous associate. He separated from 
the faithless Rohilla and joined the Marathas. Mahadji rewarded his 


398 


MARATHAS AND THE NORTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 

defection by giving him 50,000 rupees for his expenses and the terri¬ 
tory of Ghausgarh. 

After undue vacillation Sindia stirred himself to activity. On 
28 September the Marathas occupied Old Delhi and the city proper 
on 2 October. Ghulam managed to escape from the palace—Red 
Fort on 10 October. The next day Himmat Bahadur, Ravloji Sindia 
and Rana Khan entered the fort and found the blind emperor in a 
miserable plight. On 16 October Rana Khan -seated the phantom 
emperor on the throne with every mark of respect. 

Now began the frantic hunt for Ghulam Qadlr. Rana Khan, 
Rayaji Patil, Jivba Bakhshi, and later on ‘Ali Bahadur were engaged 
in tracking down and intercepting the fugitive criminal. Aligarh, 
his stronghold, surrendered to the Marathas on 20 October. There¬ 
after he took shelter in Meerut fort with 15,000 forces and 100 guns 
which the Marathas besieged for six weeks. While affecting, to 
negotiate with Rayaji Patil, Ghulam Qadlr slipped out of the fort 
with 500 horsemen and fled to Ghausgarh. He was hotly pursued 
by Jivba Bakhshi, and after a short encounter in which he lost his 
followers, he concealed himself in the house of a Brahmin at Bam- 
nauli, 24 miles from Meerut. The Brahmin conveyed the intellig¬ 
ence to ‘Ali Bahadur whose forces captured him on 19 December. 
He along with his followers, Manzur ‘Ali, Maniyar Singh, Bilas Rai 
and other Rohilla chiefs, who were also seized, were sent to Mahadji 
at Mathura on 31 December 1788. For two months Mahadji tried to 
extort from Ghulam the hidden treasure. Then under an express 
order of the King, Sindia asked Hakim Akmal and the emperor's 
chief secretary, Mir Ghalib ‘Ali, to go to Ghulam’s prison, extract 
his eyeballs, cut off his ears and nose and put them in a casket for 
being sent to the emperor. 17 The order was executed on 3 March. 
Then the mutilated rebel was taken to a place 12 miles from Mathura 
and was put to death. “When the casket reached the Delhi palace, 
Shah ‘Alam’s revenge was gratified as the blind old man fumbled its 
grisly contents and felt that his enemy had been paid back in his 
own coin". 18 

The Maratha position in the north had been considered highly 
critical before the middle of the year 1788. Mahadji’s troops had 
been fighting without any break since 1780 without any prospect of 
relief from Poona. Mahadji expected to retrieve the situation with 
the help of detachments from Poona under the commands of ‘Ali 
Bahadur and Tukoji Holkar. But the reinforcements arrived only 
after the enactment of the cruel tragedy in the House of Timur in 


399 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

August 1788. Being discouraged by the receding prospect of re¬ 
ceiving reinforcements from Poona, Sindia endeavoured to obtain 
the assistance of the English and their protege, the Nawab-Vazir of 
Awadh, in restoring Shah ‘Alam to the throne. The British Re¬ 
sident Palmer thwarted Sindia’s move by declaring unequivocally 
British reluctance to interfere in the contest for the Delhi masnad. 

The arrival of ‘Ali Bahadur and Tukoji Holkar did not mitigate 
Sindia’s difficulties as was expected. Nana Phadnis directly insti¬ 
gated ‘Ali Bahadur and Tukoji Holkar against Mahadji and thus ruin¬ 
ed the hard-earned prestige of the Marathas in the north. In utter 
disgust Mahadji meditated to retire to the south after placing ‘Ali 
Bahadur in charge of northern affairs. He even expressed surprise 
at Nana’s silence over Holkar’s clandestine relations with Jaipur 
and Jodhpur chiefs 19 which in his' opinion, should have deserved 
scathing censure. 

But neither the Poona Court nor ‘Ali Bahadur felt strong en¬ 
ough to contend with so many difficulties in the north. ‘Ali Baha¬ 
dur, conscious of his limitations, refused to take up the responsibility 
of Delhi affairs. Even Nana who had baulked Mahadji in various 
ways, was not blind to the realities of the situation. The crisis was 
not yet over and the recalcitrant nobles, though subdued, were 
waiting for an opportunity to assert themselves. On 21 December, 
1788, Nana, therefore, cautioned ‘Ali Bahadur: “Administration of 
the territories will be weakened in the absence of Mahadji and you 
may court a failure”. 20 The misunderstanding between Mahadji and 
‘Ali Bahadur which had been brewing for some time, came to be 
temporarily adjusted in the beginning of April 1789. Sindia tried to 
come to an understanding also with Holkar by sharing with the latter 
the new conquests, on condition that Holkar should maintain har¬ 
monious relations with him (Sindia) and should support him in all 
his undertakings. Even the pious lady Ahalya Bai put some feelers 
for reconciliation between Sindia, Holkar and ‘Ali Bahadur, though 
without any apparent success. 

Sindia asserts himself: 

Before the year 1788 ended Sindia had the supreme satisfaction 
of rehabilitating Maratha power in north India. He remained in 
Mathura for a few months and employed his diplomatic tact to crush 
the surviving independent chiefs of Hindustan by setting them 
against one another. Mahadji’s sojourn at Mathura was disturbed 
when he fell seriously ill in the month of June. 21 For a while the 


400 


MARATHAS AND THE NORTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 

people gave up any hope of his recovery and the British Resident 
Palmer dreaded the consequences of his death in North India. “In 
case of his demise”, Palmer wrote on 25 June 1789, “the Maratha 
power and influence in Hindustan would probably be almost instant¬ 
ly annihilated. The united force of ‘Ali Bahadur and Holkar 

would not be adequate to the maintenance of their authority in the 
Mogul Government”. 22 

Sindia’s ailment could not be diagnosed properly. In those 
superstitious days it was attributed to black magic performed by a 
woman at the instigation of Himmat Bahadur Gosavi. Sindia had 
overlooked the Gosavi’s previous disloyal conduct, but it became a 
serious matter when he was engaged in secret intrigues with Holkar 
and ‘Ali Bahadur and even with the Nawab-Vazir of Awadh, in 
whose dominion he had earlier found political asylum. Himmat 
Bahadur was arrested. But when he was being conveyed to 
Mahadji’s camp, he found means to escape to ‘Ali Bahadur’s camp. 
In vain did Sindia protest as ‘Ali Bahadur refused to surrender the 
fugitive without the Peshwd’s order. Moreover, ‘Ali Bahadur re¬ 
ceived covert encouragement from Nana in his defiance to Mahadji. 
It was more in sorrow than in anger that Sindia expressed his senti¬ 
ment to Nana: “It is surprising that you should help a man who 
tried to murder me. This is against brotherly relations”. 23 

It was in this embarrassing situation that Sindia considered it 
wise to conciliate TukojI Holkar by granting him jdgir worth 10 
lakhs in North India. Mahadji even went to the length of appeas¬ 
ing ‘Ali Bahadur by assigning to him the district of Aligarh-Koil. 
But ‘Ali Bahadur’s uncompromising attitude did not change thereby: 
‘Sindia must not lay hands on Himmat Bahadur (Gosavi) and should 
remove the guard from around his family’. Towards the end of 
January 1790, ‘Ali Bahadur asked Mahadji to make a settlement 
with the Gosavi and tried to cajole him by arguing ‘if the Peshwd 
sent a robe of honour to Himmat Bahadur, what face would be left 
to Mahadji Sindia’? 24 At last a compromise was effected. On 6 Feb¬ 
ruary, 1790, Sindia visited the camp of ‘Ali Bahadur when the 
Gosavi Himmat Bahadur was introduced to him. Sindia pardoned 
all his offences, gave him a robe of honour and released his family 
members. 

Sindia’s alliance with Isma‘il Beg had been a makeshift arrange¬ 
ment intended to counteract the enemies of the Marathas. Isma'il 
also felt sore about his friendship with Sindia. He suspected that 
Sindia might have had a hand in Kashi Rao Holkar’s occupation of 

401 

MS.—-’0 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


some of his posts in Mewat. Though Isma‘il was strong enough to 
drive away the usurpers, he made no secret of his feeling when he 
censured Mahadji for his questionable conduct: “If you want to dis¬ 
miss me, say so, and I shall go elsewhere for service. If you want 
to fight me, come on. But do not set other people against me.” 25 At 
last Isma‘il’s defection to the Rajputs took place in February 1790 
when the Rajas of Jaipur and Jodhpur agreed to relieve his financial 
liability by partly defraying the arrears of pay of his troops. 

Battles of Pdtan and Mertd: 

The Lalsot episode had left ineffaceable memories on Mahadji. 
He was determined to retrieve the situation and for this he made 
adequate preparations. He raised a corps of infantry consisting of 
six battalions armed and disciplined in the European manner under 
the supervision of the Frenchman De Boigne. The Rajputs also did 
not lag behind. They were strengthened by lsma‘il’s adherence and 
were moving heaven and earth to mobilise themselves. 

The campaign opened in May 1790. The Rajputs and the 
Mughul soldiers encamped at Patan, 60 miles north of Jaipur, in the 
vicinity of a hill. Mahadji after harnessing all his available re¬ 
sources waited for the denouement in a place about eight miles east 
of Patan city. A decisive battle was fought on 20 June in which the 
Marathas charged the Rathors in the centre and later on pretended 
to give way just to draw the enemy out of their sheltered position. 
The strategy met with unqualified success. The Rajputs descended 
into the plain and De Boigne’s muskets played havoc on them. 
Isma‘il Beg with only 14 men fled precipitately to Jaipur. Finding 
resistance useless, the Raja of Patan, Rao Sampat Singh, surrender¬ 
ed the fort. Palmer’s despatches contain the following observation 
about the battle of Patan: 

“The victory obtained by the Maratha army over Ismail Beg 
and the Rajpoots seems to have been complete and decisive; all 
the artillery has fallen into their hands and ten corps of in¬ 
fantry have been compelled to surrender and deliver up their 
arms”. 26 

The battle of Patan was not the grand finale. Though the Jai¬ 
pur Raja was forced to remain in utter inactivity for a decade, Raja 
Bijay Singh of Jodhpur still hoped to hold his own against the over¬ 
whelming Maratha superiority. Qn 21 August Sindia’s generals laid 
siege to Ajmer fort. At the same time Sindia took effective steps to 
neutralise the Jaipur Raja by mobilising forces on the eastern fron- 


402 


MARATHAS AND THE NORTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 

tier of the Jaipur State. The Maratha forces under Ladoji Desh- 
mukh, Gopal Rao Chitnis, Jivba Dada, Kashi Rao Holkar cantoned 
at Merta, rightly called the gateway of Marwar. After reaching 
Merta on 9 September, De Boigne made a surprise attack in the early 
hours of the following day. The Rathor cavalry charged desperate¬ 
ly ‘with the full violence of the waves of the sea’ till they were all 
overwhelmed by grapeshots. Gangaram Bhandari surrendered the 
Merta fort. 27 

While Mahadji by his circumspection and the assistance of the 
formidable brigade of De Boigne had won the battles of Patan and 
Merta, his misunderstanding with ‘Ali Bahadur and Tukojl Holkar 
nearly blighted his prospects in Rajputana. It was in vain that 
Mahadji attempted to win over ‘Ali Bahadur for expedition against 
Jodhpur by offering two lakhs of rupees. ‘Ali Bahadur exposed him¬ 
self fully when he recalled his forces from the battle-field of Merta. 
Mahadji rembnstrated ineffectually: “He (‘Ali Bahadur) betrayed 
the oath taken in the name of the Peshwa. Confidence cannot be 
achieved in this circumstance”. 28 Besides this, ‘Ali Bahadur had 
accepted presents from the Jaipur Raja when Sindia’s forces were 
fighting at Patan. It was too much for Nana to swallow this bitter 
pill and he who had formerly instigated ‘Ali Bahadur now upbraid¬ 
ed the latter in the following words: “Let Holkar follow his own 
way, but it is regrettable that you have accepted presents from the 
Jaipur Raja”. 29 

Holkar’s conduct was no less reprehensible. Sindia’s assiduous 
attempt to secure Holkar’s support against Jodhpur by assigning to 
the latter territories in Saharanpur and Mewat was of no avail, and 
he recalled the forces from Merta. While withdrawing, his forces 
harassed the chief of Kishangarh who was Sindia’s ally. Thus a rap¬ 
prochement between the three chiefs—Sindia, Holkar and ‘Ali 
Bahadur—seemed to be almost impossible as they refused to work in 
harmony for the common cause of the Marathas in North India. 
Mahadji lamented to his agent in the Deccan, Ramji Patil: 

“Holkar and ‘Ali Bahadur who were described by you as our 
brother and nephew have behaved in a questionable manner. 
How can we remove suspicions from our minds? We are serving 
the government to the best of our ability. The two Sardats 
should be asked to do their duty. It is impossible for us to work 
together any longer”. 30 

On account of these unseemly dissensions in the Maratha camp 
the battle of Merta lost its practical utility. Bijay Singh, the Raja 


403 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


of Jodhpur, seduced Kashi Rao Holkar by a bribe of four lakhs of 
rupees for espionage in Sindia’s forces. The Jodhpur Raja also wel¬ 
comed Isma‘il Beg and spurred him against Sindia. But things did 
not assume serious proportions because of Sindia’s prompt handling 
of the situation. He came to Sambhar on 29 December, 1790, and 
the Jodhpur Raja opened negotiations with Sindia through his agent 
Budh Singh. On 6 January, 1791, the following terms were agreed 
upon: Bijay Singh was to pay by instalments 40 lakhs of rupees 
in one year. A tribute of 20 lakhs was imposed upon the Raja and 
for this amount Sambhar, Parbatsar and two other mahals Were 
given in assignments; the amount was to be realised in four years. 
In addition, Ajmer fort was to be handed over to the Marathas who 
would then give up Merta to the Raja. Sindia was put in possession 
of the Ajmer fort on 7 March, 1791. 31 Bijay Singh did not live long 
after this treaty; he died in July 1793. 

The Jaipur Raja, being left alone, thought it necessary to come 
to an agreement with Sindia. He attempted to do so but did not 
succeed till February 1791 when an agreeemet was made with Sindia 
through the instrumentality of his minister RodojI Khawas. 32 The 
Jaipur Raja agreed to pay three lakhs in cash and one lakh in kind. 
Sindia was allowed to collect eleven lakhs from the jacfirdars of the 
Jaipur Raja. The Raja promised to pay fifteen lakhs as compensa¬ 
tion for the guns that were handed over to him by Hindustani re¬ 
bels in the battle of Lalsot. To the Mughul emperor the Raja was 
liable to pay sixty-three lakhs as arrears of tribute. This he pro¬ 
mised to settle by annual payments. He also pacified Holkar by 
ceding the district of Rampura in lieu of monetary contribution. 

The magnificent achievements of Mahadji and his vast military 
resources made a profound impression on Timur Shah, ruler of 
Afghanistan. He sent peace overtures to Mahadji by proposing that 
the Marathas should extend their dominion up to Lahore and the 
Shah should have control beyond that territory. Both should agree 
to help each other in times of danger. The Afghan ruler would assist 
Sindia with 10,000 cavalry if required to do so. Though nothing 
tangible resulted from these offers, it showed that Sindia by his 
courage and indomitable will had made the Marathas formidable 
and respectable in North India. Writes a contemporary: “Such 
moves are new and are the result of increased prestige of the 
Peshwd ”. 33 

Mahadji now found it easy to deal with Ismafil Beg. The latter 
was now a spent force, and moved from place to place in his futile 


404 


MARATHAS AND THE NORTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 

bid to receive assistance from any power. His only possible sup¬ 
porter, Najaf Qull, died on 23 August, 1791. At last he received 
summons from the widow of Najaf Quli to take possession of Kanud. 
But before he could reach Kanud, Khande Rao Hari intercepted him 
and on 4 December, 1791, inflicted a heavy defeat on him. But he 
(Isma‘il Beg) succeeded in escaping to the fort of Kanud with a few 
horsemen. It was alleged that Holkar secretly helped Isma‘il to 
move towards Kanud. Khande Rao successfully besieged Kanud 
and on 15 April, 1792, Ismafll gave himself up to Perron, the officer 
second-in-command to De Boigne. Ismafll was kept a prisoner in 
Agra fort where he died in 1799. Thus “the Mughal name was en¬ 
tirely sunk and lost in political estimation by the capture of Isma‘il 
Beg, the last leader who contended even for its nominal existence”. 34 

Having performed prodigies of strength and valour in Northern 
India Mahadji intended to repair to Poona. But when he came to 
Pushkar in March 1791 to celebrate the spring festival, he was ap¬ 
proached by Bhim Singh, Rana of Mewar, to save the State from in¬ 
ternal crisis. The Maharana, through his envoy Zalim Singh of Kota, 
sought Mahadji’s help to recover Chitor which had been usurped by 
Bhim Singh Salumbar. In the middle of September Mahadji, accom¬ 
panied by the Maharana, came to the celebrated fort of Chitor and 
subjected the fort to intensive siege operations and heavy bombard¬ 
ment. At last on 17 November Bhim Singh Salumbar surrendered 
the fort and agreed to pay an indemnity of 12 lakhs. Mahadji could 
feel gratified at the reduction of the fort when he reminded the 
Peshwd : “The fort which Akbar took twelve years to reduce was 
captured by your blessing in a few days”. 35 

Sindia now bade adieu to his northern dominion and set out for 
Poona on 6 January, 1792. Although the rapid development of 
Sindia’s power was unwelcome to the British, it did not affect the 
British policy of non-intervention. Palmer did not foresee any por¬ 
tent of danger to British interests as he was conscious that the baffling 
problems of administrative reorganisation and revenue collection in 
Hindustan would be too much for Sindia to contend with in a coun¬ 
try harassed by warfare and desolated by famines. Palmer was a 
shrewd judge of political affairs. The departure of Sindia for the 
south marked the beginning of the process of disintegration of 
the Maratha power in the North. 

Sindia-Holkar rivalry: 

Sindia’s absence from the north provided TukojI Holkar a con¬ 
venient opportunity of interfering in the region to the detriment of 


405 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Maratha interests. As long as Sindia was present in the north, he 
avoided an open rupture with Tukoji by a policy of appeasement. 
But no sooner had he left for Poona, than the rancorous jealousy 
between the two chieftains burst forth in uncontrolled fury. Tukoji 
Holkar began to interfere in the Alwar State following the death 
of Rao Raja (24 November, 1790), who had been a devoted ally of 
Sindia. He even started intriguing with the English for aid against 
Sindia. 36 It was a perilous moment for Sindia. He had not yet 
been able to come to a settlement with the Poona Government while 
his hard-earned settlement in Rajasthan seemed to be threatened by 
Holkar’s opposition. Sindia’s generals—Gopal Bhau and Jivba Dada 
—faced the situation with great resolve. They advanced from the 
north-east of Jaipur and made a surprise attack on 8 October, 1792, 
on Holkar at Suravali in the region of Sawai Madhopur, south of the 
river Banas. TukojTs camp was thrown into confusion. The affair 
was temporarily closed when Bapu Holkar and Parashar Dadaji, on 
behalf of Tukoji, made a working compromise with Sindia’s generals. 

The defeat at Suravali embittered the mind of Tukoji. He tried 
to fan the anger of the saintly Ahalya Bai by observing that “if the 
defeat was not avenged, Sindia would be so powerful as to annihilate 
the Holkars. So they should fight to the last”. 37 It was curious that 
when the enmity between the two chieftains was reaching a critical 
point, the Poona darbar made no serious effort to stop the mutual 
antagonism. Perhaps it wanted to utilise Holkar as a barrier against 
the overwhelming power of Sindia. The situation took a sudden 
turn when Malhar Rao Holkar, Tukoji’s impetuous young son, 
thought of making short-work of Sindia’s army with his light 
cavalry. Assuming the chief command of army, Malhar Rao ad¬ 
vanced to Panchilas village to meet Sindia’s force. Early on 29 May, 
1793, De Boigne with his infantry and light guns successfully attack¬ 
ed Holkars’ front and the latter fled away with the broken remnant 
of his army to jLakheri, near Ajmer. Three days later, on 1 June, 
a pitched battle took place at Lakheri. Despite a formidable force 
consisting of 30,000 cavalry and four battalions of Chevalier Dud- 
rence with 38 guns, Malhar Rao could not make any headway against 
the disciplined valour of De Boigne’s contingent. “Hemmed in front 
by De Boigne’s ten battalions and on the two flanks and rear by 
Gopal Bhau’s cavalry, with sixty light guns firing on them at point- 
blank range, Holkar’s northern sepoys fought on till they were al¬ 
most all annihilated”. 38 

Lakheri expedited Mahadji’s settlement with the Poona Darbar 
for which he had been labouring so long.since his arrival at Poona. 


406 


MARATHAS AND THE NORTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 

But by an unfortunate coincidence hardly had he reached the acme 
of political greatness, when his life was cut short by a fatal illness. 
He died on 12 February, 1794 in his camp at Wanavdi near Poona 
at. the age of 67. A few months before his death he had adopted his 
nephew’s son, Daulat Rao, then about 14 years old. 

Death oj j Mahadji Sindia: Consequences: 

Mahadji’s death was a turning point in the history of the Mara- 
thas. The removal of this great Maratha chieftain did away with 
the major barrier to the expansion of British power in the north. 
Historians feel amazed when they think of his strategy, comprehen¬ 
sion of responsibilities, steady perseverance, and infinite resource¬ 
fulness. One cannot but feel wonder at Siridia’s grasp of diverse 
political and military problems when in 1785 he distributed his forces 
numbering 1,57,000 in different parts of Northern India. His suc¬ 
cess depended to a large extent on De Boigne who entered his ser¬ 
vices at the end of 1784 and built up a vast military engine of great 
efficiency. His unflinching loyalty to Sindia saved the latter from 
many pitfalls. Compton observes: “As a general he may take his 
stand amongst the greatest India has ever produced. In times of 
crisis and sudden danger his presence of mind was incomparable”. 39 
A recent judgement by a military expert declares him “to possess all 
the necessary qualities, including the rare and invaluable one of pre¬ 
science, and that what he had to do he did with classic efficiency” 39a 
Sindia rewarded his services by granting him jdcfirs worth 35 lakhs 
of rupees situated partly in Mewat and partly in the Doab. 

The successive British Residents with Mahadji—David Ander¬ 
son, James Anderson, William Kirkpatrick and William Palmer— 
were men of varied elements, yet their conflicting views were re¬ 
conciled by Macpherson, Cornwallis and John Shore. James Ander¬ 
son was embittered in the last stage by the refuge given by Sindia to 
Faqir Khair-ud-din and his brother Salih-ud-din who had long served 
the former (Anderson) as writers and diplomatic agents, but it did 
not diminish the personal regard entertained by the Resident to¬ 
wards Sindia. To his successor Kirkpatrick, James Anderson wrote 
on 5 December, 1786: 

“Sindia, altho’ in the eagerness of ambition he may have 
committed many imprudences with respect to us, has never, ac¬ 
tually been guilty of a breach of faith, but has, on the contrary, 
in the course of our connection given several instances of un 
common liberality”. 40 


407 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Kirkpatrick, on the other hand, viewed with concern the 
growing power of Sindia. He decried the British policy of appease¬ 
ment towards Sindia and regretted that Sindia had never suffered 
any rebuff from the British in his North Indian adventure. In his 
opinion the establishment of Maratha power in the Doab should have 
been opposed either by arms or by negotiations. It was his convic¬ 
tion that Sindia was the prime mover in the emperor’s claim of tri¬ 
bute on Bengal in 1785. Though the British remonstrance made him 
disavow his connection, yet there were ample grounds for the Bri¬ 
tish to feel uneasy about his intention. Kirkpatrick faithfully por¬ 
trayed his feeling when he wrote: 

“Sindia has experienced so much overstrained complaisance 
from us, that he may be compared to the spoiled child who after 
being indulged in a variety of demands cried at last because it 
could not obtain the moon”. 41 

Kirkpatrick’s overweening conduct so much strained the rela¬ 
tions between the Company and Sindia that he gave up his assign¬ 
ment in October 1787. Major Palmer, who succeeded Kirkpatrick, 
was a man of rare refinement and enjoyed implicit confidence of the 
Governor-General, Lord Cornwallis. 

For more than a decade Mahadji Sindia held North Indian poli¬ 
tical fabric under the surveillance of the Marathas and had re-esta¬ 
blished the Maratha power in an unenviable position. But with his 
death tragical events followed in close succession. The emperor 
keenly felt the absence of a strong personality. The Maratha power 
in the north, which had withstood so many shocks, now suddenly 
found itself confronted with hostile forces. In his confidential talks 
with Hingne in May 1794, the emperor complained of an incident 
whicih, though trivial in its nature, was typical of the tensions which 
were afflicting the Maratha state in the changed set-up: 

“For twelve years Mahadji served the emperor unflinching¬ 
ly without ever disowning the Peshwti’s authority over Hindus¬ 
tan. The job of Kulmukhtydri, a delicate one of revenue- 
management, which Mahadji had entrusted to Baloba Pagnis, 
could not be performed by the incumbent with diligence. Aba 
Chitnis, therefore, stepped into his place and he proved the 
right man for it. After Mahadji’s death, Chitnis carried on his 
job. We were pleased to hear this. But now it is reported that 
Pagnis had ingratiated himself with the impressionable Daulat 
Rao and his lieutenant Sadashiv Malhar. And now comes the 
shocking news that Daulat Rao has insulted Chitnis on Pagnis’ 

408 


MARATHAS AND THE NORTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 

advice. So long the Peshwa’s decision was to be obeyed with¬ 
out any murmur and it is an excruciating experience that the 
Peshwa could now no more restrain his servant from interfering 
with Chitnis’ work. The Maratha interests in the north would 
suffer irreparably if all these unseemly wrangles were allows 
ed to thrive with impunity. The cohesion of the Marathas in 
the north showed signs of cracking up which must have em¬ 
boldened the disaffected elements to take advantage of the situa¬ 
tion. The Peshwa must maintain control over Hindustan in 
order to keep in check the fleeting elements”. 42 

Daulat Rao Sindia’s ineptitude: 

The history of North India after Mahadji’s exit from the poli¬ 
tical spectrum offers a disconsolate picture. Mahadji had maintain¬ 
ed a harmonious balance in his ministry by delegating civil adminis¬ 
tration to the DeshaStha Brahmins while placing his army under the 
Shenvi Brahmins. But after Mahadji’s death, his successor, Daulat- 
Rao, a pleasure-loving young man, did not have the capacity to main¬ 
tain the delicate balance, and caste rivalry reared its head again with 
disastrous consequences to the Marathas. Aba Chitnis, Krishnoba 
Chitnis and Gopal Bhau—men belonging to the Deshastha group were 
superior to the Shenvis in administrative ability and political under¬ 
standing. But Daulat Rao in his blind ignorance allowed the latter 
to gain full control of the political lever. The Shenvis —Jivba Dada, 
Jagu Bapu, Lakhba Dada, Baloba Tatya Pagnis and Sadashiv Malhar 
(popularly known as Bhau Bakhshi)—were openly countenanced. 
Aba Chitnis resigned his post in sheer disgust, Gopal Bhau was re¬ 
moved from the supreme command in Northern India, and the Shenvi 
generals—Lakhba Dada. and Jagu Bapu—were appointed in their 
stead. Baloba Pagnis and Sadashiv Malhar were appointed mukht- 
yars. De Boigne lost no time in protesting against the hasty deci¬ 
sion of Daulat Rao in removing Gopal Bhau from the chief com¬ 
mand as it was he who had faithfully discharged his duties. But 
Daulat Rao shut his eyes and pursued his course with blind ob¬ 
stinacy. 

Like others, Shah Nizam-ud-din, the keeper of the blind em¬ 
peror, keenly felt the change of Maratha leadership in the north. 
He expected his own fall, but never faltered in the discharge of his 
duties in the midst of personal crisis. Nothing could prevent Nizam- 
ud-din in issuing sermons to Hingne on 14 September 1794: “Under 
the present multiple leadership of Sardars, administration has been 
difficult. The English, Rohillas and other enemies are awaiting to 


409 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


enter the field. Ruining the empire will bring down the high pre¬ 
stige of Sindia.” 43 But his words of wisdom could do< nothing to 
prevent his downfall. In June 1796, he was dismissed and Jaswant 
Rao Sindia, a great-grandson of Mahadji, assumed his office. 

Lakhba Dada in collaboration with his colleague Jagu Bapu, 
became Daulat Rao Sindia’s viceroy in Northern India in November 
1794. He felt the magnitude of the problem and found it an insuper¬ 
able task to conduct the administration with even a semblance of 
authority. The report which Palmer wrote from the Maratha camp 
at Mathura on 6 April 1795, highlighted the Maratha maladminis¬ 
tration in North India: 

“The officers who have lately succeeded to the administra¬ 
tion of the Maratha affairs in Hindustan found them in a state 
of very alarming disorder; the revenues grossly mismanaged 
or embezzled and the collections so reduced as to be very inade¬ 
quate to the expenses of Government. The Deccan troops and 
Hindustani irregulars, mutinous i and disaffected for want of pay, 
and with difficulty restrained from the greatest outrages by the 
corps under M. De Boigne; the tributary Rajahs retaining their 
respective contributions and preparing to resist the future ex¬ 
actions of them; the Sikhs ready to invade and ravage the wes¬ 
tern provinces.... The Maratha State.... is but ill-qualified 
for permanent conquest or civil administration, however for¬ 
midable may be the means which it possesses of ravage and de¬ 
vastation. The country under its subjection from the Chambal 
to the Ganges is in the most miserable state of neglect and dis¬ 
order, the lands deserted and the cultivation so scanty as scar¬ 
cely to supply subsistence to the remaining inhabitants, the 
roads infested with numerous bands of robbers.... particularly 
in the neighbourhood of Delhi, where they are so formidable as 
to set the forces of the Government at defiance and to menace 
even the city itself”. 44 

The unfortunate set-back in Maratha affairs in North India en¬ 
couraged the Rajputs to free themselves from the trammels of the 
Marathas^ The Rajas of Jaipur and Kota tried to cultivate British 
friendshipdn their bid to defy the Marathas, but without any success. 
The threatened invasion of Zaman Shah Abdall in 1795 and 1796 so 
greatly overawed the Marathas, Rajputs, Sikhs and the British, 
that it stimulated a spate of speculations. But nothing concrete 
emerged as a result of this threatened danger, and the alarm died 


410 


MARATHAS AND THE NORTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 

down. Perhaps Palmer was right in drawing the following con¬ 
clusion: 

“My own opinion is that the Shah 'will never invade Hin¬ 
doostan, and it is formed on my knowledge of the difficulties 
he will have to surmount both in advancing and returning, and 
of the little inducement which Hindoostan holds out to such an 
undertaking”. 45 

But Palmer’s calculation did not diminish the great alarm with 
which Zaman Shah’s presence in India was viewed by all his Indian 
contemporaries. The probability of his invasion of India still re¬ 
mained and in that case Palmer thought it wise to form a defensive 
alliance with the Marathas. It would, Palmer believed, deter the 
Abdali from executing his warlike projects on India and would per¬ 
haps hold the disaffected Afghans of Rohilkhand and Farukkabad as 
well as the Nawab-Vazlr’s subjects—who might be disposed to join 
the Abdali—in awe and restraint. 46 Palmer’s remedy against this 
threatened danger knew no ambiguity when he wrote to Shore on 
9 February, 1797: 

“If it should be your final determination to oppose the en¬ 
trance of the Shah into Hindoostan, under whatever profession 
he may attempt, an alliance with the Marathas appears to me 
the best, and indeed the only one which you can form for that 
purpose with any prospect of success. Of their fidelity and 
hearty co-operation little doubt can be entertained, when their 
own preservation will be the first consequence of their combina¬ 
tion”. 47 

But Shore did not like to enmesh the Company in an alliance 
with the Marathas as Abdali’s invasion seemed to him as a distant 
and airy project. He expressed his feelings in a minute on 2,5 
January, 1797: 

“We have always considered an invasion of Hindoostan by 
Zaman Shah, as highly improbable. His object in such an at¬ 
tempt must be either permanent conquest or predatory acquisi¬ 
tion .... The supposition of a predatory incursion beyond Pun¬ 
jab without subduing the Sikhs seemed still more improbable. 
Delhi from its poverty has no temptation, and although the plun¬ 
der of Lucknow or Benares might repay an expedition against 
either, it is contrary to every maxim of policy to suppose that 
Zaman Shah would advance so far whilst he left behind him a 
numerous and warlike people unsubdued, not to mention the 
Mahrattas and the opposition of the Company’s arms. It is 


411 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

obvious therefore to conclude that the projects assigned to 
Zaman Shah would prove as chimerical this year, as reported 
invasions, for so many preceding seasons”. 48 

Shore concluded that Abdali’s scheme of re-establishing the 
family of Shah ‘Alam on the throne appeared not only a romantic 
and unprofitable object, but in the highest degree improbable, un¬ 
less the Sikhs were previously subdued. It was Shore’s belief that 
Zaman Shah would hardly be able to secure the co-cperation of the 
Sikhs or their consent to allow him an unmolested passage through 
their dominions. Shore made a comparison between Zaman Shah’s 
projected invasion of India with Ahmad Shah’s. He wrote on 4 July, 
1797: 


“On a comparison of circumstances now, and those at the 
time of Ahmad Shah Abdall, it may be observed that the power 
of the Marathas was then in its zenith, but the dominion of the 
Sikhs is now more extensive and better established; that al¬ 
though they are distracted by internal dissensions, the pressure 
of external danger might unite them, and nothing is wanting 
but union to render their power formidable; that Zaman Shah 
wants the experience, resources and abilities of his grandfather, 
nor can he expect a similar co-operation from those whose assist¬ 
ance so materially promoted the success of Ahmad Shah or equal 
advantages from success”. 49 

Shore understood the numerous difficulties which Zaman Shah 
would have to face when invading India. He, therefore, did not sug¬ 
gest any defensive preparations to meet the conjectural danger. 

With the arrival of Lord Mornington as Governor-General in 
1798, the British policy of non-intervention underwent a radical 
transformation. The Governor-General had received a letter from 
Zaman Shah in which the latter requested the assistance of the 
British and Nawab-Vaztr of Awadh for restoring Shah ‘Alam to the 
throne of Delhi unfettered from Maratha bondage and for expelling 
the latter from the North-west frontier of India. The new Gover¬ 
nor-General did not want to leave things to chance. According to 
him it was unquestionable that Zaman Shah entertained a design on 
India and for which he justified with admirable reason, the adoption 
of military preparations and conclusion of defensive engagements 
with Sindia as well as with other allies of the British Government. 50 
Dundas was also sensitive to the Abdall menace and admitted with 
candour that were that adventurer able to gain a material footing in 
Hindustan, Sindia’s expansive dominion must fall the first victim to 


412 


MARATHAS AND THE NORTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799)* 

his ambition. It was Dundas’ personal wish that instead of immer¬ 
sing in meandering politics of Poona which Daulat Rao Sindia had 
been pursuing with remorseless perfidy and intrigue, he should be 
persuaded to return to the north which was considered to be his 
patrimony. The Abdali menace, Dundas said, foreshadowed infinite 
evils to the Company’s Government. He struck a note of warning 
to the Governor-General when he observed on 9 October, 1799: 

“It is impossible for the British power in India to be an in¬ 
different spectator or inattentive to the consequence of so power¬ 
ful and restless a chief (Zaman Shah) coming on the back of 
our territories. He would not long remain quiet, but the coun¬ 
try of Oudh would be the immediate object of his ambition, and 
I need not detail to your Lordship the fatal consequences to our 
Bengal province, if ever he should be successful in such an en¬ 
terprise. Such an attempt must be met and resisted in the first 
and in every stage... . Our own resources alone in the Bengal 
province would be sufficient for the object, and as the Mahrattas, 
particularly Sindhia, have so manifest an interest in the question, 
there seems no reason to doubt his cordial concurrence in the 
resistance of such an invasion. But I do not think even there 
it ought to be allowed to rest; for by keeping up a connection 
with the various tribes on the north-western part of India, it 
is not a difficult matter to find him at all times in business at 
home to prevent him from hazarding so dangerous an enterprise 
at so great a distance from home. With this view allow me to 
direct your attention to the Indus river and those who inhabit 
the borders”. 51 

But the intended invasion of Zaman Shah never took place al¬ 
though it did not fail to produce infinite perplexity to the Company, 
the Marathas and the Sikhs. Zaman Shah ceased to be the ruler of 
Afghanistan in May 1801 and his successors, gravely embarrassed by 
local dissensions, abandoned the design on India. 

The new Maratha viceroy in North India, Lakhba Dada, found 
his task irksome because of the impoverished state of the country and 
the prevalence of simmering jealousy among Sindia’s generals. He 
could expect no relief either from Poona or from his master, Daulat 
Rao, all of whom were embroiled in Poona politics following upon 
the death of Peshwd Sawai Madhav Rao (27 October, 1795). Des¬ 
pite his meritorious service in occupying Sabalgarh fort situated in 
the Kerauli State (August 1795) and the town of Narwar (October 
1795), Lakhba Dada could not tolerate the inconsistent actions of 


413 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Daulat Rao. Baloba fell out of favour with his master when he 
could not provide the latter with necessary funds. He was placed 
under arrest on 26 October, 1796. Baloba was Lakhba’s patron and 
the former’s humiliation brought about the simultaneous degradar 
tion of the latter. Lakhba with his sane and reasonable tempera¬ 
ment, did not want to sully his reputation by resisting Daulat Rao, 
and he chose to lead a quiet and retired life in Gopalgarh. Lakhba’s 
fall struck a grievous blow to Sindia’s prestige in Hindustan. In 
those days of divided loyalties and of criss-cross ties, Lakhba Dada’s 
imperturbable loyalty elicited admiration from Palmer when he 
wrote on 8 November, 1796: “I lament the fall of Lakhba Dada on 
account of his personal character which for mildness and modera¬ 
tion exceeds that of any Maratha I know”. 52 

But Lakhba was not allowed to remain in passivity. Zaman 
Shah’s reported move to Lahore and Delhi in December 1796 made 
Daulat Rao panicky and the latter requested Lakhba to ward off the 
coming danger. But Lakhba could not be hustled to activity, and 
during his political eclipse Jagu Bapu exercised the supreme power 
in Hindustan. But in the next year when Zaman Shah occupied 
Lahore (3 November) and the Rajput Rajas showed impatience to 
throw off the Maratha yoke, Daulat Rao well understood the por¬ 
tents of danger. He asked General Perron and other officers com¬ 
manding the trained corps to consider themselves under the super¬ 
vision of Jagu Bapu and Lakhba Dada, while the latter were re¬ 
quested to march to Mewat and Jodhpur. 

Sarza Rao Ghatge in power: 

But as soon as the Durrani menace disappeared, Daulat Rao, 
under the debasing influence of Sarza Rao Ghatge (who became 
all-powerful at Sindia’s Court because of the marriage of his daugh¬ 
ter Baiza Bai to Daulat Rao Sindia). unleashed a reign of terror in 
Poona (February 1798). Palmer gives us first-hand account from 
Poona: 

“Sindia is principally occupied in raising money to appease 
the clamours of his troops for their arrears. For this purpose 
he employs Sarza Rao Ghatge, his father-in-law, who seems to be 
as fit an instrument of rapine as can be found. This man has 
taken up his residence in the house of Nana whence he issues 
orders for the seizure of all persons of reputed wealth, and by 
violence extorts, or endeavours to extort from them individual¬ 
ly, such portion of it as he arbitrarily demands, without even 


414 




MARATHAS AND THE NORTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 

the pretext of right or any other plea than the necessities of 
Sindia. It is not however very probable that Sindia will ob¬ 
tain any considerable relief from these odious and unjustifiable 
practices. The Mahrattas are remarkably tenacious of their pro¬ 
perty and will frequently part with their lives rather than sur¬ 
render the small portion of it to violence and injustice”. 53 

At the instance of Ghatge, his evil genius, Daulat Rao asked his 
chiefs Lakhba Dada and AmbajI Ingle to come to Poona; they how¬ 
ever, evaded the order when they understood that Sindia’s real ob¬ 
ject in calling them to Poona was to extort money from them. Next, 
Lakhba and Jagu Bapu marched towards Bhopal where they had 
been invited to interfere in the succession dispute. Hardly had they 
reached Sagar when they were arrested by Harji Sindia (10 March, 
1798), and under direction of Daulat Rao, AmbajI assumed charge 
of northern affairs. Gopal Bhau was restored to Sinda’s confidence 
and Narayana Rao Bakhshi, son of Jivba Dada, was imprisoned. 

Daulat Rao’s folly led the Marathas to further trouble. He pro¬ 
voked the wrath of Mahadji’s widows—Bhagirathi Bai, Yamuna Bai, 
and Lakshmi Bai—by refusing to give them a sufficient maintenance 
allowance which he had promised before his adoption. The widows’ 
cause appeared to be just and popular and most of the old Sardars— 
Aba Chitnis, Narayan Rao Bakhshi and army captains of Sindia— 
arrayed themselves in their favour. With a large following these 
ladies marched from the north upon Poona in order to seek redress 
of their grievances. Daulat Rao was unduly alarmed at the news. 
In the last week of March 1798, many prominent persons—Deoji 
Gauli, Rayaji Patil and Ramji Patil—suspected of partisanship with 
the ladies—were arrested by Ghatge and on 6 April Nana Phadnis 
(who had been seized in December 1797) was confined at Ahmad- 
nagar fort. 54 As Palmer reported: 

“Sindhia’s having for sometime past devolved the manage¬ 
ment of his affairs upon persons of obscure and profligate cha¬ 
racter by whom most of the old and respectable ministers of his 
Government have been plundered, confined or driven into exile 
universal discontent and distrust prevails throughout his ser¬ 
vice, which in all probability will soon produce a general de¬ 
fection and terminate in the subversion of his dominion and the 
transfer of it to some other member of his family’'. 55 

On the approach of Sindian ladies Sarza Rao Ghatge duped them 
with false hopes and on 15 May, 1798, personally ill-treated them. 
On 25 June in a battle at Bhamburda the widows were defeated. 


415 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Thereafter they took to a running fight for which Daulat Rao’s train¬ 
ed battalions were altogether unsuitable. Meanwhile Jagu Bapu 
succeeded in escaping from confinement on 5 August and Lakhba 
Dada was released three days later. They espoused the widows’ 
cause and gained the city of Ujjain (15 September) without striking 
a blow. But three months later Bala Rao Ingle, AmbajI’s brother, 
succeeded in recovering the city. 

Daulat Rao’s difficulties seemed to be insuperable. “In his Nor¬ 
thern dominions”, Bradshaw reported on 27 May, 1798, “dislike to his 
government prevails thick and I have reason to believe that. Mah- 
ratta supremacy is equally obnoxious to both Hindu and Mussul¬ 
man”. 56 With a force numbering about 20,000, Lakhba began his 
campaign in January 1799 in Malwa and outmanoeuvred Bala Rao 
Ingle in more than one engagement. On 8 March Lakhba over¬ 
powered the troops of Bapu Sindia and Satvaji Patil, who were pro¬ 
ceeding to reinforce Bala Rao. In the beginning of April Lakhba 
entered Mewar and attacked Hamirgarh. 

AmbajI Ingle’s only chance of success was swiftness and auda- 
city and he sadly lacked those qualities. As Lakhba’s rebellion as¬ 
sumed a wider dimension, the officers in charge of Agra, Aligarh 
and Delhi refused to deliver these forts to Perron. Daulat Rao in 
utter bewilderment sought reconciliation with Lakhba and the 
widows and, therefore, released Baloba Tatya from confinement. 57 
Moreover Yashwant Rao Holkar’s restless ambition and Lakhba’s 
alliance with him made Daulat Rao nervous. 

Bala Rao Ingle, who had made an armistice with Lakhba on 15 
May began several parleys with him. Daulat Rao assuaged the 
wounded sentiment of Lakhba by appointing him once again his 
viceroy in Hindustan. But AmbajI would not part with his vicero— 
yalty over Mewar. He was a powerful chieftain and it could hard¬ 
ly be expected that he would compromise his position. The terri¬ 
tory which he held on behalf of Sindia extended from Ajmer to 
Gohad, including the forts of Gwalior and Narwar, yielding a crore 
of rupees; besides this he entertained a numerous force. Though he 
professed attachment to Daulat Rao, his secret ambition was to esta¬ 
blish an independent government of his own in place of what he now 
administered in subordination to Sindia. In September 1799, 
AmbajI was deprived of his authority over Mewar by Daulat Rao, 
and the latter appointed Lakhba Dada and Jagu Bapu as his deputies 
in Hindustan in a bid to win their allegiance. A peaceful settle¬ 
ment was made between Lakhba and Perron at Muzzamabad (mid- 


416 


MARATHAS AND THE NORTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 

way between Kishangarh and Jaipur) on 27 October on the follow¬ 
ing terms: 

(1) Lakhba Dada was acknowledged by all parties to be Sindia’s 
deputy in Hindustan and the detachment of Perron’s army 
commanded by Sutherland was tp remain under Lakhba’s 
order. 

(2) Perron was to retain possession of the forts of Delhi, Agra 
and Aligarh until Daulat Rao’s final decision on this point 
be known. 

(3) Ambaji Ingle was to remain in undisputed possession of 
Gwalior and all other districts which he held formerly, but 
give up Mew&r and every pargand taken from the party 
of widows. 58 

Lakhba Dada’s second term of viceroyalty, which began in 
November 1799 augured well 'for Sindia’s North Indian dominions. 
The .widows had been temporarily pacified and Yashwant Rao 
Holkar’s mischievous activities had somewhat abated. With the 
restoration of Baloba Tatya as Diwdn of Sindia, Lakhba’s position 
became strengthened and he ruled over Hindustan with tact, vigour 
and prudence. 

Sikh revolt: 

Despite the peace that had been concluded between the Mara¬ 
thas and the Sikhs in May 1785, the latter continued to make occa¬ 
sional raids in the upper Doab and North Delhi districts in the follow¬ 
ing years. Though Baghel Singh was the first Sikh chief of con¬ 
siderable importance to welcome Mahadji’s authority, the jacfirdars 
in the cis-Sutlej country became defiant and refused to pay tribute 
due to the emperor. It was with great effort that Mahadji could 
keep the Sikh chiefs in apparent subordination when he granted a 
large jagir to Baghel Singh. But the Marathas could only maintain 
a semblance of authority in the Upper Doab as many of the newly 
recognised Sikh chiefs of that region were unable to keep in check 
the restless elements from harassing the Maratha territories. The 
Sikhs were kept in check for some time when De Boigne’s disciplin¬ 
ed brigades were stationed at Sonepat (April 1792). After the 
death of Mahadji, Lakhba’s Deputy, Nana Rao—who was posted at 
Karnal—made an attempt to collect the revenues due from the cis- 
Sutlej country. This provided an excuse for war. In October 1795, 
the Patiala queen and Bhanga Singh of Thaneswar assailed the Mara¬ 
thas so fiercely that Nana Rao beat back a hasty retreat to Delhi. 

417 

M.S.—27 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Immediately after this a body of five thousand Sikhs swept through 
the Upper Doab like a hurricane. But the courage of George 
Thomas, supported by Apa Khande Rao, stemmed the onslaught; 
for this glorious service Thomas was appointed by Lakhba as Warden 
of the Marches to guard the Jamuna frontier of the Doab and was 
assigned the pargcmds of Panipat, Sonepat and Karnal for the main¬ 
tenance of his army. “Up to the end of 1797, George Thomas had 
been a regular servant of some lawful authority or other. But 
when Apa Khande Rao’s successor (Waman Rao) terminated his ser¬ 
vices, Thomas became a private robber-captain for his living”. 59 He 
made Haryana, with Hansi as its capital, the centre of his roving 
raids. The Marathas having sacrificed Thomas, could not fare well 
with the Sikhs in April 1798 and entrenched themselves at Saharan- 
pur. 60 Thereafter, desultory war took place between them without 
any positive advantage to either. 

The Maratha affairs in North India in the last quarter of the 
eighteeenth century assumed importance on account of the admir¬ 
able success which they had won, largely owing to the resourceful¬ 
ness and sagacity of Mahadji Sindia and the military efficiency of 
his French-trained battalions commanded successfully and succes¬ 
sively by De Boigne and Perron. The fleeting appearance of Ghu- 
lam Qadir on the North Indian horizon, the treachery of his Hindus¬ 
tani troops just immediately after the battle of Lalsot and the covert 
opposition of Nana Phadnis and faithlessness of ‘Ali Bahadur and 
Tukoji Holkar sometimes bedevilled Mahadji, but on the whole he 
surmounted all these obstacles with rare equanimity and inflexible 
resolution. It was indeed true that the disunity and dissension 
among the Rajputs considerably helped Mahadji to raise the Mara¬ 
thas to the amazing height of glory; and the decade spanning the 
battle of Merta (1790) and Malpura (1800) saw no major contest 
between the Rajputs and the Marathas. 

The death of Mahadji Sindia in 1794 created many vexatious 
problems for the Marathas to the solution of which Daulat Rao, a 
pleasure-loving, thoughtless young man, proved utterly unequal. 
In the unusual situation at Poona, he engaged himself in unseemly 
political squabbles, while allowing his North Indian domain to drift 
towards anarchy and chaos under his lieutenants. His rashness pro¬ 
voked the enmity of Mahadji’s widows, and the simmering distrust 
among his lieutenants was glaringly revealed with the outbreak of 
open hostility between Lakhba and Ambajl. Collins, British am¬ 
bassador with Daulat Rao, did not fail to notice all these symptoms 


418 


MARATHAS AND THE NORTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 

of danger. He submitted a dreary report to the Governor-General 
on 22 July, 1799: 

“Unless Sindia should effect a cordial relation with the Bais, 
by which event he would be enabled to return to Hindustan, his 
possessions in this quarter can never be restored to tranquillity, 
the Government thereof being contested by two chieftains, each 
of whom seems determined on supporting his own authority, 
though both must be sensible that the consequences of their dis¬ 
sensions cannot but be ruinous to the interests of their master”. 65 

It is an irony of history that the Marathas who had restored the 
Mughul emperor, Shah ‘Alam II, to the masnad of Delhi in 1772 and 
again in 1788 after his temporary eclipse for a few months, allowed 
him to languish in the palace with a niggardly allowance under the 
grasping guardianship of Shah Nizam-ud-din. By propping up the 
imperial edifice the Marathas had derived considerable advantage, 
but it was a sad commentary that they did not mitigate the King’s 
pecuniary distress. This sordid policy had not only disgusted the 
royal house of Timur, but had also roused the indignation of many 
Muhammadans in Hindustan, who felt for the abject condition to 
which the imperial family was subjected. It was, therefore, not un¬ 
natural that in September 1803 the hapless Mughul emperor wel¬ 
comed the English as deliverers. 

Few stories in our history are more politically instructive than 
the last few years’ pitiless apathy of some Maratha leaders to the 
broader political problems when the new Governor-General Welles¬ 
ley subdued the Nizam with the chains of subsidiary alliance on 1 
September, 1798, and annihilated Tipu Sultan a few months later. 
“Henceforth, the Peshwa and Sindhia seemed to act like birds fasci¬ 
nated by the blazing eyes of a python and walking unresisting into 
its open jaws” 62 Only Nana prophetically observed: “Tipu’s defeat 
is not a good omen for the Peshwa”. 63 BajI Rao II lay supine while 
Daulat Rao, with seeming unconcern, pursued the vain dream of con¬ 
trolling the Peshwu’s government. At last being conscious of his 
peril, he (Daulat Rao) left Poona in December 1800, only to paper 
over the cracks which had already manifested in North India. 

NOTES 

1. Rajwade, MIS., I, 1, Shejwalkar, Panipat (1961), p. 5; also Sardesai, G. S.: 
Nevj History of the Marathas, II (1948), pp. 365-66. 

2 Bhargava, K. D. (Ed.): Browne Correspondence ; Browne to Hastings, 2 Novem¬ 
ber, 1782, letter No. 2. 

3- Ibid., Browne to Hastings, 16 September, 1783, letter No. 51, p. 108. 

4 Sardesai, G. S. (Ed.): Historical Papers Relating to Mahddji Sindia (1937), p. 408. 

419 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


5 Bhargava, K. D. (Ed.) Browne Correspondence: Browne to Hastings, 12 Novem¬ 
ber, 1784, No. 114. Later on, at Nana’s insistence, the Peshwa obtained the title 
‘Vakil-i-Mutlaq f and Sindia became his Naib or Deputy. 

6- British Museum, Add. MSS., No. 29, 209. 

7. P.R.C., Vol. I, pp. 25-6, 30. 

8. Foreign Dept. Secret Consultation, 11 October, 1785, No. 4. 

9. Ibid , 26 May, 1785, No. 5. 

10. Sarkar, Fall of the Mughal Empire, III, pp. 344-45. 

11. Foreign Dept. Secret Consultation, 23 June, 1786, No. 30. 

12. Sarkar, Jadunath, Fall of the Mughal Empire, III (1938), p. 388. 

13- Foreign Dept. Secret Consultation, 3 October, 1787, No. 14. 

14. Parasnis, D. B. (Ed.): Dilli Yethil Marathyanchi Rajkarane, I, No. 266. 

15. Ibid, No. 238. 

16- Sarkar, Jadunath, Delhi Affairs, Persian Records of Mardtha History, I, p. 199. 

17. Poona Residency Correspondence, Vol. I, letter No. 244. 

18. Sarkar, Jadunath, Fall of the Mughal Empire, III (1952), p. 230. 

19- Sardesai, G. S. (Ed.): Historical Papers Relating to Mahadji Sindia, No. 517. 

20- Bhagwat, A. N. (Ed.): Holkarshahichya Itihasachi Sadhane: Patravyavahar 
Purvardha Khand , I, Letter No. 20. 

21. Ibratnamah, Asiatic Society of Bengal MSS. No. 178; Sindia’s illness, Fol. No. 
303A-309A. 

22. Foreign Dept, Secret Proceedings, 8 July, 1789, No. 5. 

23. Sardesai, G. S. (Eld.): Historical Papers Relating to Mahadji Sindia (1737), 
No. 561. 

24. Sarkar, Jadunath (Ed.): Sindia as Regent of Delhi, Persian Records of Mardtha 
History, II, p. 34. 

25- Parasnis, D. B. (Ed.): Dilli Yethil Marathyanchi Rajkarane, I, Letter No. 371; 
also Historical Papers Relating to Mahadji Sindia, Nos. 570-71, quoted in Fall 
of the Mughal Empire, TV (1950), p. 17. 

26. P. R. C. Vol. I, pp 368 70; for details see De Boigne’s letter in Desmond Young, 
Fountain of the Elephants (1959), pp. 115-20. 

27- Historical Papers of Mahadji Sindia (Ed. Sardesai), pp. 829-30; also Desmond 
Young, op. cit., pp. 123-28. 

28 Sardesai, G. S.: Ibid, p. 862. 

29- Bhagwat, A. N. (Ed.) : Holkarshahichya Itihasachi Sadhane: Patravyavahar 
Purvardha Khand I, Letter No. 57. 

30- Sardesai, G. S. (Ed.): Historical Papers Relating to Mahadji Sindia, p. 846. 

31. Ibid, pp. 855-57, 864. 

32. Sardesai, G. S. (Ed): Ibid, Letter No. 591, pp. 862-65. 

33. Ibid, p. 864. 

34. Foreign Dept. Pol. Cons. 27 June, 1792, No. 5; Palmer to Malet, 17 May, 1792; 
also Grant Duff’s History,. Vol. II, pp. 223-24. 

35- Sardesai, G. S. (Ed.): Historical Papers Relating to Mahadji Sindia, p. 874. 

36*. Calendar of Persian Correspondence, Vol. X, p. 236. 

37- Thakur, V. V. (Ed): Holkarshahichya Itihasachi Sadhane, Vol. I, Pt. II, 
Letter No. 385. 

38 Sarkar, Jadunath, Fall of the Mughal Empire, IV (1950), p. 95. Sarkar des¬ 
cribes the battle in detail at pp. 89-96. 

39. Compton, H., A Particular Account of the European Military Adventurers of 
Hindustan, p. 105. 

39a. Desmond Young, op. cit., p. 128. 

40. Poona Residency Correspondence, Vol. I, No. 65, p. 98. 

41 For. Dept Sec Cons , 288 August, 1787, No. A. 

42- Parasnis, D. B. (Ed.): Dilli Yethil Marathyanchi Rajkarane, II, Letter No. 121. 

43. Ibid, Letter No. 130. 

44. P R C. Vol. Vm, No. 11, pp. 33-35. 

45. Ibid , Vol. VIII, No. 53; Palmer to Malet, 26 Dec. 1796. 

46 For. Dept. Pol. Cons., 24 February, 1797, No. 95. 

47. Ibid, 6 March, 1797, No. 15. 

48 For. Dept. Sec. Cons., 25 January, 1797, No. 1. 

49. Ibid , 7 July, 1797, No. 1. 

50. British Museum, Add. MSS., No. 13, 456; Mornington to Dundas, 28 February 


420 


MARATHAS AND THE NORTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 

51- Ibid , No. 37, 274: Dundas to Momington, 9 October, 1799. 

52. P.R.C., Vol. VIII, No. 42. 

53- For. Pol. Dept., 9 July, 1798, No. 33; Palmer to Sir Alured Clarke, 13 April, 
1798. 

54. Khare, Aitihasik Lekha Sangraha, X, Letter No. 4194. 

55- For. Pol. Dept., 9 July, 1798, No. 33. 

56. Ibid, 9 July, 1798, No. 112. 

57- Khare, Aitihasik Lekha Sangraha , XI, No. 4860. 

58- P.R.C., Vol. VIII, No. 185. 

59 Sarkar, Jadunath, Fall of the Mughal Empire, IV (1950), p. 236. 

60. PJl.C., Vol. VIII, No. 217. 

61. Ibid, No. 158, p. 197. 

62. Sarkar, Jadunath, Fall of the Mughal Empire, IV, p. 156. 

63 Khare, Aitihasik Lekha Sangraha , XI, No. 5045. 


421 


CHAPTER XII 

MARATHAS AND THE SOUTH INDIAN STATES 

(1772-1799) 

From 1772 to 1799 during which the sway of the Marathas be¬ 
came paramount in North India, their power in the South was some¬ 
what limited in extent. Their relations with the two foremost 
southern powers—Mysore and Hyderabad—alternated with fluctuat¬ 
ing periods of friendship and hostility. Their ephemeral friendship 
with Mysore in 1780 was followed by their alliance with the Com¬ 
pany against that indigenous power which in a way altered the 
balance of power in the Deccan. Mysore, crippled in wars with the 
British, ceased to be a rival to the Company, and the Nizam, emas¬ 
culated by the Marathas in 1795, maintained a pitiful existence till 
1798 when he was the first among the Indian powers to embrace the 
subsidiary alliance of Wellesley. The Marathas looked on South 
Indian States as their subordinates, which did not foster mutual 
understanding and respect. The divergence of interest among the 
South Indian powers ultimately weakened them all and enabled the 
British to impose their authority upon them. The story of Maratha 
relations with South Indian States is, therefore, a sad tale of Mara¬ 
tha collaboration with the British against Mysore and the crippling 
of the Nizam in 1795. The Maratha aloofness from the last war with 
Tipu showed their lack of foresight and when they realised their 
mistake, the inexorable force of circumstances gripped them more 
strongly than ever before, from which they could not extricate them¬ 
selves. 

Marathd-Mysore Relations: 

For several generations, Maratha-Mysore relations had been 
very unfriendly. Peshwd Baji Rao had been granted Khandesh and 
Malwa as his field of activity and his appearance in the south was 
in a secondary capacity as an aid to the Pratinidhi and Fateh Singh 
Bhosle. He had turned only cursorily to the south, and in 1726 
exacted contribution from Mysore. With the passing away of Shahu 
Raja in December 1749, the Peshwd took over Karnatak, and in four 
swift campaigns, brought much of the province under Maratha sway. 
The battle of Panipat (1761) meant not only the temporary eclipse 
of the Maratha power in the north, but the rise of Haidar’ ‘Ali which 
checked the Maratha expansion in the south as well. Peshwd 


422 


MARATHAS AND THE SOUTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 

* 

Mudhav Rao, therefore, was forced by the political situa'ion to spend 
the best part of his life in immobilising Haidar ‘Ali and putting a 
curb to his aggressions. Haidar ‘Ali was completely defeated in 1764- 
65, but Raghunath Rao prevailed upon the Peshwd to grant him easy 
terms. Another campaign in 1766-67 further weakened Haidar. The 
Maratha expedition in 1769-72 was eminently successful under the 
generalship of Trimbak Rao Pethe who rendered meritorious service 
in the Karnatak with the co-operation of the Patwardhans. On 5 
March, 1771, he inflicted upon Haidar a crushing defeat near Serin- 
gapatam in the battle of Moti Talao (or Chinkurli). But, in spite of 
this reverse, Haidar showed unexpected sign cf fortitude by opposing 
the Marathas with sullen obstinacy. In the meantime the Peshwd, 
who was ailing for some time, became increasingly apprehensive of 
his approaching death and asked Trimbak Rao to conclude peace by 
whatever means possible (April, 1772). Moreover, with its depleted 
resources, Poona could not carry on the war indefinitely. Haidar 
was also wearied with a hopeless war involving terrible exhaustion 
of his resources. So Trimbak Rao concluded a treaty with Haidar by 
which the latter agreed to pay a sum of Rs. 31 lakhs in cash and sur¬ 
render valuable territories south of the Tungabhadra. “Madhav Rao, 
the greatest of the Peshwds, must be regarded as the most formid¬ 
able antagonist whom Haidar had to meet on the battle-field. Haidar 
was no doubt defeated by Smith as also by Sir Eyre Coote, but he 
could keep the influence of these defeats confined within a narrow 
sphere. But Madhav Rao inflicted on him defeats in the field and 
followed up each blew by the recovery of valuable territory’'’. 1 

The premature death of Peshwd Madhav Rao (18 November, 
1772) and the succession of his brother Narayan Rao, an incompetent, 
fickle-minded young man, emboldened Haidar ‘Ali to take full ad¬ 
vantage of the embarrassing situation at Poona. He sent his troops* 
to Chitaldurg and Savanur and threatened to attack Sira, Maddagiri 
and Gurramkonda. The Marathas made feeble efforts to counter¬ 
act Haidar by appointing Trimbak Rao as the chief commander and 
sending some forces under Muhammad Yusuf. Narayan Rao asked 
Haidar to pay the arrears of tribute amounting to 50 lakhs of rupees. 
But the Peshwd was rebuffed when Haidar replied that the demand 
would be met on the restoration of places conquered by the late 
Peshwd Madhav Rao. 

The short but uneventful Peshwdship of Narayan Rao was high¬ 
lighted by the eruption of domestic discord that had been brewing 
for a long period. There was avowed enmity between the Peshwd 
and his unscrupulous uncle Raghunath Rao which culminated in the 


423 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


assassination of Narayan Rao (30 August, 1773). After years of im¬ 
patient waiting and ceaseless intriguing, Raghunath Rao at last be¬ 
came the Peshwd, but he was not destined to enjoy the dignity for 
long. A well-concerted opposition grew up against Raghunath Rao, 
and in order to deflect the attention of the Poona Council he set out 
on foreign expeditions expecting to rehabilitate himself by strokes 
of victories over the Nizam and Haidar ‘Ali. He defeated the Nizam 
but granted him such easy terms that they betrayed his weakness and 
lack of foresight. Meanwhile news trickled through, that most of 
the important ministers were rallying round Ganga Bai, the widow 
of Narayan Rao, now known to have advanced in pregnancy. Raghu- 
nath Rao was too eager to settle matters with Haidar, and agreed to 
receive from him 72,000 rupees as tribute from Bellary. 2 In his 
eagerness to mitigate his acute financial distress, Raghunath Rao 
gave up all claims to the Maratha districts of Maddagiri, Hoskote and 
Chandragiri upon Haidar’s paying 25 lakhs of rupees. By the treaty 
of Kaliandurg, Haidar recognised Raghunath Rao as the Peshwu and 
agreed to pay him an annual tribute of 6 lakhs. The territory con¬ 
quered by Madhav Rao was ceded to Haidar. 23 

The birth of Sawai Madhav Narayan, the posthumous son of 
Narayan Rao, threw Raghunath Rao into political limbo. In despair 
he tried to secure the military assistance of the East India Com¬ 
pany by concluding with the Bombay Government the Treaty of 
Surat on 6 March, 1775. He also importuned Haidar to assist him 
with military and financial help and to take possession of the Mara¬ 
tha territory up to the right bank of the Krishna. In March 1776 
the Treaty of Surat was substituted by. the Treaty of Purandhar by 
which the Calcutta Council agreed to renounce the cause of Raghu¬ 
nath Rao. “The death of Madhav Rao, the murder of Narayan Rao 

/ 

and the quarrel between Barbhais and Raghoba, gave Haidar a wel¬ 
come respite from Maratha invasions and an opportunity not only to 
regain what he had lost to the Marathas but also to conquer Coorg 
and reconquer Malabar”. 3 

In March 1776 Haidar captured Gooty and imprisoned its irre¬ 
pressible ruler, Murar Rao along with his two sons. He also created 
troubles in the Maratha territory north of Tungabhadra. Through¬ 
out 1776 the Marathas had been busy in subduing an impostor who 
posed as Sadashiv Rao Bhau. But the tragic end of Murar Rao in 
prison, roused the Marathas to feverish pitch of anger and ex¬ 
citement. The menacing activities of Haidar produced an alliance 
between the Poona Government and the Nizam and it was decided 
they should share the conquered territory equally. The Marathas 


424 


MARATHAS AND THE SOUTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 

assembled an important galaxy of prominent generals in the persons 
of Patwardhan chiefs like Pandurang Rao, Konher Rao as well as 
Krishna Rao Panse, Sivaram Ghorpade (nephew of Murar Rao), Nil- 
kanth Rao Sindia, the Desai of Nargund and chiefs of Dharwar 
district. The Nizam’s general Ibrahim Khan Dhausa and the Mara¬ 
tha commander Haripant Phadke were to move in complete concord 
against the Mysore ruler. 

Haidar’s triumph became unmistakable when he succeeded in 
defeating the Patwardhans in a sanguinary contest on 8 January, 
1777, at Saunshi, near Dharwar. Konher Rao was killed and Pandu¬ 
rang Rao was taken captive with some of the Ghorpades. The Mara¬ 
thas endeavoured to keep up the morale of the troops in high key 
by sending Parashuram Bhau Patwardhan, who at once began the 
celebrated Maratha system of guerilla warfare. But the outbreak of 
domestc dissensions in Poona in the first half of 1778 obliged the 
Bhau to fall back and emboldened Haidar to achieve his obvious ob¬ 
jective. With his well-trained force of cavalry and infantry, Haidar 
conquered important places in the Krishna-Tungabhadra Doab. The 
Chiefs of Nargund, Shirhatti and Dammal tendered submission and 
were confirmed in their respective territories on promising to pay 
usual tribute to Haidar. The resistance of Dharwar for a con¬ 
siderable period v/as the only flickering light of courage and resolu¬ 
tion in the pervading gloom of despair and tame submission. Thus 
Haidar was able to move forward along the path of his heart’s de¬ 
sire when he annexed the territories up to Tungabhadra as well 
as between the Krishna and Tungabhadra at a time when the Mara¬ 
thas were passing through a domestic ordeal. The days of Madhav 
Rao were obviously over when the relentless Maratha pressure on 
Haidar had kept the latter in perpetual dread of the Marathas. The 
internal crisis that gripped the Marathas from 1774 to the middle of 
1778 favoured Haidar in his much-coveted design of recovering the 
lost territories and conquering new ones. 

The outbreak of the First Anglo-Maratha War effected a radical 
change in the policy of the Marathas when the latter, with good sense 
dawning on them, projected a rapprochement with Haidar in the 
beginning of February 1780. Nana’s diplomatic genius brought 
about a coalition of Indian powers consisting of the Peshiva. Bhosle, 
the Nizam and Haidar ‘Ali, which threatened to shake the very 
foundations of British power in India. In this broad-based coalition 
it was decided that the grand army under Sindia and Holkar was to 
oppose Goddard, Mudhoji Bhosle. to invade Bengal and its dependen¬ 
cies, Nizam ‘Ali the Northern Sarkars and Haidar the Karnatak. 


425 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


A series of incidents shook the complacency of Haidar ‘Ali. By 
the treaty which Haidar concluded with the British in 1769, he was 
to receive military aid from the Company in time of need. The 
Marathas attacked him in the next year and the British betrayed him 
by not sending any succour. With the outbreak of war between 
England and France in 1778, the English besieged Pondicherry which 
fell in a short time. The Madras Government cast a covetous glance 
on Mahe, the last citadel of French power in the south. Haider lost 
no time in sending a note of warning to the Madras Government. 
“Should the English create a disturbance in the French factory of 
Mahe, he would punish them by devastating the whole country from 
Madura to Madras. He would totally efface them from the face of 
the earth. The defeat which they received at the hands of the 
Mahrattas would be completely eclipsed by what he should inflict 
on them”. 4 In the treaty concluded with the Marathas on 20 Febru¬ 
ary, 1780, Haidar offered to pay the latter fifteen lakhs of rupees 
‘in settlement of their former accounts’, while he also promised them 
an anuual tribute of twelve lakhs. The Poona Darhar recognised 
Haidar’s sovereignty ‘on this side of the Tungabhadra as also on the 
other side’; his right to the Maratha territories south of the Krishna 
was also admitted. Both parties agreed not to make separate peace 
with the English. 5 

It is paradoxical that the treaty of Salbai (17 May, 1782) which 
put an end to the First Anglo-Maratha War, was concluded not only 
without reference to Haidar ‘Ali, but with a specific provision that 
the Peshwa would compel him to relinquish all his conquests in the 
Karnatak and to release all prisoners within six months of the rati- 
.fication of the treaty. In addition to this specific article (Art. 9) 
Mahadji Sindia solemnly promised that if Haidar ‘Ali should refuse 
to abide by the terms of the treaty, the forces of the Peshwa would 
join the English in compelling him to accept them. 6 Thus by his 
clever diplomacy -the Governor-General, Hastings, succeeded in ful- 
filling the intention of his friend Sullivan who had comprehended 
the destruction of Haidar in close collaboration with Poona, Berar 
and Hyderabad. To Sullivan, Haidar was an anathema and he was 
convinced that “Haidar must be destroyed to secure our own power. 
There is no medium. Mysore reduced in strict alliance with Berar, 
Hyderabad and Poona, with proper bridles upon all, will be the only 
system of duration”. 7 

Hardly had Haidar died (7 December, 1782) when his son Tipu 
began to show scant regard to the treaty of Salbai. Consequently, 
a new treaty was concluded on 28 October, 1783, between the Mara- 


426 


MARATHAS AND THE SOUTH INDIAN STATES (17724799) 

thas and the English. In case of Tipu’s refusal to accede $0 the terms 
of the treaty of Salbai, the Peshwd would assist the English and 
make war against him; territories conquered from Tipu would be 
jointly shared by them ‘according to the vicinity of their respective 
situation’. 8 Grant Duff’s comment on this transaction is weighty 
and carries conviction: “It was as much the wish of Nana Furnu- 
wees as of Sindia to oblige Tippoo to conform to the terms of the 
treaty of Salbye, in order that he might appear to the other powers 
of India a Maratha dependent as well as a tributary”. 9 

While the Maratha preparations for commencing hostilities 
against Tipu were well under way, the Madras Government was 
compelled to conclude with him the treaty of Mangalore on 11 March, 
1784, which provoked the ire of Warren Hastings. The Poona Gov¬ 
ernment were left ignorant of the transactions as it had already sent 
its forces under Haripant Phadke to oppose Tipu. The treaty of 
Mangalore, however, did not put a brake on Nana Phadnis’ warlike 
preparations. He urged Tukojl Holkar to join Haripant while he 
himself along with Parashuram Bhau met the Nizam at Yadgir in 
the Raichur district on 16 May, 1784. After protracted negotiations 
“the conference terminated in a general treaty of alliance, the parti¬ 
culars of which were to be specified as soon as they found them¬ 
selves prepared to enter upon its execution”. 10 

Tipu reacted promptly when he called upon the Nizam to hand 
over to him Bijapur. He at once followed up the threat with an 
attack on the Nizam’s territories south of the Krishna, while sending 
Burhan-ud-din to besiege Nargund. Nana’s preparations in the ini¬ 
tial stage were not adequate as he was deluding himself to arrive at 
a compromise with Tipu for which the latter was negotiating through 
his agent at Poona. He agreed to pay two years’ tribute to the 
Peshwd provided Nargund was left to his discretion. Nana was 
quick to seize this proposition anxious as he was to get the money 
and to protract matters till the end of the rainy season. Scarcely had 
Tipu practised this monumental deceit when he captured Ramdurg 
(5 May, 1785) and Nargund (29 July, 1785), consigning the latter’s 
Brahmin ruler Vyankat Rao Bhave and his Diwdn Kalopant Pethe to 
prison at Seringapatam. By the end of December 1785, Dodwad, 
Dharwar, Sampgaon and Jamboti had passed under the occupation 
of the Mysoreans. 

Tipu’s activities shook Nana’s complacency. He now turned to 
the British at Bombay for armed help and offered them any sea-port 
in Tipu’s dominions provided his territories were conquered. But 
Nana’s expectations of British help were blown over when Boddam, 


427 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

the Bombay Governor, reiterated the Company Government’s policy 
of neutrality. Mahadji Sindia harped on the treaty of Salbai which 
obliged the English to enter into hostilities with Tipu whenever the 
latter should break the peace with the Peshw\d. 11 The Calcutta 
Council said in reply that Mahadji was wrongly interpreting the 
treaty of Salbai, as by the treaty of Mangalore, the British were re¬ 
quired not to assist the enemies of Tipu. But the British policy gain¬ 
ed a sudden momentum when it was apprehended that the Mara- 
thas, being disgusted with the British, might draw closer to the 
French. Moreover the presence of the French agent, Montigny, at 
Poona increased the apprehension of the Frahco-Maratha collabora¬ 
tion. British imagination also became active when it suddenly 
heard the reported news of Tipu’s death. Though the news was 
later found to be false, the immediate reaction was a sense of utmost 
concern to the British as the Mysore Government, distracted by this 
calamity, might form a dangerous coalition with the French. It was 
this sheer necessity, the Calcutta Council observed on 14 February 
1786, that forced the British to deviate from the policy of neutrality 
And it decided to offer the Marathlas the assistance of three batta¬ 
lions of sepoys with the important reservation that they should not 
be employed offensively against the Mysore Government but only 
in defence of the Peshwa’s person or of any of his forts within his 
own dominions. The British flattered themselves with the follow¬ 
ing reflection: 

“We consider the Maratha Government as the natural allies 
of the English in India for the two Governments united can give 
law to India.... The Government of the Peshwa is permanent, 
as it is so far like the Government of the English that no changes 
of the rulers affect either nation. The Governments of other 
states of India depend on the continuance of particular rulers”. 12 

The British offer of aid was Macpherson’s doing. The next 
successor, Lord Cornwallis who assumed office in September 1786, 
came to India with instructions to adhere scrupulously to Pitt’s India 
Act which forbade the Company to declare war or conclude treaties 
with any Indian power without the consent of the Court of Directors. 
In a minute dated 27 September, 1786, the new Governor-General 
explained: 

“We cannot give the three battalions without going to war. 
We cannot go to war without offending the laws of our country. 
It is therefore high time to extricate ourselves from our present 
critical and dangerous situation the continuance of which will 


428 


MARATHAS AND THE SOUTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 

not only give the most just grounds of offence to Tippoo, but will 
probably produce a quarrel with the Poona ministers who al¬ 
ready express a diffidence of our sincerity”. 13 

The British ambassador to Poona, Malet, performed the delicate 
task of conveying to Nana Phadnis the newly oriented British policy. 
Emphasising on change of circumstances as Franco-Mysore coalition 
appeared by now chimerical, Malet dwelt on the necessity of strict 
adherence to treaties. But this did not assuage the frayed temper 
of Nana who failed to see any rectitude in the British diplomacy. 13a 
He would not concede that this should happen when Macpherson had 
already agreed to assist the Marathas. 

Meanwhile, the Marathas had begun to make brisk preparations 
for their struggle with Tipu. It was with great difficulty that Nana 
could obtain Mudhojl Bhosle’s co-operation. He agreed to give up 
Garha-Mandla to Bhosle and the latter agreed to collect 15,000 horse 
and to pay Rs. 32 lakhs. Nana also craved Holkar’s co-operation 
and it was only after considerable monetary sacrifice amounting to 
ten lakhs of rupees which Holkar required for discharging the 
arrears due to the army that Nana could obtain his concurrence. On 
15 February, 1786, Nana and Nizam ‘Ali once again met at Yadgir. 
Nania almost ruined the prospect of success of the meeting when he 
expressed his desire to return to Poona after leaving the command 
of the army to Haripant Phadke. Nizam ‘Ali loudly expressed his 
resentment at this conduct of Nana and the latter therefore decided 
to stay on. It was agreed after long parleys that the Nizam and the 
Peshwa’s Government were to divide the conquests equally among 
themselves. 14 It is curious indeed that it was the Nizam and not 
Nana who left the camp in the month of April by leaving the com¬ 
mand of his forces under Tahawar Jang. 15 

At this crisis Tipu made frantic efforts to dissolve the confede¬ 
racy or at least to avert the war. But the situation was past beyond 
reconciliation. Nana pursued his war efforts with relentless zeal by 
sending his agents—Krishna Rao Ballal to the Nizam and Balwant 
Rao to Holkar—to push them along the path of action. 16 

Despite the concourse of prominent personalities, the Maratha 
army presented a distressing spectacle. According to a newswriter: 

“The Mahrattas seem at a stand what to do, and the whole 
of their affair in a state of suspense, their opinion much divided 
and whatever Nana proposes to the Peshwa’s chiefs, is paid little 
or no attention; their troops much in arrears, and little or no 


429 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

money in their camp to pay them, and every necessity amazing¬ 
ly dear, and they by no means prepared to attack their enemy, 
and it is imagined without a speedy change in their present mode 
of conduct that Tipoo will in the course of a few months, enlarge 
his dominions at their expense”. 17 

Military operations began on 1 May with the investment of 
Badami. The fort capitulated after being subjected to three weeks' 
incessant bombardment. The fall of Badami might have generated 
a feeling of complacency among the Marathas as Naha set off for 
Poona, Mudhoji Bhosle to Nagpur and Parashuram Bhau to Tas- 
gaon. Hari Pant marched on Gajendragarh, a town in the Dharwar 
district, in June 1786 and the fort surrendered. Tukoji Holkar had 
also been able to secure every part of the Kittur district except the 
fort of the same name. 

To offset these losses, Tipu made a surprise move by suddenly 
appearing before Adoni, a strong post of Nizam ‘Ali. Despite the 
allied efforts to protect Adoni, it could not be saved. On 29 June 
Tipu appeared before the fort and occupied it without firing a shot. 
Nana Phadnis felt mortified at the loss of Adoni which he called the 
key of the Deccan. To retrieve the situation Hari Pant arrived with 
his forces before the strong fort of Bahadur Benda and on 17 August 
the fort surrendered. 

While Hari Pant was relaxing at Bahadur Benda, he received 
the news that Tipu had performed a daring feat by crossing the 
Tungabhadra in the rainy season with the help of basket boats. 
Hari Pant changed his ground for the convenience of forage and pro¬ 
ceeded to Savanur, the Nawab of which had beseeched him to come 
to his rescue against Tipu-’s atttack. 18 Tipu encamped about 8 miles 
from Savanur when he was soon joined by Burhan-ud-din and Badr- 
Uz-Zaman Khan who arrived with a large convoy of provisions from 
Bidnur. The Marathas became reinforced by the arrival of Raghu- 
nath Rao Patwardhan from Koppal as well as by Tukoji Holkar who 
came with 50,000 men. 

On 1 October a little before dawn Tipu’s columns enveloped the 
Maratha camp. The Maratha force, being unable to sustain the 
fierce attack of the Mysoreans, was obliged to retreat. Tukoji’s 
heroism made no impact in the complexion of the war. By the be¬ 
ginning of October 1786 the Maratha army left Savanur along with 
its Nawab, Hakim Khan and the place surrendered on 6 October. 
Hari Pant afterwards, moved to Shirhatti, a fortified town about 20 
miles north-east of Savanur. On 11 November Hari Pant invested 


430 


MARATHAS AND THE SOUTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 

the fort which surrendered on 14th after a feeble resistance. 

On 24 November me Marathas left Shirhatti. On 2 December 
it was decided at a council of war to make a general attack on Tipu. 
But on the next day the Marathas, for some inexplicable reasons, 
began to falter and made preparations to march back. This was 
Tipu’6 opportunity and by constant barrage of rockets he threw the 
Maratha camp in confusion. Tipu’s forces became master of tke 
whole baggage. But the most heinous deed was committted by 
Tukojl’s cavalry who plundered the Maratha camp as much as the 
enemy did. The suspicion gained credence when it was found that 
Holkar did not suffer any loss during Tipu’s attack. 19 In the unim¬ 
peachable account of contemporary observer, Yvon, we find the fol¬ 
lowing clue to the treachery: 

“The treason carried on in this army is evident, and for the 
present has rendered the army incapable of coming to action. 
TukojI Holkar and Bonsla are the principal traitors who carry 
on open correspondence with Tippoo, and have voted for a con¬ 
clusion of peace’’. 20 

This disgrace rankled deeeply in Hari Pant’s mind and he was 
determined to achieve some brilliant military strokes. By sending 
the artillery and superfluous baggage to Badami, Hari Pant lay en¬ 
camped at Bahadur Benda and afterwards between Gajendragarh 
and Koppal. Meanwhile Tipu had advanced to Bahadur Benda and 
occupied it after a week’s siege. On 16 January Tipu made an 
abortive attempt to surprise the Maratha camp. 

The Maratha-Mysore war lacked any dramatic element in which 
neither party gained any positive advantage over the other. As the 
war continued, Tipu’s increasing concern was that the British might 
not remain aloof in the contest and inevitably would support the 
cause of the confederates. It was this anticipated British collabora¬ 
tion with the Marathas that made Tipu to broach peace proposals 
to the different personalities—Holkar, Hari Pant and Haste—despite 
his slight edge over the confederates in fighting. But it was only 
in December 1786 that the Marathas listened to peace overtures from 
Tipu with all seriousness. Tipu proposed that the Marathas should 
recognise his sovereignty over the territory between the Krishna 
and the Tungabhadra. In return he would pay 48 lakhs of rupees 
as arrears of tribute—32 lakhs immediately and 16 lakhs after six 
months. 21 But Hari Pant refused to accept the proposal as it fell far 
short of his Government’s expectation. It had been its desire to re- 


431 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


siime all the territories possessed by the Marathas during the days 
of Madhav Rao, to which Tipu would not agree. But Tipu dared not 
cut off the process of negotiation; instead he sent Badr-uz-Zaman 
and ‘Ali Reza who arrived in the Maratha camp towards the last 
week of January 1787. 

Quite unexpectedly a settlement was reached in March 1787 at 
Gajendragarh between Tipu and the Marathas. This volte face is 
explained by the fact that the fear of British intervention lurked 
more in Tipu’s mind than the hostility of the Marathas, and he 
naturally desired to compromise with the latter. By this treaty the 
Marathas regained possession of Badami, Nargund and Kittur. 22 

Adoni was restored to Mahabat Jang, nephew of Nizam ‘Ali. 
Tipu was to retain possession of Savanur, Dharwar, Bahadur Benda 
and all the forts situated between the Krishna and the Tungabhadra. 
He also agreed to pay four years’ arrears of tribute amounting to 60 
lakhs of rupees which his father had stipulated to pay. 23 From the 
total a deduction of 15 lakhs was obtained by Tipu in compensation 
of damages sustained by him during the war. Of the remaining 45 
lakhs, 30 lakhs were paid and the remainder promised at the expira¬ 
tion of the year. Nizam ‘Ali was included in the treaty. 

Thus ended a war in which Tipu had a decided superiority over 
the Marathas. As Wilks has put it: “The success of his night 
alarms, in the. late campaign, had been considerable, and he is diffuse 
in his description of various stratagems, by which he kept his ene¬ 
mies perpetually awake.... it is certain from the impression pro¬ 
duced in every part of India, by the events of this campaign, that 
it must have been conducted, on the part of the Sultan, .with a de¬ 
gree of energy and enterprise which established a general opinion 
of his military superiority”. 24 Tipu had triumphed over the con¬ 
federates and kept the Maratha army on the defensive. The con¬ 
tinuance of war seemed to Nana an expensive affair and he was eager 
to get out of it. “In fact”, as Malet reported on 24 March, 1787, 
“the Poona Government was reduced to the necessity of adopting so 
disagreeable an alternative. Nania cannot but have perceived that 
the progress of the army was by no means proportioned to the ex¬ 
cessive expenses of its maintenance. He must have had some reason 
to doubt the abilities of his commander, the good faith of his allies 
and even some of his own chieftains”. 25 But the situation turned 
in favour of the Maratha Government when Tipu on his own initia¬ 
tive opened peace negotiations. Tipu made his choice of befriend¬ 
ing the Maratha Government to subvert the power of the English. 

432 


MARATHAS AND THE SOUTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 

But success eluded him as events moved in such devious ways that 
the Maratha Government and the Nizam, instead of supporting an 
indigenous neighbour, fell victims to foreign wiles and walked into 
the British web of alliances. 

Though the British studiously kept aloof from the war between 
Tipu and the Poona Government, they were ever watchful of the 
conduct of Tipu lest he might be strengthened by the French. 
Humours of French designs were rife in 1787 and Cornwallis imme¬ 
diately instructed Malet at Poona to secure the co-operation of the 
Maratha Government, if the Franco-Mysore combination was ever 
to take place. Cornwallis made tempting offers to them—territorial 
compensation and reimbursement of war expenses. But the British 
reservation that they should not be forced to assist the Marathas in 
the event of their being attacked by Tipu alone, made Nana Phadnis 
cynical about the proposal. Cornwallis could feel the pulse of the 
Marathas when he wrote to Dundas on 16 November, 1787: 

“There appears such a jealousy and coldness in the disposi¬ 
tion of the Marathas towards us v that I do not flatter myself, in 
the event of a breach with Tippoo, that we could derive any im¬ 
mediate assistance from them”. 26 

But despite Nana’s apathy to an alliance with the British, he was 
willing to consider it only on the following conditions. 27 In case 
either of the contracting parties should be attacked by Tipu, the 
other should ask him to desist and in case of non-compliance should 
Join the party attacked to punish him. Nana further pledged him¬ 
self for Nizam ‘Ali’s acceding to this defensive alliance. Nana’s de¬ 
finition of the defensive alliance—the protection of the contracting 
parties against any attacks of Tipu, singly or jointly with the French, 
left no room for evasion and put the British in a tight corner. Corn¬ 
wallis could not visualise an alliance with the Marathas on such 
terms and, therefore, rejected Nana’s proposal. 

In October 1787 the British were on the brink of war with 
France over the Dutch affair. But in the beginning of 1788 peace 
was established between England, France and Holland. Cornwallis, 
therefore, could afford to be negligent in cultivating the friendship 
of the Marathas. But events moved inexorably towards a war and 
Tipu felt that Cornwallis was bent on hostilities when he proposed 
(on 7 July, 1789) unqualified military assistance to the Nizam against 
Tipu. Towards the close of December 1789, Tipu, therefore, made 
a surprise attack on Travancore, an ally of the Company. 

433 

M.S—28 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


War with Tipu being now inevitable, Cornwallis began to lean 
towards the Marathas with intense ardour. The value of Maratha 
friendship had not been perceived by Cornwallis alone. In England 
Dundas had been voicing this sentiment with utmost frankness: 

“I feel that an alliance with Mahrattas of the closest kind 
is all that is required to keep the whole world in awe respecting 
India. The aid of their cavalry seems all that is wanting to 
make our power complete”. 28 

Malet who had been striving hard to secure the alliance of Mara¬ 
thas now found to his delight that they were solicitous to enter into 
alliance with the British. On 1 June, 1790, a treaty (called the 
Treaty of Poona) was, therefore, concluded between Malet on the 
part of the Company and Nana Phadnis on the part of the Peshwa. 
It was stipulated that the forces of the Peshwa and the Nizam num¬ 
bering about 25,000 should assist the Company in invading the terri¬ 
tories of Tipu. The British were to assist both the powers with two 
battalions of the Company’s forces and their expenses were to be 
borne by the Peshwa and Nizam ‘All respectively. All conquests 
were to be equally shared and the poligars and zaminddrs formerly 
dependent on the Peshwa and the Nizam were to be reinstated on 
paying a nazar which was to be equally divided among the allies. 
Peace should be made by mutual consent and if after the conclusion 
of peace with Tipu, he should attack either of the contracting parties, 
the others should join to punish him. 29 

The British Resident at Hyderabad, Kennaway, found it easy to 
seduce the Nizam who was considered to be a spent force in South 
Indian politics. The Nizam’s increasing anxiety was to secure him¬ 
self against future Maratha attacks to which Cornwallis could not, 
with propriety, agree. But the Nizam raised so many objections to 
the Treaty of Poona that Kennaway was obliged to conclude a sepa¬ 
rate treaty with him (Treaty of Pangal, 4 July, 1790) the terms and 
conditions of which were nearly the same as those of the treaty 
signed by the Peshwa on 1 June. It was this alliance with the Peshwa 
and the Nizam, reinforced by friendship of the Rajas of Coorg, Cochin 
and Malabar Chieftains, that heartened Cornwallis to expect the 
most promising support in the war. 

Cornwallis entered the war with the zeal of a crusader. To Pitt, 
he assured: “I will not quit the helm in time of danger unless I am 
required to do so and I will spare no pains to bring the war to a 
speedy and honourable conclusion”. 30 He received hearty co-opera- 


434 


MARATHAS AND THE SOUTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 

tion from all his colleagues—General Medows and General Aber- 
cromby, the Governors of Madras and Bombay Presidencies respec¬ 
tively, as well as from military commanders like Kelly, Maxwell, 
Floyd and Hartley. 

In 1790 the march of events was not altogether unfavourable 
for the British. They had established unquestioned supremacy in 
Malabar, though they had not fared well in Coromandel. On 10 
December Hartley utterly routed Tipu’s forces at Calicut and four 
days later Abercromby reduced Cannanore. But the British re¬ 
sources without the co-operation of the Peshwti and the Nizam 
were wholly inadequate against the mounting pressure of Tipu’s 
attack. 

Parashuram Bhau assumed the chief command of the Maratha 
forces. Strengthened by the Maratha contingents under Raste and 
Prtttinidhi and British troops under Captain Little, Bhau proceeded 
towards Dharwar. Meanwhile the Maratha forces had been able to 
occupy Hubli as well as Kittur. From the beginning Dharwar exer¬ 
cised a magic spell on the mind of Parashuram Bhau as the latter 
considered it a place of strategic importance. Truly did Little ob¬ 
serve from Dharwar: “By report it is well supplied with artillery, 
ammunition and a great store of provisions. On this place the enemy 
put their whole dependence for the defence of the country on this 
side of the Tungabhadra”. 31 The fort was so well-stocked with men 
and provisions that it was least expected that its commandant, Badr- 
uz-Zaman Khan, would placidly relinquish its possession. 

On 18 September the Maratha army reached the fort and started 
bombardment. But neither did it cause any damage to the fort nor 
did it create a sense of perplexity to its sturdy defenders. The 
Maratha army lacked efficient artillery and gunpowder. They were 
constrained to admit: 

“We have only ten guns—one of them is already broken, 
two are very small, five are made of cast iron and the remain¬ 
ing two are only made of metal. The fort is very strong and 
the enemy have 40 guns. Our preparations are meagre”. 32 

On 13 December the town was stormed by the combined forces 
of the Marathas and the English. But the siege of the fortress was 
carried on in such a half-hearted manner that it drew from Lt. Moor 
a cryptic comment “that the Marathas would not with twenty guns 
against the present garrison, approach and breach Dharwar in 
twenty years”. 33 The arrival of Lt. Col. Frederick from Bombay 




435 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

did not improve upon a situation which was truly considered hope¬ 
less for the Marathas. Chagrined by the failure to surprise the fort, 
Frederick suggested the withdrawal of forces. Bhau’s conscience 
was assailed. He harped on the consequences of withdrawal—dis¬ 
grace and dishonour to the armies of both nations. 34 Frederick did 
not live long to see the reduction of the fort which capitulated on 
3 April. 

Meanwhile, the war assumed a new complexion with the as¬ 
sumption by Lord Cornwallis of the chief command of the forces. 
In a letter to Henry Dundas, Cornwallis wrote on 12 November, 
1790: 

“That we have lost time, and our adversary has gained re¬ 
putation, which are two most valuable things in war. It is 
vain now to look back; we must only consider how to remedy 
the evil, and to prevent the ill effects which our delay may 
occasion in the minds of our allies. It immediately occurred to 
me that nothing would be so likely to keep their spirits, and 
to convince them of our determination to act with vigour, as my 
taking the command of the army”. 35 

Cornwallis clearly perceived the British limitations in the ex¬ 
ertions of the war. He was also conscious of the lukewarm attitude 
of Nana Phadnis; but against this hazard he could do nothing as he 
himself admitted: ‘I know of no remedy that it is in our power to 
apply.’ 36 

On 29 January, 1791, Corn\vallis assumed command of the army 
and came dashing against Bangalore which he carried by assault on 
21 March. Nana might have brooded over the British efforts in the 
war and these must have led him to despatch Hari Pant Phadke on 
1 January, 1791, with 30,000 forces. Marching through Kurnool, 
Hari Pant proceeded to Pangal to consult with the Nizam about the 
future course of action. “At this conference it was agreeed by 
Nizam Ali and Hurry Punt, on the part of his master the Peshwd, 
that they should abide by the terms of the treaty with the English, 
but only so far as might humble Tippoo, without absolutely annihi¬ 
lating his power”. 37 The Maratha Government was anxious to re¬ 
sume its territory south of the Krishna acquired by BalajI Baji Rao 
and Madhav Rao with much fighting and seized by Haidar and Tipu 
after the murder of Narayan Rao in 1773. 

Having secured Bangalore, Cornwallis at once proceeded to¬ 
wards Seringapatam, the fall of which would have enabled him to 


436 


MARATHAS AND THE SOUTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 

make short work of the enemy. He, therefore, made pressing appli¬ 
cation to Hari Pant to come to his relief. But Hari Pant made a 
pretence of joining Cornwallis and wasted precious time in desul¬ 
tory operations. Bhau also followed the same lackadaisical policy 
of engaging his forces in reducing minor forts. Little, who accom¬ 
panied Bhau’s army, made a despairing comment to Cornwallis on 
30 April, 1791: 

“I am apprehensive we may be delayed some time by the 
reduction of several small forts in the way to Seringapatam 
which I was at first given to understand would be avoided. 
Some time also has been lost lately by unnecessary halts”. 38 

But Bhau found it difficult to stave off the greater needs of the 
war when he heard the news of Cornwallis’ march to Seringa¬ 
patam. He hurried to join Hari Pant and at Nagamangala, about 20 
miles from Seringapatam, the Maratha forces were united. But 
Tipu’s vigilant intelligence service prevented the Marathas from 
conveying any news of their approach to Cornwallis, who was then 
engaged in a desperate battle with Tipu at Seringapatam. In the 
third week of May Cornwallis, finding his position untenable, began 
to retreat after destroying the whole of the battering train and 
equipment of the army. 

Hardly had Cornwallis abandoned his design in despair when 
news was received of the arrival of the Marathas. On 28 May 
Cornwallis met Parashuram Bhau and Hari Pant Phadke at Mel- 
kote. The arrival of the Marathas at this juncture was a welcome 
relief to the half-starved British army. What followed next could 
best be described in Dirom’s graphic language: 

“The famished followers of our army now ran to the Mah- 
ratta camp in thousands, and were happy to purchase grain at 
any rate. Luckily the want of money was none of our diffi¬ 
culties, else we should have profited little by this supply; for 
the chiefs. . . sold everything at the most exorbitant rates. 
Three seers of rice, and six of raggy or gram, for a rupee, was 
the common, and in general, the lowest price. But grain was 
now worth its weight in gold; and, while this lasted, there was 
no hesitation in making the exchange”. 39 

Cornwallis would not have forsaken his grand design had he got 
timely intelligence of the arrival of the Marathas. It was a sad com¬ 
mentary on the inadequate communication service which frustrated 
Cornwallis’ cherished object for the time being. 


437 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


The onset of the monsoon kept the allied army in a state of en¬ 
forced inactivity. The Maratha army commanded by Parashuram 
Bhau and the Bombay Brigade of three battalions under Little sepa¬ 
rated from the grand army on 8 July and proceeded towards Sira 
and Chitaldurg. Nijgal surrendered to Bhau. But the Marathas 
found it difficult to reduce the hill fort of Devarayadurg which they 
had to abandon. Proceeding from Devarayadurg and Sira, the latter 
being formerly occupied by Hari Pant, the army marched to Erode, 
which secured Bhau’s protection by paying a considerable sum. 
But this did not prevent the Marathas from ransacking the town. 

Early in August the army arrived in th£ neighbourhood of 
Chitaldurg. “Chitaldurg has ever been deemed the strongest hill in 
India; indeed, if properly defended, ^here appears no possibility of 
taking it”. 40 The fort was garrisoned by 10,000 infantry and 1,000 
cavalry under its commandant Daulat Khan who was firm in his 
determination to repel the attack. Finding it difficult to reduce the 
fort either by assault or siege, Bhau moved off on 2 November and 
halted at Chandgiri till the middle of December. Then he moved 
to the eastern bank of the Tungabhadra, about eight miles from Hole 
Honnur. The Marathas wrought such havoc in this rich part of the 
country that it earned for them opprobrium from Moor. 

“This part of the country was the richest we had yet seen, 
abounding in villages and towns, so thick that the night we 
came to this ground we counted ten villages in flames at the 
same time. It was by no means uncommon to see six or eight 
burning at once in several parts of this fine country. In this 
style do the Mahrattas carry on a war. It is indeed the only 
way in which, as enemies, they are at all formidable; they can 
pour on an enemy’s country in inundation of a hundred thou¬ 
sand horse; and when we consider the ruin and devastation 
spread by such a host of locusts, we are inclined to think that 
the curse of God could not have fallen in Egypt in a more des¬ 
tructive form”. 41 

Bhau was required to operate on the right flank of the British 
army between Sira and Sivaganga, effect a junction with Aber- 
cromby and proceed to Seringapatam. But nothing could persuade 
Bhau to give up his desultory operations on the Tungabhadra. 42 
However, he endeavoured to give a good account of himself when 
on 18 December, 1791, he appeared before Hole Honnur, situated at 
the confluence of the Tunga and Bhadra. On 21st morning the place 
was carried by storm. After three . days Benkipur surrendered 


438 


MARATHAS AND THE SOUTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 


without any resistance to the Bhau. Advancing along the left bank 
of the Tunga, Bhau arrived at Shimoga, a place noted for its strong 
fortifications. The place being flanked on the right by the river 
Tunga and on the left by a very thick jungle, enabled its comman¬ 
dant, Muhammad Reza, to repulse the combined attack of the Mara- 
thas and the English. But the exemplary conduct of Little who 
rallied the whole force, broke the back of the enemy’s resistance 
and the fort capitulated on 3 January. Grant Duff pays Little a glow¬ 
ing tribute: 

“The whole conduct of Captain Little on this occasion was 
most exemplary; it reminds us of the generalship of Lawrence 
or of Clive and of itself entitles him to a very respectable rank 
in the military annals of British India”. 43 

Bhau loitered at Shimoga until the middle of January 1792 and 
got possession of several neighbouring forts which he captured with¬ 
out serious efforts. Next he proceeded towards Bidnur and had 
the satisfaction of capturing Kumsi and Anantapur with surprising 
ease. On 28 January he arrived within sight of Bidnur and was 
about to invest it when suddenly he abandoned the project. Leav¬ 
ing sufficient garrisons to protect Hole Honnur, Shimoga and the 
neighbouring areas, Bhau began his march to Seringapatam on 10 
February. He had been repeatedly urged by Cornwallis to co-ope¬ 
rate in the grand undertaking by remaining in the vicinity of the 
English army. Bhau could afford to ignore Cornwallis’ summons, 
but he found it hard to resist the pressure of Hari Pant when the 
latter asked him to proceed without a moment’s delay to Seringa¬ 
patam. Hari Pant’s importunities had a ring of sincerity: 

“I have been praying God for your immediate arrival and 
was glad to receive your letter informing that you will be com¬ 
ing to Pattan”. 44 

The operations of Cornwallis, after his retreat from Seringa¬ 
patam, were confined to the limited sphere of Baramahal. In July 
the British troops occupied Hosur and Rayakotta. Cornwallis next 
succeeded in reducing the hill-forts interspersed between Bangalore 
and Gurramkonda and between Bangalore and Seringapatam. The 
capture of these strong fortresses increased the security of the con¬ 
voys and enabled Cornwallis to strike the final blow with great con¬ 
fidence. He wrote to Pitt on 23 January, 1792: 

“If we can subsist in .the neighbourhood of Seringapatam, 
there is in my opinion no doubt of our complete success, and I 


439 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


have taken so many precautions to insure the safety of our 
supplies, that I trust it is hardly possible that they should fail”. 45 

While Cornwallis was engaged in occupying the hill-forts, he 
was fretting with impatience about the arrival of the Maratha de¬ 
tachment under Parashuram Bhau and the Nizam’s forces under 
Prince Sikandar Jah. Though a part of Nizam’s army joined Corn¬ 
wallis on 25 January near Outradurga, Bhau appeared on the scene 
when the war was over. Cornwallis appeared before Seringa- 
patam on 5 February. Dividing the army in three columns—the 
right under General Medows, the left under Col. Maxwell and the 
centre under his personal care—Cornwallis on the following night 
occupied Lalbagh, Tipu’s beautiful garden and Shehar Ganj. 46 

The realities of the situation now prompted Tipu to offer peace 
overtures and he sent Ghulam/‘Ali and ‘Ali Reza to the allies res¬ 
pectively—Kennaway representing the English, Govind Rao Kale 
and Bachaji Mehendale representing the Peshwd and Mir ‘Alam re¬ 
presenting the Nizam. Being left without any choice Tipu hasten¬ 
ed to conclude the preliminary articles of peace on 23 February and 
the final treaty on 18 March. Tipu agreed to cede to the allies half 
the territory from the countries adjacent to their respective boun¬ 
daries; to pay three crores and thirty lakhs of rupees, one half im¬ 
mediately and the rest by three instalments within a year; and to 
release all prisoners of war held since the time of Haidar. 47 He also 
agreed to deliver two of his sons, ‘Abdul Khaliq and Muiz-ud-din as 
hostages for the due performance of the stipulations. The bounda¬ 
ries of the Maratha state were again extended to the Tungabhadra 
and now included Savanur, Lakshmeswar and Kundgol in the subdh 
of Dharwar. The Nizam obtained Cuddapah, Gooty with the dis¬ 
tricts between the Krishna and the Tungabhadra. The British ac¬ 
quisitions were substantial—the rich districts of Baramahal, Dindi- 
gul, t Salem, a large slice of the Malabar Coast, including the ports of 
Calicut, Cannanore and the territory of Coorg. Cornwallis, there¬ 
fore, could feel gratified when he wrote to Dundas on 4 March, 
1972: 

“We have at length concluded our Indian war handsomely 
and I think as advantageously as any reasonable person could 
expect. We have effectually crippled our enemy without mak¬ 
ing our friends too formidable... I shall therefore. only ex¬ 
press my hopes that the Gentlemen who talked so much non¬ 
sense about the balance of power and the barrier of Tippoo will 
have the grace to be ashamed of themselves” 48 


440 


MARATHAS AND THE NORTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 


By the end of March, the allied army dispersed for their res¬ 
pective cantonments. Before Hari Pant Phadke left, Tipu found a 
pretext to visit him, and cautioned him in a prophetic vein: “You 
must realise that I am not your enemy. Your real enemy is the 
English”. 49 The intended visit of Mahiadji to Poona was a source of 
great irritation to Nana and the latter asked Bhau to bring Little’s 
platoon to the Maratha capital. But this did not seem to happen and 
Little was given a send-off at Moti Talav. 50 This war so dramatically 
altered the political balance of India that superiority irrevocably 
passed to the British, and the Maratha Government had to play a 
second fiddle to the overgrown power of the Company. 

It is an irony of history that from the middle of 1792 the Mara¬ 
thas began to entertain a soft attitude towards Tipu. Rumours were 
rife of a coalition between Tipu and the Marathas against the British 
and the Nizam. With the arrival of Wellesley and the unfolding of 
the ingenious plan of subsidiary alliances, Tipu could well under¬ 
stand the deep-laid schemings of the Company. But he showed an 
unbecoming diffidence of coming to grips with the Company, crip¬ 
pled as he was after his defeat in 1972. He missed the opportunity 
of improving his relations with the Marathas and when his agents 
Ahmad Khan and Fakhr-ud-din arrived at Poona towards the end 
of December 1798, the die had already been cast. The object of the 
agents was not merely to secure the Maratha aid, but also the Peshwa’s 
mediation between their master and the British. Baji Rao did in¬ 
deed propose a mediation but that was spurned by Wellesley with 
the following observation: 

“How could the Peshwa undertake the office of mediation- 
without the most flagrant inconsistency? As a member of the 
Triple Alliance he has already declared himself to be an aggriev¬ 
ed party”. 51 

The British attempt to court the friendship of the Marathas was 

* 

not destined to be successful. It was alleged that the Peshwa’s neu¬ 
trality had been purchased by Tipu for a sum of 13 lakhs of rupees. 
Moreover, Baji Rao’s vacillating conduct, whether to help the Bri¬ 
tish or to remain neutral, frustrated Anglo-Maratha partnership in 
the last war against Tipu. Baji Rao perhaps thought that the war 
would go on for quite some time and he would determine his policy 
according to the exigencies of the situation. But the sweeping and 
rapid victory of the British arms and the death of Tipu Sultan on 4 
May, 1799, upset all Baji Rao’s calculations. To Nana the British 
appeared as a formidable power and his warning to Baji Rao fell 


441 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

on deaf ears. It failed to save the latter from the clutches of the 
British in December 1802: 

“Tipu is finished; the British power has increased; the 
whole of east India is already theirs; Poona will now be the 
next victim. Evil days seem to be ahead. There seems to be 
no escape from destiny”. 52 

Mardtha-Nizdm Relations: 

We can now turn to Maratha-Nizam relations which in the last 
quarter of the eighteenth century fluctuated between friendship and 
hostility. In 1773 there was an open war between Raghunath Rao 
and the Nizam. In 1779 the Nizam took an active interest in the for¬ 
mation of the anti-British confederacy in collaboration with the 
Peshwa, Haidar and Bhosle. The Treaty of Yadgir concluded in 
June 1784, the object of which was the humiliation of Tipu, marked 
the culmination of Maratha-Nizam friendship. In the 8th article of 
the treaty it was laid down: ‘Neither party shall ever adopt any 
measure of hostility against the other’. In the middle of 1790 both 
the powers bound themselves in separate treaties to co-operate with 
the British against Tipu: 

Poona-Hyderabad partnership disappeared with the defeat of 
Tipu. The Poona Government now began to press forward its an¬ 
cient claims on the Nizam. It was Baji Rao I who had first imposed 
chauth upon the Nizam’s dominions; his successors Balaji Baji Rao 
and Madhav Rao had brought the Nizam’s power to exhaustion and 
the chauth to be paid by him now accumulated to huge amounts. 
To all intents and purposes the Nizam was a tributary of the Mara- 
tlias; but the Nizam, strengthened by acquisitions from Tipu’s domi¬ 
nions and by alliance with the British, fondly hoped to shake off the 
Maratha tutelage. 

The Nizam found it difficult to evade the demands of the Poona 
Darbar, especially the chauth and sardeshmukhi of Bidar, Adoni 
and Berar. Mir ‘Alam, the Nizam’s agent, recognised the justice of 
the demand, although he expected moderation from the Poona 
Government. But once the propriety of Poona Government’s claims 
was accepted, the quarrel could have been settled had there existed 
mutual goodwill between the respective ministers of the two courts— 
Nana Phadnis of Poona and ‘Azim-ul-Umara of Hyderabad. 

The British Governor-General, Sir John Shore, wedded to the 
policy of non-intervention, was reluctant to interfere in the Mara¬ 
tha-Nizam dispute, except in case of extreme necessity. But he did 


442 


MARATHAS AND THE SOUTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 


not question the legality of the Peshwfa’s demand; the fact was irre¬ 
fragable and the ‘quantum of the demand upon the Nizam’ was only 
to be assessed. 53 Meanwhile it had been decided to send Mir ‘Alam 
in an embassy to Poona to adjust the dispute between the two Gov¬ 
ernments. The British Government decided to countenance Mir 
‘Alam through its Residents at Poona and Hyderabad to help him 
arrive at a mutual settlement of the dispute. “This circuitous mode 
of moderating between the parties”, Kirkpatrick, the British Resi¬ 
dent at Hyderabad observed, “was preferable ‘ to a direct or formal 
offer of our mediation”. 54 It would prevent the Company from tying 
itself with the Nizam and would not be able to injure the Maratha 
susceptibilities. 

It was in this deepening crisis that the Nizam craved the pro¬ 
tection of the British. On 29 May, 1794, the British Resident, Kirk¬ 
patrick met ‘Azim-ul-Umara; the latter tried to rouse the British 
sympathy by insinuating that he had incurred the displeasure of the 
Peshwd by maintaining close connections with them. He, therefore, 
could reasonably claim the Company’s protection and was prepared 
to obtain it at any cost. ‘Azim-ul-Umara wanted to ascertain the 
British attitude towards the dispute and to what length they would 
go in Nizam ‘Ali’s support. To this crucial question, Kirkpatrick 
evaded answer and urged the minister to expedite the deputation of 
Mir ‘Alam: “Unless he agreed to it and that readily, it would be 
hmself and not the Marathas that would be open to the suspicion of 
insincerity”. 55 

The Maratha-Nizam dispute centred round the personal rancour 
between Nana Phadnis and ‘Azim-ul-Umara. It is doubtful whether 
any rapproachement was possible unless the Nizam sacrificed his 
minister. Uhthoff, the acting Poona Resident, discussed the situa¬ 
tion in all its facets: ‘The Poona Court might, perhaps, be induced? 
to acquiesce in an accommodation, if His Highness would concede 
the two points of sacrificing ‘Azim-ul-Umara and commuting the cur¬ 
rent claims and those in arrear for the cession of a tract of coun¬ 
try”. 56 It must be remembered that Kirkpatrick was not disposed 
to see the humiliation of the Nizam at the cost of reconciliation be¬ 
tween the two ministers, but nevertheless he inveighed against ‘Azim- 
ul-Umara, whom he considered as the root of all troubles in Hydera¬ 
bad. He was, therefore, prepared to accept the disgrace of the 
minister, if it could lead to a happy solution of the dispute. He ob¬ 
served in this connection: 

“I am further ready to grant that if the sacrifice could be 

supposed to be in the end inevitable, it would be wiser in His 


44 3 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Highness to make it at once than after a struggle which would, 
in this case, only serve to rivet his chains still stronger. In fine, 
I heartily wish the appointment of a better minister than 4 Azim- 
ul-Umara”. 57 

In despair, the Nizam invoked the 6th article of the treaty of 
1768 in which it was declared that the friends and enemies of one 
of the contracting parties were to be deemed the friends and ene¬ 
mies of the other. Kirkpatrick brushed aside the stipulation of the 
treaty by quoting Cornwallis’ explanatory letter of 7 July, 1789, 
which forbade the employment of the Company’s forces against any 
power in alliance with the British. In any case, the British refused 
to be drawn in the dispute and Kirkpatrick blasted the illusory hope 
of the Hyderabad Government by denying any hope of British 
assistance. 

Towards the close of July 1794 Mir ‘Alam, accompanied by Rai 
Rayan arrived at Poona. But his powers were so circumscribed that 
he was not authorised to settle the Faisleh Kuleat or general politi¬ 
cal probleilis; he could only adjust minor details or juziat claims. 
The restriction of Mir ‘Alam’s powers was undoubtedly ‘Azim-ul- 
Umara’s creation who made the former’s task more delicate by em¬ 
ploying too many emissaries at Poona. Mir ‘Alam, Rai Rayan, 
Govind Bhagwant, Raghunath Rao—men of different characters re¬ 
presenting various shades of opinion—raised doubts about the practi¬ 
cability of any satisfactory solution. Malet could doubt the success 
of Mir Alam’s mission when he observed: “What good can be ex¬ 
pected from an assemblage that has not a single atom of concord in 
its whole composition?” 58 

It was only after wasting two precious months that Mir ‘Alam 
could begin negotiations when he had fulfilled the semblance of dip¬ 
lomatic etiquette as required by the Poona Darbar. He was given 
full latitude to prosecute the juziat negotiations; but as to the Kuleat, 
he was to seek previous permission of the Nizam. Negotiations be¬ 
gan in early October on the Adoni article. The Poona Darbar claim¬ 
ed from that district about 1,75,000 rupees which the Hyderabad 
Government was ill prepared to grant. The Bidar article met with a 
similar fate. The Nizam’s agents could not agree to the Poona Dar- 
bar’s demand of one-fourth of its revenue. Negotiations drifted to¬ 
wards a deadlock when proposals and counterproposals were sub¬ 
mitted by both parties with no signs of settlement. 

Meanwhile the armies of the Peshwd and the Nizam marched 
to advanced positions. Mir ‘Alam met the Peshwa and his ministers 


444 


MARATHAS AND THE SOUTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 

on 10 December and expressed the futility of conducting the nego 
tiations when military preparations were set afoot by both parties. 
The Poona Government assured Mir ‘Alam that it was prepared to 
maintain the status quo despite its military movements, provided 
similar assurance was given by Hyderabad. It is curious that the 
article in regard to the chauth of Bidar was settled at Hyderabad 
through the mediation of the Poona agent, Govind Rao Kale. 

Mir ‘Alam had to suffer disappointment in his fresh negotiations 
at Poona. The Poona Darbar refused to suspend its warlike prepara¬ 
tions by countermanding the march of forces from northern India 
as well as from Berar. Jivba Bakhshl’s troops on their way to the 
south laid waste the Nizam’s border territories in the Daulatabad 
region and Holkar’s forces also plundered Malkapur, another terri¬ 
tory of the Nizam. Though the Bidar article was settled at Hydera¬ 
bad, the Peshwd did not take any notice of it. The Poona Darbar 

m * 

continued negotiations with Mir ‘Alam on other points of dispute, 
e.g., Berar and Berar Balaghat. 

Meanwhile British relations with the Poona Government had 
been somewhat strained owing to the former’s feeble attempt at 
mediation in the Maratha-Nizam dispute. Shore, the British Govelnpr- 
General, decided to leave no stone unturned in removing the linger¬ 
ing misunderstanding by his unequivocal declaration. On 29 
December, 1794 he said: 

“Ignorant as we are of the true grounds of disagreement 
between the Peshwd and the Nizam and of the right of their 
respective claims, we could take no part with either, unless we 
were to exclude the consideration of justice and equity, and de¬ 
termine to interfere on the principle only of assisting the weak¬ 
est... . Having adopted a system of neutrality, our adherence 
to it has been strict and every appearance of partiality has been 
avoided”. 59 

Though the British neutrality seemed to be threatened by the 
reported move of a coalition between Tipu and the MarathSs to be 
directed against the Nizam, Shore was not in a mood to jeopardise 
British interests by risking a war in support of the Nizam. Shore 
knew too well the magnitude of the resources of the Marathas and 
the decrepit state of the Nizam’s administration, apart from the fatal 
result that would ensue to the British in carrying on war against the 
united forces of the Marathas and Tipu. To Shore the paramount 
object was to preserve inviolate the British dominion. He struck the 
key-note of British policy by observing: “We must attend to self- 


445 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

preservation including the permanency of the British possessions in 
India” 60 

In weighing motive for keeping the Company uninvolved in the 
Maratha-Nizam quarrel, Shore was guided by the strategic necessity 
of appeasing the Marathas at any cost. He understood that nothing 
decisive could be gained by the Nizam’s friendship as he was con¬ 
sidered to be the weakest among the Deccan powers. Shore enun¬ 
ciated the central theme of British policy: 

“The consolidation of our alliance with the Marathas is an 
object of the first importance to us. With their aid which we 
might expect we could always hold Tipu and any European 
power; from Tipu, we could never hope for assistance, or scar¬ 
cely neutrality”. 61 

All things conspired to the inevitable conflict between the 
Marathas and the Nizam. Nizam ‘Ali was the first to move with the 
hope of taking the Marathas at a marked disadvantage. Proceeding 
along the banks of the Manjra, he advanced from Bidar towards the 
Maratha frontier. The Marathas harnessed all their resources in 
their struggle with the Nizam. All the principal feudatories of the 
empire—TukojI Holkar with Dudrence’s forces, Sindia’s army under 
the command of Jivba Bakhshi, Perron, Devjl Gauli, Raghuji 
Bhosle, Ciovind Rao Gaikwad’s forces, Parashuram Bhau and Baba 
Phadke (son of Hari Pant)—congregated under the banner of the 
Peshwa. The great Southern jdglrdars belonging to the Brahmin 
families of Patwardhan and Haste, the Pratinidhi, the Pant Sachw, 
the Mankaris—Nimbalkar, Ghatge, Pawar, Thorat with many others 
of less eminence, swelled the Maratha ranks. 

The Nizam’s army numbering about 110,000 men encamped on 
the river Khar below the Mohri Ghat, about 2 miles from Kharda. 
The Maratha army under the command of Parashuram Bhau mainly 
occupied the bank of the Sina river. After initial skirmishes last¬ 
ing for two or three days, the final battle took place on 11 March, 
1795. Finding his position precarious, the Nizam began to move in 
the direction of Parenda, situated 26 miles south of Kharda. The 
unwisdom of the Nizam’s action now became plain. Severe fighting 
ensued and Sindia’s forces forced back the Nizam’s troops. The 
Nizam took shelter in the small fort of Kharda during the night. 
The Marathas at once invested the fort. There were no provisions 
in the fort and no water, and the Nizam realised the futility of re¬ 
sistance and requested for a cessation of hostilities. 613 


446 


MARATHAS AND THE SOUTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 


The cease-fire took place on 13 March, 1795, but the final treaty 
was not concluded till 10 April. The Nizam employed the inter¬ 
vening period in averting the disgrace of his minister, ‘Azlm-ul- 
Umara. But the Maratha attitude was explained by the emphatic 
repudiation of this idea. In vain did the Nizam employ various 
persons—Tahawar Jang, Rao Rambha—to postpone the dishonour of 
dismissal of his favourite. Since the Marathas would not be coaxed, 
‘Azim-ul-Umara tried to ingratiate himself with Nana by sending 
him his own Diwan Neem Want. The agent made tempting offers— 
two crores and a half and territories worth 8 lakhs in annual value— 
to Nana on condition of ‘Azim-ul-Umara’s retaining the lever of 
Nizam’s administration. Nana Phadnis, in the temper with which he 
glowed, fired back: “That even should he agree to pay one hundred 
crores and surrender all his master’s territory his being permitted 
to remain in the management thereof was inadmissible”. 62 When 
‘Azim-ul-Umara felt that nothing on earth would change the irrevo¬ 
cable decision of Nana, he arrived in the Maratha camp on 27 March 
and was received by Nana. “Thus has ended,” as Kirkpatrick right¬ 
ly said, “and not less ingloriously for the Nizam than miserably for 
himself, the administration of ‘Azim-ul-Umara’’. 63 Mir ‘Alam, stung 
by the fall of ‘Azim-ul-Umara, was scornful of the British policy of 
non-intervention in the dispute. 

‘Azim-ul-Umara’s surrender removed the main cause of dead¬ 
lock between the Marathas and the Nizam. A treaty was concluded 
on 10 April on the following terms: 

(1) Territories yielding an annual revenue of about 32 lakhs of 
rupees in the quarter of Daulatabad and Parenda, including 
the fort of Daulatabad, were to be ceded tn the Peshwd. 

(2) Nana Phadnis and other ministers were to receive terri¬ 
tories yielding an annual revenue of about two and half 
lakhs of rupees. 

(3) Raghuji Bhosle was also to be given some territorial con¬ 
cession. 

(4) An indemnity of one crore and another crore for accumu¬ 
lated arrears of tribute were to be paid to the Peshwd. 

(5) About a crore of rupees was to be given to Daulatrao Sindia 
and Raghuji Bhosle, including the darbar charges. 

(6) A time limit of three years was fixed for all these pecuniary 
payments. 


447 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


(7) Maratha-Nizam relations with Tipu were to be regulated 
according to the treaties of Poona, Pangal and Seringa- 
patam. 633 

The Nizam had no intention to execute the terms of the treaty. 
He begged to be excused on account of a domestic trouble in which 
he was involved owing to the rebellion of his son ‘Ali Jah. The 
Marathas retaliated by forcibly occupying the fortress of Daulata- 
bad. Govind Rao Kale gave a good account of Nizam ‘Ali’s pusilla¬ 
nimous conduct after the conclusion of the treaty: 

“Nizam Ali has set his heart upon getting out of these harsh 
conditions. He is not inclined to fulfil the terms. Honesty, pro¬ 
mise, pledge have no value with him, steeped as he is in crafty 
devilry. On his return from Kharda his look changed. He says 
lie must meet the Peshwa personally before he can execute the 
treaty-. He goes on delaying these matters. His son’s rebellion 
has added to his troubles”. 64 

The Nizam did not rest satisfied submissively. He was reported 
to have started secret negotiations with Tipu Sultan. He dismissed 
the British battalions and augmented the corps of the French adven¬ 
turer, Monsieur Raymond. 

Reports soon gained credence that the Nizam might seek assist¬ 
ance from the French. But all his subtle calculations went awry 
with the outbreak of ‘Ali Jah’s rebellion. Once more the Nizam 
sought the military assistance of the English and the latter were 
ready to give it. ‘Ali Jah was captured but he took away his own 
life. 

The battle of Kharda seemed to ruin the semblance of Nizam’s 
independence. Its immediate consequence to the Marathas was also 
not a little flattering. Nana Phadnis was now at the zenith of power, 
thanks to the energy and political sagacity which he had exhibited 
against the Nizam. The British attributed the formidable state of 
the Maratha Empire in 1795 to Nana’s great statesmanship, critical 
comprehension and measurement of all the forces at work. Grant 
Duff was not partial when he wrote: 

“Naha Furnuwees was now at the summit of prosperity; 
without the intervention of a foreign power he had obtained 
every object of his ambition. Daulat Rao Sindhia was favour¬ 
ably disposed towards him. Tookajee Holkar had become im¬ 
becile, both in mind and body, and his officers were subservient 


448 


MAKATHAS AND THE SOUTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 

to Nana. Rughoojee Bhonslay was completely secured in his 
interests, and the Brahmin Jagheerdars were of his party”. 65 

The short but dramatic period which engulfed Poona affairs 
after the death of Sawai Madhav Rao enabled the Nizam to defy the 
harsh stipulations of the treaty of Kharda. From his sanctuary at 
Mahad, Nana arranged through Govind Rao Kale a secret treaty with 
the Nizam. By this contract which was signed on 7 October, 1796, 
all the territories ceded to the Peshwd by the Convention of Kharda 
were to be restored and the balance of the tribute remitted, on con¬ 
dition that Nizam ‘Ali supported Nana in installing Baji Rao in the 
Peshwaship. The treaty was made subject to ratification by Baji Rao 
v/hen he becatne the Peshwd. Thus, owing to fluctuating, fortunes 
in the politics of Poona, the ruler of Hyderabad was saved from be¬ 
ing overwhelmed by Maratha encroachments. 

The Nizam could save himself from Maratha thraldom thanks 
to fortuitous circumstances, but he could not stand against the irre¬ 
sistible pressure of the Company. Immediately on his arrival Welles¬ 
ley bound the Nizam with the subsidiary alliance on 1 September, 
1798, and substituted his French force with that of the British. 
Dundas congratulated Mornington in the following words: 

“I have long felt unhappy from the circumstances of the 
French force in the service of the Nizam. ... Your treaty with 
the Nizam effectually puts an end to every alarm upon that part 
of the business, and whether you consider it negatively as re¬ 
moving the French force from our neighbourhood, or positively 
in respect of the additional strength it affords to ourselves and 
the aid it gives to our finances, it is a transaction which tells in 
our favour in a variety of ways and was well worth accomplish¬ 
ing at any risk, even if the Mahratta powers had been dissatis¬ 
fied with it”. 66 

Thus the Maratha relations with the South Indian States have 
a melancholy interest for the historian. It was an irony of history 
that the anti-British confederacy organised in 1780 among the Indian 
powers— Peshwd, Bhosle, Nizam and Haidar—could not be re¬ 
peated in the following years. Ignoring this make-shift coalition, 
the Peshwd signed the treaty of Salbai in complete disregard of 
Haidar ‘Ali. Mahadji Sindia went a step further by concluding a 
new treaty (October 1783) with the English to enforce the treaty 
of Salbai on Tipu. The way by which Cornwallis enmeshed the 
Peshwd in the cobweb of British alliance against Tipu in 1790 re¬ 
flects the bankruptcy of Maratha diplomacy. The Nizam in his blind 

449 

M.SL—29 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


rage for the Marathas entered into the Company’s fold in the same 
year against Tipu, although he had been divested by the Company 
of the Guntur Sarkar in 1788. 

For the last time the Marathas presented a solid front when 
they met the Nizam in 1795 in the battle-field of Kharda. It was the 
last flicker of Maratha unity. Harsh fate was to envelop them in 
no time when they relapsed into petty squabbles and moral degene¬ 
racy in total ignorance of nascent British imperialism that was un¬ 
folding itself in a devious way. Maratha resentment against Tipu in 
1790 and the Nizam in 1795 was a sad testimony of their inability 
of comprehending the seamy side of British diplomacy. With the 
death of Tipu in 1799 and the defeat of the Marathas in the first de¬ 
cade of the nineteenth century, the South Indian politics pivoted 
round the unassailable sway of the Company. 


NOTES 

1. Sinha, N. K., Haidar Ali (1949), p. 47. 

2. Gense and Banaji, The Third English Embassy to Poona, p. 321. 

2a. Grant Duff, History of the Mdhruttas (1921 ed.), Vol. II, p. 13. 

3- Sinha, N. K., op. cit., p. 118- 

4. Calendar of Persian Correspondence, Vol. V, letter No. 1416. 

5. Sardesai, G. S., Mardthi Riyasat, (Uttar Vibhag), I, pp. 216-17. 

6. For. Dept. Sec. Cons., 3 June, 1782, No. I. 

7 • British Museum, Add. MSS., No. 29, 149—Sullivan to Hastings, 2 June, 1781. 

8. For. Dept. Sec. Cons., 14 November, 1783, No. 32. 

9. Duff, Grant, History of the Mahrdttds, II (1921), p. 154. 

10. Ibid, p. 157, also P.R.C. IV, pp. 315-18. 

11. For. Dept. Sec. Cons., 24 August, 1785, No. 35. 

12. Ibid, 14 February, 1786, No. 3. 

13. Ibid, 27 September, 1786, No. 11. 

13a. P.R.C , II, pp. 75-78. 

14. Khare, Aitihasik Lekha Sangraha , VIII, Letter No. 2966. 

15. Ibid, Letter No. 2975. 

16. Hadiqat-ul-Alam, pp. 377-78. 

17. For. Dept. Sec. Cons., 24 April, 1786, No. 29. 

18. Hadiqat-ul-Alam, p. 385. 

19. Thakur, V. V. (Ed. by), Holkarshahichya Itihasachi Sadhane. Vol. I, pt. II 
Letter No. 180. 

20. For. Dept. Sec. Cons., 20 February, 1787, No. 20 & Malets report at pp. 80-81 
of P R C., U. 

21. Khare, op. cit., VIII, Letter No. 3071. 

22. For. Dept. Sec. Cons., 13 April, 1787, No. 2. 

23. Ibid, 20 June, 1787, No. 4 , P R C., H, pp. 104-5. 

24. Wilks, M., History of Mysore, Vol. II (1932), pp. 308-09. 

25. For. Dept. Sec. Cons., 2 May, 1787, No. 16. 

26. Melville Papers, No. 3385; National Library of Scotland, Edinburgh. 

27. For. Dept. Sec. Cons., 14 December, 1787, No. 8. 

28. Melville Papers, Dundas to Cornwallis, 13 July, 1788; No. 3387; National 
Library of Scotland, Edinburgh. 

29. For. Dept. Sec. Procgs., 7 July, 1790, No. 3 and Grant Duff, History of the 
Mahrattas, Vol. II, p. 196. 

30. Cornwallis to Pitt, 15 April, 1790; Chatham Papers, Public Record Office No 
30/8/125. 

31. For. Dept. Pol. Cons., 27 October, 1790, No. 5. 

32. Khare, op. cit., VIII, letter No. 3239. 


450 


MARATHAS AND THE SOUTH INDIAN STATES (1772-1799) 

33. Moor, Edward, Narrative of the Operations of Copt, Little’s Detachment and 
of the Mahratta army commanded by Purseram Bhow (1794), p. 30.. 

34. For. Dept. Pol. Cons., 30 March, 1791, No. 19. 

35. Ross, C., Correspondence of Cornwallis, Vol. II (1859), p. 50. 

36- For. Dept. Pol. Cons., 4 February, 1791, No. 5. 

37. -Duff, Grant, op. cit., Vol. H (1921), p. 202. 

38. For. Dept. Pol. Cons., 1 June, 1791, No. 77. 

39. Dirom, Major, A Narrative of the Campaign in India which terminated the 
War with Tipoo Sultan in 1792 (1794), pp. 9-10. Also, P R C ., IH, 325-27. 

40. Moor, Edward, op. cit., p. 129. 

41. Ibid, p. 141. 

42. For. Dept. Pol. Cons., 3 February, 1792, No. 6. 

43. Duff, Grant, op. cit., VoL II, p. 210. 

44. Khare, op. cit., IX, Letter No. 3414. 

45- Chatham Papers , Public Record Office, 30/8/125. 

46. P.R.C., Vol. Ill, No. 434; also Khare, op. cit., IX, Letter No. 3414. 

47. Chatham Papers , Public Record Office, 30/8/362; also P.R.G., Vol. HI, 442. 

48. Melville Papers, No. 3387, National Library of Scotland, Edinburgh. 

49 Sardesai, G. S., New History of the Mar&thas, Vol HI, p. 192, citing Itihas San • 
graha, Ait. Kirkol Prakarane , Part n. 

50- Khare, op. cit., IX, No. 3420. 

51. Wellesley to Palmer, 19 February, 1799; British M!useum, Add. MSS., No. 13, 
596 

52. Quoted by Sardesai in New History of the Mar&th&s , HI (1948), p. 354. 

53. British Museum, Add. MSS., No. 13, 583; P.R.C., Vol. IV, No. 68. 

54. Kirkpatrick to Shore, 1 May, 1794; For. Dept. Pol. Cons., 19 May, 1794, No. 3. 
55 For. Dept. PoL Cons., 23 June, 1794, No- 1. 

56- J. Uhthoff to Kirkpatrick, 9 June, 1794; P.R.C., Vol. IV, No. 72, 

57- Kirkpatrick to Uhthoff, 29 June, 1794; For, Dept. Pol. Cons., 25 July, 1794, 
No. 19. 

58- Malet to Kirkpatrick, 9 September, 1794; P R C., IV, No. 107. 

59- For. Dept. Pol. Cons., 29 December, 1794, No. 2. 

60 Ibid, 20 February, 1795, No. 25. 

31. Ibid. 

61a. For details of the battle of Kharda see P R C., IV, pp. 238-49. 

62. For. Dept. Pol. Cons., 17 April, 1795, No. 13. 

63. Kirkpatrick to Shore, 28 March, 1795, P.R.C., IV, No. 200, p. 265. 

63a. P R C., IV, pp. 307-13. 

64. Quoted in Sardesai's New History of the Mar&thds, HI (1948), p. 308. 

65. Duff, Grant, op. cit., Vol. n (1921), p. 250. 

66. Dundas to Momington, 18 March, 1799; B. M. Add. MSS., No. 13, 459. 


451 


CHAPTER XIII 


MYSORE: HAIDAR ‘All AND TIPO SULTAN 

The State of Mysore, situated at the junction of the Eastern and 
Western Ghats, was ruled over by the Wodiyar dynasty from the 
fourteenth century. Between 1731-34 the Government of Mysore 
was usurped by two brothers-—DevrSj and Nanjaraj, who left to the 
King Chik Krishnaraj only the exterior appendages of royalty. 
Devraj was the D&lwtii or Commander-in-Chief and Nanjaraj was 
the Sccrvddhikari or Controller of revenue and finance. But from 
1746, Devraj, grown old, allowed his brother to lead distant expedi¬ 
tions, himself taking charge temporarily, during his absence, of re¬ 
venue and finance. 

In the service of Nanjaraj there was a young volunteer horse¬ 
man named Haidar, serving in a detachment led by his own brother 
Shahbaz. In 1749, he caught the eye of Nanjaraj in a shooting com¬ 
petition at Devanhalli, was promoted to the command of 50 horse and 
200 peons. Between 1750-60 Haidar, known in the early days of his 
military career as Haidar Naik, came steadily into prominence and 
rose from prominence to power. Circumstances were favourable. 
Peshwd BalajI BajI Rao began to pursue a policy of southward ex¬ 
pansion, without abandoning his forward policy in the north. 
Mysore was invaded by the Marathas in 1753, 1754, 1757 and 1759. 
Nizam-ul-Mulk regarded Mysore as Mughul territory and his succes¬ 
sors also considered that Mysore was a part of their territorial 
legacy. Thus Mysore was drawn within the circle of the conflict 
between the Peshwd and the Nizam. To add to the complications, 
Nanjaraj conceived the project of seizing Trichinopoly with its de¬ 
pendencies by taking part in the struggle between the French and 
the English in what is known as the Second Karnatak war. Muham¬ 
mad ‘Ali offered him this bait and he eagerly swallowed it. From 
February to December, 1752, the Mysoreans and the British fought 
as allies against the French at Trichinopoly. But later Nanjaraj 
changed sides and through 1753 and 1754 he was the ally of Dupleix 
as against Muhammad ‘Ali, backed by the English. The Mysorean 
had to become the ally of the French when he found that Muhammad 
‘Ali would not hand over Trichinopoly to him and the British asso¬ 
ciated themselves with this “Fraud of Trichinopoly”. Nanjaraj was 
recalled by Devraj in April, 1755 to meet an invasion of Mysore by 

452 


MYSORE — HAIDAR ‘All AND TIP# SULTAN 


Salabat Jang, guided by Bussy. The heavy expenses estimated at 
3 to 4 crores incurred in the Trichinopoly venture, the drafts twice 
made by the Marathas, a sum of 56 lakhs that had to be paid to Sala¬ 
bat Jang—all combined to make the very solvent Mysore State of 
1752 almost bankrupt in 1755. 1 The Government was unable to pay 
its soldiery and defray its expenses. Thus were created those con¬ 
ditions that brought about the subversion of the existing authority. 

Haidar was with Nanjaraj throughout the Trichinopoly campaign. 
There Haidar was not merely conspicuous for his intrepidity and 
daring, but was also successful in securing rapid promotion, as also 
a considerable share of plunder. Towards the end of his stay there, 
he was officially at the head of 1,500 horse, 3,000 regular infantry 
and 4 guns. He was now appointed as the jaujddr of Dindigul, a 
rock fort belonging to Mysore, 65 miles south-east of Trichinopoly. 2 
It is relevant to note that at Trichinopoly Haidar learnt his lessons 
in the art of war. He was an eye-witness of the attacks and counter¬ 
attacks of Clive and Lawrence as also their French opponents. 
Ambitious, able to take advantage of his opportunities, he learnt what 
the art of war meant , in those days in the western sense of drill, dis¬ 
cipline, attack and defence. 

While he was consolidating his position at Dindigul during the 
years 1755-57 Devraj and Nanjaraj quarrelled and Devraj withdrew 
from Mysore to Satyamangaiam, leaving Nanjaraj as the undisputed 
usurper. But Nanjaraj could find no opportunity of consolidating his 
position. The Marathas again invaded in 1757 and Nanjaraj agreed 
to pay them 32 lakhs, but could pay only six, and for the payment of 
the balance handed over fifteen taluks as security. Shortly after 
this, Haidar came to Mysore and advised Nanjaraj to expel the Maria- 
tha garrisons from those taluks on the approach of the rains. Nanja- 
.raj acted according to this advice and this made inevitable another 
Maratha invasion of Mysore. When the Marathia army came in 1758, 
as the Mysore troops were still in arrears, none of the old veterans 
agreed to take command of the army; Haidar took personal respon¬ 
sibility for arrears and was placed in charge of the field army. He 
somehow held his own, remained on the defensive, hoping thereby 
to wear the Marathas out. The Marathas agreed to withdraw if they 
were paid thirty-two lakhs. Half of this was paid by raising forced 
contributions. For the remainder, Haidar gave his personal security 
and he took the thirteen ceded districts under his control. His next 
step was to oust Nanjaraj. This he managed very adroitly with the 
assistance of his Diiv&n Khande Rao who had won over the nominal 
King in the interest of Haidar. Deserted by the soldiers at whose 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


head he now found Haidar, Nanjaraj decided to retire. He was given 
a jacfir and he promised to withdraw to Coonoor; but on the way he 
entrenched himself at Mysore. He failed, however, to maintain his 
position because the Portuguese Officer commanding his white troops 
proved to be a traitor. He had to capitulate and withdraw to Coo¬ 
noor. The King now found that he had only exchanged one master 
for another. Haidar had now in his direct possession more than half 
of the kingdom and the King discovered that under the new dictator 
he continued to be a figure-head as he had been in the previous re¬ 
gimes of Nanjaraj and Devraj. 3 

As the de facto ruler in Mysore Haidar had. now to consolidate 
his authority. But in the meantime the Court party in league with 
Khande Rao came to an understanding with the Maratha Chief 
Visaji Krishna and tried to launch a concerted attack on Haidar. 
On 12 August, 1760, a cannonade was opened from the ramparts 
of the fort of Seringapatam on Haidar’s residence near the modern 
Darya Daulat Bagh. Haidar was taken by surprise. The Marathas 
could not arrive in time. Haidar ran away leaving his family at 
Seringapatam. 4 He reached Bangalore. His brother-in-law, Makh- 
dum ‘Ali, had been sent to help the French at Pondicherry in the 
Third Karnafcak war. He was not asked to return. But the Mara¬ 
thas defeated him on his way back at Anekal. A relieving force sent 
by Haidar ‘Ali from Bangalore to his aid was also defeated. Haidar’s 
career appeared to be approaching its close when suddenly the Mara¬ 
thas expressed their willingness to withdraw on his paying 51 lakhs 
and ceding Baramahal. Visaji Krishna had to withdraw because of 
the serious aspect of Maratha affairs in the north which culminated 
later in the disastrous Maratha defeat at Panipat. 5 When Haidar 
heard about it, he refused to hand over the Baramahal districts. 
Khande Rao, left alone, was unable to cope with the wily Haidar, 
who had even induced Nanjaraj to join him and bless his cause. 
When Haidar besieged Seringapatam, the King made an abject sur¬ 
render and handed over Khande Rao. Nanjaraj was sent back to 
Coonoor to fade into complete obscurity. Khande Rao was kept 
a prisoner in a cage in which he languished for a year and 
died. 6 Haidar could now feel that he was safely established in 
Mysore. 

Between 1761-63 Haidar succeeded in conquering Hoskote, Dod 
Ballapur and Sera with its dependencies. The Poligar of Chik Balla- 
pur exasperated Haidar by his, tough resistance and was despatched 
as a prisoner to Bangalore 7 while the Poligar of Raidurg for his will¬ 
ing submission was generously treated. Haidar next took up the 


454 


MYSORE — HAIDAR ‘ALI AND TIPtr SULTAN 

cause of Chen Basavaiya, who was believed to be the fugitive boy- 
king of Bednur, adopted son of the deceased Bednur Chief Basa- 
vappa Nayak. The queen of Bednur could offer but feeble resist¬ 
ance. After the conquest of Bednur was completed in the name of 
the boy-king, Haidar declared him an impostor and threw him into 
prison. 8 According to Wilks the loot of Bednur alone brought Haidar 
12 million sterling. Haidar next conquered Sonda, the king of Sonda, 
Savai Immadi Sadasiv, flying to the Portuguese for protection and 
surrendering to them his territory below the Ghats in return for an 
asylum and a stipend. 9 

Haidar had now to reckon with the Marathas with whom he had 
to fight at very frequent intervals from 1764-1779. He was unable 
to cope with Peshwd Madhav Rao and it was only the prema¬ 
ture death of that great ruler that saved Haidar from annihilation. 
Haidar's recent conquests, his plan to extend his frontier up to the 
Tungabhadra and even beyond, brought him into collision with the 
Maratha power, recovering from the stunning blow of Panipat, under 
the wise guidance of Madhav Rao. Haidar ‘Ali was defeated in an 
engagement at Ratehalli, 70 miles south-east of Dharwar on 3 
May, 1764. He had to fall back to an entrenched fort at Anavatty. 
But here too, he found his position untenable and suffered a com¬ 
plete defeat. The Peshwd made a triumphant march towards Bed¬ 
nur. At this stage, Raghunath Rao, uncle of the Peshwd , thought it 
necessary to intervene and a treaty was concluded by which Haidar 
paid 28 lakhs as tribute and restored all the territory of Murar Rao 
of Gooty beyond the Tungabhadra as also the territory of the Nawab 
of Savanur between the Krishna and the Tungabhadra, because 
these two chieftains were in Maratha interest. 93 The Peshwd mar¬ 
ched against Haidar again in November, 1766. He succeeded in per¬ 
suading the Nizam, Nizam ‘Ali, to join him in a scheme of offensive* 
alliance against Haidar. But Nizam ‘Ali soon after concluded an 
alliance with the British and he hoped to dictate in any scheme of 
the partition of Haidar’s territory. But this at once made Madhav 
Rao determine to act on his own. He marched very quickly, realiz¬ 
ing tribute from most of those places south of the Tungabhadra that 
had recently submitted to Haidar. Haidar sued for peace. He agreed 
to pay a tribute of 33 lakhs to the Peshwd and got back most of his 
territory including Sera, Chik Ballapur and Kolar, but the Marathas 
retained Dod Ballapur, Hoskote and some other places. Nizam ‘All 
was outwitted and Peshwd Madhav Rao without waiting for his ally 
went away. Nizam ‘Ali thought it proper to come to terms of accom¬ 
modation with Haidar. 


455 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Madhav Rao invaded again in 1769. Haidar’s persistent and 
systematic encroachment on the Maratha sphere of influence could 
only be countered by a relentless offensive against him. Haidar had 
even compelled Savanur and Gooty to pay him tribute. The cam¬ 
paign of 1769-70 kept Haidar on the defensive. But the Peshwa be¬ 
came so ill that he could not lead the campaign of 1770-71. Trim- 
bak Rao, who was left in command, defeated Haidar completely in 
the battle of Chinkurli or Moti Talao on 5 March, 1771, almost 
within the sight of Seringapatam. Haidar lost his entire equip¬ 
ment, his store and all his artillery. He and his son Tipu narrowly 
escaped being taken prisoners. But so tough and stubborn was 
Haidar that this defeat Was not followed by a collapse of his military 
power. The Marathas were so much intent upon plunder that they 
let ten precious days pass before they laid siege to Seringapatam. 
After besieging Seringapatam in vain for a month and ten days, 
Trimbak Rao withdrew to Bellur, in view of approaching rains. He 
began campaigning again in September, 1771, but the Peshwa’s con¬ 
dition worsened and the campaign had to be abandoned. The Mara¬ 
thas retained Sera, Hoskote, Dod Ballapur, Kolar and Gurrumkonda 
and gave up the rest. 10 Haidar promised to pay sixty lakhs. Dur¬ 
ing the prolonged campaign of the Marathas Haidar was expecting 
British aid because he had concluded a defensive alliance with them. 
The British did not come to his aid and this partly explains the 
strong anti-British turn which Mysore foreign policy took later. 

Fortunately for Haidar Peshw id Madhav Rao died in November, 
1772, and the chaos that now began in Maratha affairs, helped Haidar 
‘Ali not merely to regain his lest ground but also to conquer and con¬ 
solidate his sway up to the Tungabhadra, and extend his conquests 
up to the Krishna. He took the fullest advantage of the chaos and 
confusion in Maharashtra caused by the murder of Narayan Rao, op¬ 
position to the regime of Raghunath Rao and the resultant civil war. 
Haidar recognised Raghunath Rao as the Peshwa and agreed to 
pay him an annual tribute of 6 lakhs. The territory conquered by 
Madhav Rao in his three expeditions was ceded to Haidar. Between 
February 1774 and April 1776, Haidar not only recovered all that 
Peshwa Madhav Rao had taken but also annexed Bellary, Cuddapah, 
Gooty and Kurnool. He also annexed Coorg in 1780. With the fall 
of Gooty Haidar got under his control all that was included within 
the Maratha sphere of influence south of the Tungabhadra. The 
Poona Ministry learnt to their dismay that Haidar began* in 1776 to 
conquer Maratha territory between the Krishna and the Tunga¬ 
bhadra. They could not, however, organise an expedition before 


456 


MYSORE — HAIDAR ‘AU AND TIPD SULTAN 


1777. Hari Pant was commissioned to oust Haidar from Maratha 
territory in concert with Nizam’s general Ibrahim Khan Dhausa. 
But the troops of Hari Pant were in arrears, Dhausa was lukewarm, 
the emissaries of Haidar were at work and nothing very effective 
could be done during the year 1777-78. In the meantime, at Poona 
Nana Phadnis, who seemed temporarily to be eclipsed by his cousin 
Moroba, resumed his former power. Haidar took advantage of these 
complications in Maratha affairs to seize all the important places in 
the Krishna-Tungabhadra Doab. In view of the British supporting 
the cause of Raghoba which resulted in the first Anglo-Maratha War, 
Nana was on the look out for allies, and that great Maratha states¬ 
man had to recognise all these acts of aggression in order that he 
might enlist the support of the Mysoreans against the British. 11 

Haidar’s relations with the British prior to the outbreak of the 
second Anglo-Mysore war are best studied separately. It would be 
a mistake to think that Haidar was anti-British from the very be¬ 
ginning of his career. No doubt Haidar gave the French some help 
in the Third Anglo-French War but that was because the French 
supported him in his usurpation and promised him valuable terri¬ 
torial cession in case of a favourable termination of their conflict. 
At the time of the Khande Rao impasse the British carried on some 
negotiations with the king of Mysore, no doubt with the object of 
temporizing at the end, but this left a trace of bitterness behind. 
French influence in Haidar’s Court began to increase and French 
officers like Chevalier Du Mouhy, De La 1 Tour and others joined him. 
Haidar gave shelter to Mahfuz Khan, the elder brother and neces¬ 
sarily an enemy of Muhammad ‘Ali, Nawab of Arcot. He also enter¬ 
tained in his service Raza Saheb, son of Chanda Saheb, Muhammad 
‘Ali’s mortal enemy. There were also territorial disputes between 
Arcot and Mysore. But all this would not possibly have led to open 
war between the British in Madras and Haidar ‘Ali in *1767 if the 
British had not made the mistake of concluding a treaty with Nizam 
‘Ali in 1766 artd helping him with a detachment of their troops in 
his operations against Haidar. It is relevant to note that in 
May, 1766, Haidar had offered to the British a defensive alli¬ 
ance against the Marathas and the Nizam. His exasperation 
naturally knew no bounds when he found the Nizam backed by the 
British engaged in operations against him in apparent concert with 
the Marathas. 12 He concluded a separate treaty with the Marathas, 
won the Nizam over and persuaded him to join an offensive alliance 
against the British and Muhammad ‘Ali. Together they carried the 
war into the territory of the Nawab of Arcot. 


457 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


In the first battle of the war, Colonel Smith won a nominal 
victory over Haidar ‘Ali and Nizam ‘Ali at Changama. It was on 
the whole a very indecisive affair. Strong in cavalry, the confede¬ 
rates had no difficulty in getting into Karnatak. The next engage¬ 
ment was at Trinomali, where also the confederates were defeated. 
Thereupon Nizam ‘Ali withdrew from the conflict. But Haidar ‘Ali 
continued to maintain his offensive. There were engagements at 
Vaniambadi (December, 1767), at Mulbagal (4 October, 1768), at 
Ariyalur (22 November, 1768). Haidar was not successful in any 
of these, but neither was he worsted. He was unable to cope with 
Col. Smith but he was more than able to hold his own against other 
commanders like Wood aifd Lang. His cavalry gave him greater 
mobility and he made excellent use of rapidity of movement in the 
closing stages of the war. Having successfully screened his move¬ 
ments from the British field army, he appeared before the gates of 
Madras. The panick-stricken Madras Government was induced to 
sign a treaty on 4 April, 1769, that provided for mutual restitution 
of conquests and a defensive alliance. The Court of Directors later 
remarked that the Company’s interest and influence suffered much 
diminution and discredit as a consequence of this war and the treaty 
that ended it. 13 

This defensive alliance with the Madras Government was re¬ 
garded by Haidar as the sheet-anchor of his foreign policy. But in 
January, 1770, when the Marathas invaded his territory, the British 
would not go to his help. He solicited the assistance of the Com¬ 
pany again and again. In the twenty-fourth month of this long pro¬ 
tracted war, the Madras Government at last asked him what money 
and provisions he could provide if they were to assist him and they 
informed him sometime afterwards that the Home Government had 
forbidden any assistance. Besides this infringement of the treaty 
of 1769, there were other sins of omission and commission that ulti¬ 
mately made Haidar ‘Ali conclude that it would be a mistake to de¬ 
pend upon British friendship. The British would not supply him 
guns, saltpetre, lead and such other things that he required, but the 
French from the port of Mahe supplied him liberally. He repeated¬ 
ly attempted to renew the violated conditions of the Treaty of 1769 
but met with prevarication on the part of Muhammad ‘Ali. Be¬ 
tween 1775-79 many events happened that stiffened Haidar’s atti¬ 
tude. When war began between England and France,, the British 
led an expedition against the French possession of Mahe which fell 
on 19 March, 1779. Haidar’s vakil had earlier protested that his 


458 


MYSORE — HAIDAR ‘ALI AND TIPD SULTAN 


master regarded all trading settlements on the Malabar Coast as 
under his protection. Haidar’s troops actually assisted in the de¬ 
fence of Mahe and his flag had been hoisted over it. The Madras 
Government had also foolishly assured Basalat Jang of Adoni, a 
brother of Nizam ‘Ali, unconditional defence of the place. They 
even advanced detachments to his place through the territory of 
Haidar ‘Ali and Nizam ‘Ali. This aroused the antagonism of both. 
Basalat yielded to their joint pressure and the march of the British 
detachment had to be countermanded. Besides these episodes there 
were boundary disputes. In July 1780 Haidar launched his war 
flooding the Karnatak with immense armies. Their activities have 
been described by Burke in his famous speech indicting Warren 
Hastings. “A storm of universal fire blasted every field, consumed 
every house, destroyed every* temple. The miserable inhabitants 
fleeing from their flaming villages were either slaughtered or swept 
into captivity.” An English brigade under Baillie was surrounded 
and cut up. Munro, the victor of Buxar, smirched his reputation 
by abandoning his artillery and retreating in panic to Madras. How¬ 
ever, on 1 July, 1781, a very important battle was fought at 
Porto Novo which Coote won by consummate generalship. Coote 
turned Haidar’s entrenched position, forced him in the open field, 
and against odds, made the best possible use of the echelon forma¬ 
tion. It was a great tactical victory for the British, but it had no 
important strategic effects. In 1781, Coote defeated Haidar on two 
other occasions in the second battle of Pollilore (27 September) as 
also at Solingar (27 October). These two defeats in succession gave 
a great shock to Haidar’s prestige. Vellore, besieged by Haidar, was 
relieved by Coote and this closed the campaign of 1781. But early in 
1782, a disaster befell the British. Col. Braithwaite, while encamped 
with a detachment of the British army south of the Coleroon, was sur¬ 
prised and cut down by an army led by Tipu. Braithwaite was taken 
prisoner. Admiral Suffren, one of the best seamen that France ever 
produced, arrived off Pulicat on 15 February at the head of 12 
ships. Five naval engagements took place between Admiral Suffren 
and Admiral Hughes, without any decisive result. But Suffren suc¬ 
ceeded in seizing Trincomali in Ceylon which, as a base for French 
maritime operations, was immensely superior to distant Mauritius. 
Haidar’s heart was growing sick and his trust in the French was eva¬ 
porating. He was, however, reassured by this brilliant French ad¬ 
miral that Bussy would soon arrive with reinforcements. But Bussy 
did not actually arrive until after Haidar’s death. The most impor¬ 
tant action in the campaign of 1782 was that of Ami, which in the 
words of Fortescue, “produced no result beyond the heightening of 


459 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Coote’s reputation in the eyes of Haidar”. Haidar had also to detach 
Tipu with reinforcements to Malabar where the British were trying 
to create a diversion by sending a detachment under Humberston 
and McLeod. But on 7 December, Haidar died and Tipu had to 
hasten back to join the main army. He was quietly proclaimed and 
his succession was accepted without any opposition. Brigadier-Gene¬ 
ral James Stuart, who had now succeeded Sir Eyre Coote as the 
British Commander-in-Chief on his death in April 1783, failed to 
take advantage of the consternation in Mysore caused by the 
rumours of the death of Haidar and the possibility of a disputed suc¬ 
cession. 

On 28 June, news arrived that peace had been concluded 
between the English and the French in Europe. The British were 
now free to deal with Tipu. General Matthews, Commander-in- 
Chief of the Bombay Presidency, was leading the British army in 
Malabar. He was asked to abandon operations on the coast and 
push on to Bednur. This he did successfully and took Bednur. On 
the western coast Mangalore was also taken by the British. But 
Tipu now advanced with his full force, invested Bednur and com¬ 
pelled the British to capitulate. It is said that safe conduct was pro¬ 
mised to the British but Tipu violated the terms. Almost all the 
conquests of Matthews were retaken by Tipu, and Mangalore alone 
held out. Tipu besieged Mangalore and the siege lasted from 
20 May, 1783 to 30 January, 1784. Campbell, who defended the 
place capitulated on condition that the English garrison should be 
transported to Tellicherry. The terms were faithfully observed. 
Negotiations had already been begun by Macartney, Governor of 
Madras. Tipu at last agreed to make peace. There was to be a 
mutual restitution of conquests. The prisoners were to be restored. 
The Treaty was signed on 11 March, 1784. 

After the conclusion of the Treaty of Mangalore, it might have 
been expected that Tipu would remain quiet for sometime and try to 
make friends with the Marathas and the Nizam. But it was very 
difficult in the existing circumstances for these three Indian powers 
to co-operate. The Nizam had not, in any sense, played the part he 
had agreed to play as one of the confederate anti-British powers. 
The Marathas had concluded even before the death of Haidar the 
Treaty of Salbai (May 1782) which was, of course, ratified after 
Haidar’s death. Nana Phadnis was anxious to get back the region 
between the Krishna and the Tungabhadra and Nizam ‘Ali was fur¬ 
ther alienated and alarmed by Tipu’s assertion of claims over Bija- 
pur. Tipu, lacking in moderation, created fresh grounds of dispute. 




i 


460 


MYSORE — HAIDAR ‘ALi AND TIPtj SULTAN 


The Desai of Nargund, connected by marriage with one of the lead¬ 
ing Maratha chiefs, had been compelled to transfer his allegiance 
from the Marathas to Mysore when Haidar annexed the Krishna- 
Tungabhadra Doab. The Maratha government was assured by 
Haidar ‘Ali that all the chiefs in the Doab area, who had been de¬ 
pendent upon the Marathas, would be fairly treated by him. But 
Tipu is said to have seized the Desai of Nargund by treachery and 
the whole family was put in the Mysore State prison. The Desai of 
Kittur was also overwhelmed. Three years’ tribute at the rate of 
11 lakhs a year remained unpaid to the Maratha Ddrbar. Nana 
Phadnis knew very well that the circumstances leading to the 
Treaty of Mangalore and the treaty itself were regarded by English¬ 
men as humiliating. As Nana and Nizam ‘Ali drew closer together 
they presumed that in case Tipu proved to be very much superior, 
cr in case he was effectively helped by the French, they might even 
get English help. 

In 1786, Tipu’s answer to this Maratha-Nizam coalition was to 
complete his preparations and to read the Khutba in his own name 
because “Shah ‘Alam in whose name the Khutba was so long read 
was the prisoner or servant of Sindia”. In the war that ensued,’ the 
confederates took Badami. But while they, were being watched by 
a Mysore army, Tipu by forced marches advanced from Bangalore 
to Adoni, the most important fort of the Nizam, south of the Tunga- 
bhadra. Tipu could not carry the place by assault and had to raise 
the siege as the confederates marched to its relief. But as no 
arrangements had been made for a prolonged campaign, south of the 
Tungabhadra, the confederates evacuated the place which fell into 
the hands of Tipu. Immediately after they recrossed the river, it 
was in spate and they expected that they would have a free hand-in. 
the Doab. But Tipu performed the very remarkable feat of cross¬ 
ing the river which was in flood in basket boats and rafts. The 
Sultan succeeded in repulsing the confederates near Savaniir which 
he entered without opposition. He next made a very successful night 
attack in which he got possession of the camp equipage of Tahavar 
Jang, who commanded the forces of Nizam ‘Ali. Tipu, however, exr 
pressed an anxious desire for peace because he was apprehensive, 
in spite of the pacific professions of Lord Cornwallis that the English 
would most probably join the confederates. English military esta¬ 
blishments were being reorganised and this perhaps made the Sultan 
believe that they were preparing for war. Tipu agreed to pay arrears 
of tribute. Badami was ceded. Adoni, Kittur and Nargund were to 
be restored. Wilks distinguishes between the political and military 


461 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


conduct of the war. The generally accepted opinion was that Tipu 
concluded a successful campaign by an inglorious peace. But Malet, 
British Resident at Poona, thought that the treaty was highly advan¬ 
tageous to Tipu. “He has dissolved a formidable confederacy and 
dissipated an immense army, the members of which, embittered 
against each other by mutual distrust, disspirited by ill success, dis¬ 
gusted by disappointment, were not likely to be so formidable 
again”. 14 It is only relevant to note that the rapid and accurate fire 
of Tipu’s artillery, directed by French officers, very much impressed 
the Maratha Chiefs and can be said to account for Maratha eagerness 
for British help in the later stages of the war. 

Lord Cornwallis arrived in India in 1786. He perceived from 
the beginning that a war between the British and Tipu was inevit¬ 
able. Malet, ambassador at Poona, told him “Tipu is prompted to 
conquests by the ambition of a despot and the wild enthusiasm of a 
bigot, supported by a consciousness of superior military talents, 
founded on frequent success”. 14a Cornwallis wrote to Malet in 
December, 1787: “As the French policy has been generally extreme¬ 
ly ambitious and as there appears to be no bounds to the designs of 
Tipu, the violence or injustice of either of these powers, may soon 
remove the present political restraints of this government and leave 
us free to form the closest alliance with the Marattas”. 15 The settle¬ 
ment of the Guntur Sarkar with the Nizam provided Cornwallis 
with an.opportunity of winning him over against Tipu. He eluci¬ 
dated ambiguous articles of the British treaty of 1768 with the 
Nizam in a way that really led to the formation of an alliance against 
Tipu. Tipu’s diplomatic manoeuvres, on the other hand, failed. 
He had sent an embassy to Constantinople in 1784 and another in 
1785. Only 68 men out of 1100, sent to Constantinople in 1785 
actually returned. He also sent an embassy to the French King in 
1785 with valuable presents of jewels, and the bonds given by the 
general officers for supplies to the French troops during the last war 
were cancelled, as a proof of his esteem for the French. But nothing 
tangible could come out of these diplomatic feelers. 16 After the 
termination of the war of 1786-87 an attempt was also made in 1788- 
89 to bring about a union between Nizam and Tipu, the two powers 
to pledge on the Quran to form a strict and indissoluble union. T}ie 
Sultan proposed an intermarriage between the two families, but 
Nizam ‘Ali was unprepared for this social degradation. 1 ? Thus Tipu 
was left politically isolated as the British, the Marathas and the 
Nizam drew closer together. 13 


462 


MYSORE — HAIDAR ‘ALl AND TIPU SULTAN 


Thq immediate cause of the war was Tipu’s attack on Travancore 
lines on 29 December, 1789. The Raja of Travancore was includ¬ 
ed in the Treaty of 1784 among the friends of the English. The 
Travancore lines were 30 miles long, extending eastwards from the 
island of Vipeen. A part of these lines was within Cochin. But 
Jaikottai and Cranganore belonging to the Dutch in Cochin were 
situated close to these lines and were necessary for their defence. 
Alarmed by Tipu’s attitude the Raja induced the Dutch to sell these 
places to him. Tipu regarded Cochin as a tributary state and gave 
out that this was the purchase and sale of a part of the kingdom of 
Mysore. 

Isolated and apprehending a concerted attack, Tipu’s plan was 
to secure every part of Travancore, if possible in December, 1789, 
invade the southern provinces of the British and by the time the 
British would be prepared, he would be able “to begin his war with 
the Kaveri as his frontier towards Coromandel, a boundary anxious¬ 
ly and incessantly desired by the rulers of Mysore since 1751”. 
Tipu’s first attack on Travancore lines failed. 19 He gave out that he 
was searching for fugitives. His next attack came in April, 1790. 20 
He carried everything before him and the Travancoreans retreated 
to their fortresses in the south. Cornwallis made his treaty with 
the Marathas on 1 June, 1790 and with the Nizam on 4 July, 1790. 
The war had actually begun in May, 1790. 

This war lasted two years. The British plan was that the 
Madras army under General Medows would seize Coimbatore and 
thence invade Mysore from the south after an ascent via Gazalhatti 
pass. Colonel Kelly with three brigades would guard the passes 
leading from Mysore to the Karnatak, and if possible, penetrate to 
Baramahal. General Abercromby with the Bombay army would 
subjugate Malabar. General Abercromby would perform his part of 
the task quite easily. Medows succeeded in capturing the posts ex¬ 
tending to the Gazalhatti pass. The British army did not meet with 
any opposition so far. Tipu’s corps of observation under Sayyid Saheb 
was driven across the Bhavani by Floyd who took Satyamangalam. 
But the British troops were dispersed in three divisions at Palghat, 
Coimbatore and Satyamangalam. Tipu saw his opportunity and.in¬ 
flicted swift blows in quick succession on the three dispersed detach¬ 
ments. Floyd had to retreat precipitately. Medolvs advancing, was 
for sometime unable to establish any contact with him and a repeti¬ 
tion of the Munro-Baillie affair was barely averted. Kelly’s detach¬ 
ment, commanded by Maxwell also barely escaped disaster. Tipu 
next made a raid on Trichinopoly, turned back after plundering 


463 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Srirangam and, in the style of Haidar, kept the British army under 
Medows dancing about him in the Karnatak. The Governor-General, 
who was also the Commander-in-Chief decided to take the command 
himself. 

The new British plan of campaign was to evacuate all the posts 
captured by Medows in the last campaign except Palghatcherry and 
Coimbatore, to divert a part of Tipu’s forces from the main army 
under Cornwallis, and with that end in view the Bombay army under 
Sir Robert Abercromby was to advance from Tellicherry upon 
Seringapatam by the pass of Periapatam. The Marathas and the 
Nizam besieging Dharwar and Koppal, were to invade Tipu’s domi¬ 
nions from the north. Cornwallis himself advancing with the main 
army towards Seringapatam succeeded in deceiving Tipu as to the 
exact route he would take, and ascended by the Pass of Moogli, thus 
opening the campaign very skilfully. There was really no opposi¬ 
tion until the British reached Bangalore, which important place they 
succeeded in taking without much difficulty. But as Cornwallis 
marched in the direction of Seringapatam, Tipu’s plan of campaign 
W’as revealed. On 13 May Cornwallis was at Arikera, nine miles 
from Seringapatam. Tipu made it impossible for Cornwallis to 
secure supplies and forage. Tipu’s excellent intelligence service 
kept concealed from Cornwallis all news about Abercromby’s move¬ 
ments as also those of the Marathas coming to join him. In an action 
at Arikera Tipu could not maintain his ground and had to withdraw 
to Seringapatam. Rains fell and the “utter failure of all the equip¬ 
ments of the English army” compelled Cornwallis to retreat and his 
cup of misery woud have been full but for the oppportune arrival 
of the Marathas with plentiful supplies. His siege train having been 
destroyed, Cornwallis was not in a position to renew his atttack on 
Seringapatam and fell back to Bangalore. Tipu recaptured Coim¬ 
batore. After the rains, Cornwallis began his preliminary opera¬ 
tions. A line,of posts was established preparatory to a final advance 
upon Seringapatam. With an army of 22,000 together with 18,000 
horse furnished by the Nizam and a detachment of the Marathas, 
Cornwallis began his advance towards Seringapatam. Tipu trusted 
too much to the defences of Seringapatam, where his father had so 
often defied his enemies, but, as Wilks says, unlike his father who 
extracted some advantage from every discomfiture, he was intoxica¬ 
ted with success and desponding in adversity. When the most impor¬ 
tant of his redoubts, called the Sultan’s redoubt, was taken by Corn¬ 
wallis and Abercromby formed a successful junction with the main 
army, Tipu offered terms. Half of his territory he surrendered, to 

464 


MYSORE — HAIDAR ‘ALl AND TIPU SULTAN 

be divided equally among the three allies. Maratha dominion ex¬ 
tended to the Tungabhadra. The Nizam got territory extending from 
the Krishna to beyond the Pennar with the forts of Ganjikotta and 
Cuddapah. The British got Baramahal, Dindigul, as also Malabar. 
Tipu had also to give independence to the Raja of Coorg, and had to 
pay an indemnity of three crores and thirty lakhs of rupees. Tipu 
was still left with sufficient territory “to make him respectable and 
still in some degree formidable to his neighbours”, thus leaving un¬ 
affected the balance of power in the south. 21 

The fourth Anglo-Mysore War seven years later ended in com¬ 
plete collapse of Tipu’s power. The situation is best described in 
the words of Wellesley: “Tipu has preserved without abatement 
implacable sentiments of revenge since the hour of his last defeat. 
It has always been well understood that Tipu Sultan’s resentment 
was not to be appeased by any conciliatory advances on our part, 
nor by any other means than the recovery of lost power, the disgrace 

_ Sr _ 

of the British army, and the ruin of British interests in India. His 
intrigues at the courts of Hyderabad and Poona, together with his 
embassy to Zaman Shah, were sufficient indications of an hostile 
mind.” But the immediate reason for this declaration of war was 
that he sent an embassy to the Isle of France which according to 
the Governor-General, proposed an offensive and defensive alliance 
against the British in India and levied a military force which was 
actually landed in Tipu’s country. Wellesley admitted that the 
succour received was inconsiderable but he thought that this must 
be regarded as “a public, unqualified and unambiguous declaration 
or act of war”. 22 Wellesley apprehended that Tipu’s earliest hostile 
movements would lead to the general hostile movements of the 
French adventurers in the Indian Courts and more effectual French 
succour might arrive. Wellesley’s aim was to bring such a reduc¬ 
tion of Tipu’s power as would establish a permanent restraint upon 
his future means of offence, to seize his whole maritime territory, to 
compel him to defray the expenses of war as also to compel him to 
admit permanent Residents at his court from the British and their 
allies. Tipu in reply said that “forty persons, French and of a dark 
colour, of whom ten or twelve were artificers and the rest servants 
paid the hire of the ship, came here in search of employment”. 23 As 
Mill says about this Mauritius episode, it really disclosed that the 
connection between Tipu and the French was very trifling and their 
mode of intercourse childish. There may be some difference of opi¬ 
nion as to the nature and extent of the French menace. But it can¬ 
not be denied that in the existing circumstances war was inevitable. 

465 

M.S.—30 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Tipu was an enemy of the British, beaten on his own ground yet 
able to hurt. He would not consent to sink to the level of the Nizam 
and he believed that he was destined by the English to the fate of 
a pensioned Nawab. 

Tipu was completely outmanoeuvred and out-generalled. He 
had no allies to help him. The Nizam’s army did not play much 
effectual part on the British side and the Peshma’s troops were not 
there to help the British. But the organisational work was this time 
very efficient. Tipu was defeated by Stewart at Sedasere and by 
Harris at Malavally. He was driven to the defences of his capital, 
of which the siege was begun on 17 April and the assault was 
made on 4 May, 1799. Tipu fell fighting bravely. His sons sur¬ 
rendered and the rule of the dynasty came to an end. The Wodi- 
yars, who were nominal rulers in the days of Haidar ‘Ali and in the 
early years of Tipu Sultan’s regime, were restored to a portion of 
the dominions ruled by the Sultan and his father. Besides Kanara, 
Coimbatore, Wynaad and Dharapuram, the entire sea coast of the 
kingdom of Mysore was annexed by the British. By Article 8 of the 
Subsidiary Treaty with the Raja of Mysore the East India Co. was 
“to undertake the defence and could garrison in whatever manner 
they may judge propel all fortresses and strong places in the Mysore 
territory.” Arthur Wellesley, later famous in English history as a 
soldier and a statesman, first came into prominence as the leader of 
the Hyderabad contingent in this Anglo-Mysore War and then play¬ 
ed a prominent part along with Col. Close, the Resident, and 
Purnaiya, the old finance minister and now the Diwan, in the esta¬ 
blishment of the new order in Mysore. Tipu’s family was sent to 
the fort of Vellore, which was appropriated for their residence. Sir 
Arthur Wellesley thus summarises the Governor-General’s first 
year’s work: “Our principal ally, the Nizam, was restored to us, the 
French State growing in the peninsula of India was destroyed, our 
formidable native enemy Tipu, the ally of the French, was subdued”. 24 

Wilks says that “the decision of history will not be far removed 
from the observation almost proverbial in Mysore that Haidar was 
born to create an empire, Tipu to lose one. Haidar was an improving 
monarch and exhibited few innovations, Tipu was an innovating 
monarch and made no improvements”. 25 

In civil administration the first thing to note was the difference 
in the attitude of the father and 3on to the nominal king. Haidar 
never openly assumed the royal title. He maintained an attitude to 
the old dynasty more or less like that of the Peshwds to the successors 


466 


MYSORE — HAIDAR ‘ALi AND TIPU SULTAN 


of Shivaji? Tipu dethroned the Raja, made him practically a state 
prisoner and openly assumed the title of Sultan in 1786. The coins of 
Haidar ‘Ali are remarkable for their conservatism. He exercised the 
sovereign right of striking coins in his own name for the first time in 
Bednur which he described as his swarajya and whose name he 
changed to Haidarnagar. None of Haidar’s coins anywhere exhibit 
more than the initial letter of his name and in associating his coins 
with Hindu deities, he showed very remarkable toleration. 26 Tipu 
had even a new calendar based on the mauludi year. He changed 
the names of the mint towns as well. Kirkpatrick says in this con¬ 
nection that Tipu’s calendar was that in common use in Mysore but 
he substituted Arabic names for Hindu ones, assigned to the cyclic 
years and months. 

Haidar’s finance was also characterised by his conservative tra¬ 
ditional outlook. He would rent his country in large districts to 
amildars. His terms were favourable. They paid regularly but suc¬ 
ceeded in amassing large sums even after payment of public reve¬ 
nues. Haidar’s spies would inform him. The amildars would be 
asked to attend the Darbar, compelled to disgorge their wealth, given 
a small present and sent to other districts. Tipu changed the insti¬ 
tutions of his father and also changed his own pretty often. He 
wanted to introduce a system of checks and balances. In each area 
the military were under an officer called Sudur, the civil under an 
officer called Asaf. The Killadars were under the former. The Asaf 
had the tahsildars and head farmers under him. The Sudur and the 
Asaf had their cutcheries in the same hall. But as has been said, 
“all these checks served only to diminish the revenue. All parties 
soon found that it was wiser to agree and divide the public money 
than to quarrel and send their complaints to the Sultan. The Asaf 
and the Sudur with their cutcheries, the tahsildars and their cut¬ 
cheries and the head farmers and the accountants of villages,'all had 
their respective shares which were as well ascertained as their pay. 
The whole amounted on an average throughout the extent of Tipu’s 
dominions to above 30 per cent.” 

The Mysore government under Haidar was a very simple and 
despotic monarchy. Every department, civil as also military, felt 
the touch of the genius of the great ruler. Justice was impartially 
administered. Every important officer owed his position to his abi¬ 
lity, not to his social position, and most of the trusted men were 
raised from obscurity. In these circumstances his Government had 
a vigour unexampled in India. Tipu’s great drawback was his rest¬ 
less spirit of innovation and the increasing bigotry of his later years. 


467 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Sir Thomas Munro wrote to his father: “The great blow of the loss 
of half of his country seems to have confounded him. He never had 
the talents of his father but he had always till that event paid his 
army regularly, kept it in good order, gave a good deal of his atten¬ 
tion to business and managed his finances tolerably well.” It is no 
wonder that the dominions of Tipu showed indications of good gov¬ 
ernment that surprised the British invaders. The revenues of Tipu’s 
dominions, according to the terms of the Treaty of 1792 were 2 crores 
and 37 lakhs of rupees. 263 

In connection with Haidar’s public works we should specially 
mention Dariya Daulat and Lalbagh and the establishment of a grand 
bazar town named Ganjam &ahr. It is relevant to note that in 1774 
when the house of Kadimuddin at Seringapatam caught fire, many 
buildings including a portion of the temple of Rangaswami were des¬ 
troyed. Haidar rebuilt the temple in so short a period as one month. 
Tipu’s most important constructive work was in Malabar. He was 
the pioneer of Malabar roads. There were no highways in Malabar 
before him. Tipu projected and constructed an extensive chain of 
roads there. The intolerance of Tipu Sultan has been very much ex¬ 
aggerated. The Sringeri letters of Tipu Sultan show that Tipu car¬ 
ried on a correspondence with Jagadguru Shri Shankaracharya in a 
spirit that we can associate only with a very religious prince. The 
monastery suffered much in 1791 at the hands of Maratha pindaris. 
The Guru was supplied by Tipu with necessary funds for replacing 
the displaced image and for necessary ceremonies. In 1793, Tipu 
wrote to him, “You are the Jagadguru. You are always performing 
penance in order that the whole world may prosper and the people 
may be happy”. These letters prove definitely the sincerity of Tipu’s 
tolerance and do not fit in well with the details of persecution with 
which we are familiar. Political,, military and administrative con¬ 
siderations were responsible for some of the measures of persecution 
of Haidar and Tipu—transplantation and forcible conversion of re¬ 
bels and the formation of Chela battalions of captive converts like 
the Turkish janissaries. It would be a mistake to regard these mea¬ 
sures as indications of their attitude to their Hindu subjects. 27 

The efficiency of the military system of Haidar ‘Ali and Tipu 
Sultan cannot be denied. But in this sphere too Tipu departed to a 
large extent from the principles of his father. In 1767, at the time 
of the first Anglo-Mysore War Haidar had 210 Europeans, 800 ex¬ 
cellent Mughul horse, 12,000 other cavalry, 5,000 grenadier sepoys, 
8,000 sepoys with European muskets, 1,000 topasses and 4,000 
matchlockmen. In 1780, when he entered the Karnatak he had, as 


468 


MYSORE — HAIDAR 4 AL! AND TIPU SULTAN 


has been mentioned, about 90,000 troops with him. At the outbreak 
of the war in 1790 Tipu’s force was 45,000 regular infantry and 
20,000 horse, exclusive of irregular peons. In. 1793, after the loss of 
half of his territory, his army consisted of 30,000 regular infantry, 
7,000 regular cavalry, 2,000 artillery and 6,000 irregular horse, be¬ 
sides a large number of peons. Besides the field army Haidar and 
Tipu had to maintain garrisons in times of war at Seringapatam, 
Sera, Bednur Sonda, Chik Ballapur, Dod Ballapur, Kolar, Hoskote, 
Bangalore, Dindigul, Coimbatore and Mangalore. 28 

In the days of Haidar the British army, small in numbers, was 
composed almost wholly of infantry. Haidar was strong in horse, 
though not strong enough in infantry and artillery. He lost many 
battles without injury to his affairs because the British were unable 
to pursue. A single big victory in the field over Sir Eyre Coote 
would have made him master of almost every place in the Karnafak. 
But the situation of the British Government with regard to Indian 
powers changed completely in the days of Tipu. Cornwallis took 
with him quite a big army and he was helped by the cavalry of the 
Marathas and the Nizam. But in 1799, the British army was by it¬ 
self quite strong both in infantry and cavalry, in quality and num¬ 
ber. The superiority was so great that the issue could not be doubt¬ 
ful. Tipu’s artillery and infantry showed the effects of intensive 
training by Frenchmen, but in the altered circumstances this could 
not avail. It has been said that his grand military mistake was the 
neglect of his cavalry, a proper use of which would have made his 
defeat a much more difficult proposition. The organisation of the 
army showed traces of weakness. His army was overstaffed. He 
had about 150 general officers for an army, less numerous than what 
his father took into the Karnatak in 1780 and for which he had only 
ten generals. Tipu’s army also fell more and more into arrears and 
when Seringapatam was attacked by the British, it had received 
only two issues of pay in 14 months. He went on adding to the de¬ 
fences of Seringapatam for which he spent about 12 lakhs of pago¬ 
das. After the opening of the campaign he did nothing effective to 
retard the progress of the British armies. He had seen his father 
defy his exultant enemies by shutting himself up in his capital until 
the rains. He perhaps hoped to repeat his father’s performance. 
But circumstances were changed and he also was very much unlike 
his father “whose equanimity was uniform in every aspect of for¬ 
tune and who generally extracted some advantage from every dis¬ 
comfiture.” 


469 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


In connection with the navy of Haidar and Tipu it is necessary 
to note that Haidar and Tipu commanded the entire sea board from 
Sadashivgarh to Cochin. Haidar’s conquest of Bednur and Sonda in 
1763-64 brought the ports of Honavar, Mangalore, Bhatkal, and 
Sadashivgarh in his possession. He could now have a fleet of his 
own and in 1765, according to the Portuguese, he had thirty vessels 
of war and a large number of transport ships. In 1766, his fleet was 
of very considerable help in the conquest of Malabar. It consisted 
of 80 vessels, 13 top-sail vessels, several machwas of war, besides a 
great many shibars and small crafts. The conquest of North Mala¬ 
bar and South lyTalabar completed, Haidar had more ports under his 
control. In 1769, Haidar temporarily abandoned Malabar, which he 
reconquered soon after the Maratha menace was over. The Moplahs 
were great navigators and they formed excellent sailors. Haidar’s 
fleet had two commanders—Stannett and Latif Ali Beg. In 1768, 
when the Bombay government sent a squadron of ships to the Mala¬ 
bar coast with European troops and sepoys, Haidar’s naval power 
collapsed. The British expedition failed on land but Stannett proved 
to be a traitor. He joined the British with a part of his fleet. Un¬ 
daunted by this collapse of his naval power, Haidar began another 
ship-building programme. With the help of some Portuguese and 
Dutch ship-builders he strove to realize an ambitious scheme of ship¬ 
building. But he could not realise his plan. Sir Edward Hughes 
in 1780 entered Mangalore harbour and destroyed the enemy’s ships 
he found there. Thus failed the second attempt of Haidar. Tipu, 
however, walked in the footsteps of his father. General Mathews 
on getting possession of some of his seaports in 1783 found 19 large 
ships, some completely built and others in great forwardness. In 
1796, Tipu established a Board of Admiralty and planned the erec¬ 
tion of 20 lines of battle ships and 20 frigates. , Neither Haidar nor 
Tipu had the necessary respite that alone could have enabled them 
to equip a fleet strong enough to hold its own against the British on 
the west coast. 29 Unable to build a strong navy of his own, Haidar 
depended in his campaigns of 1781 and 1782 very much on French 
naval support and he occupied Porto Novo in order to provide the 
French with the necessary landing facilities. The French never gave 
him adequate naval support and in spite of the triumphs of Suffren 
at sea, there must have been profound distrust in his mind of the 
French promises and it was perhaps in this mood that he remarked 
to Purnaiya about the British navhl power—“I can ruin their re¬ 
sources by land but I cannot dry up the sea.” 


470 


MYSORE — HAIDAR ‘ALI AND TIPtr SULTAN 


NOTES 

1. Diary of Ananda Rdnga P illai, Vol. IX, pp. 369-70 & S P D., XXVIII, Nos. Ill- 

-lu. 

2. Wilks, Mysore, Vol. I, p. 352. 

3. Sen, S. N., A Portuguese Account of Haidar AH, Calcutta Review, 1937. 

4 S P.D., XXVIII, 266; Wilks, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 418. 

5. Parasnis, Itihas Sangraha, Ait. Tippanen, II, 16, 17; Ibid, Peshwa Daftarantil 

Mahiti, p. 44. 

6. Peixoto, Book 1 . 

7 . Nishan-i-Haidari. 

8. Orme, MS, Vol. 72. Peixoto, Book II. 

9 Pissurlencar, Antigualhas, II & LXXXI. 

9a. S P D„ XXXVH, 60-63. 

10. See Chap. VII, Peshwa Mddhav Rao for Maratha campaigns against Haidar 
‘All. 

11. Mawji and Parasnis, Treaties, Engagements , etc., p. 85. Rajwgde, X, 235. 

12. Madras Records, Military Consultations, Vol. XXIV, p. 615 
13 Sinha, N. K., Haidar ‘All, pp. 91-94. 

14. Poona Residency Correspondence Series, Vol. II, p. 122. 

14a. PRC., Ibid, No. 32, p. 68. 

15 P R C., Ill, p. 24. 

16. P.R.C., III, pp. 8-10, 45-46. 

17. Ibid, p. 28. 

18. Ibid, III, pp. 42-45, 74-77. 

19. Ibid, pp. 49-52. 

20. Ibid, p. 113, 129-30. 

21. Ibid, p. 501. 

22. Wellesley Despatches (Martin), Vol. I, p. 159. Pp. 448-53 contain the declara¬ 
tion of Governor-General against Tipu Sultan. 

23 Ibid, p. 382. 

24. Owen* S. J., A Selection from the Wellington Despatches, p. 10. 

25- Cited in Mysore Gazetteer, Vol. II (1930 ed), p. 2671 and p. 2674. 

26- For Haidar’s civil administration, see N. K. Sinha, Haidar ‘All, pp. 233-45. 
26a. Sinha, N. K., op. cit., p. 249. 

27. Wilks differs from this view, see Mysore Gazetteer, Vol. II, pp. 2668-74. A 
large number of people from Malabar and Southern Maratha country were 
forcibly converted to Islam. 

28 Mohibul Hasan Khan, History of Tipu Sultan (1951), p. 351. 

29. Ibid, pp. 352-53. 


47J 


CHAPTER XIV 


PROGRESS OF THE BRITISH POWER 

(1785-1798) 

British Relations with the Mardthas: 

Warren Hastings left India in February, 1785. Macpherson as 
senior member of the Council officiated as Governor-General until 
the arrival of Lord Cornwallis in September, 1786. Macpherson, 
according to Cornwallis (1 November, .1789) “was the most contemp¬ 
tible and the most condemned Governor that ever pretended to 
govern”. He was indifferent to anything except his personal interests. 
The administration of Macpherson saw no departure from the princi¬ 
ples and policy of Warren Hastings. According to the system esta¬ 
blished by the Treaty of Salbai, Sindia was the most important ally of 
the British. The Court of Directors wrote to Cornwallis on 21 July, 
1786: “It does not at present occur to us that almost any system 
of politics can soon take place in India which with the aid of Sindhia 
we may not be able to counteract, if in its tendency (it is) prejudi¬ 
cial to us”. 1 The position accorded to Sindia in the scheme of things 
associated with the Treaty of Salbai best illustrates subsequent his¬ 
tory. Burke said that the negotiations of Warren Hastings with the 
Mughul Court covered “an insidious design to betray” Shah ‘Alam 
into the hands of Sindia. On this charge Hastings replied, “I de¬ 
clare that I entered into no negotiations with Madajee Sindhia for 
delivering the Mughul into the hands of the Marattas, but I must 
have been a mad man indeed if I had involved the Company in a 
war with the Marattas because the Mughal as his last resource had 
thrown himself under the protection of Madajee Sindhia.” It was, 
therefore, not unnatural in these circumstances, that Sindia’s de¬ 
mand on behalf of Shah \Alam of the tribute due to the Great Mughul 
from Bengal should be refused peremptorily by the Government of 
Macpherson. Hastings had also declared in 1783 that British con¬ 
nection with the Mughul had long been suspended and he wished 
never to see it renewed, as it had proved a fatal drain to the wealth 
of Bengal and the treasury of the Company. Besides this refusal 
of tribute, the Government of Macpherson was also responsible for 
another move to checkmate the ambitious designs of Mahadji Sindia. 
Ambaji Ingle, Mahadji Sindia’s Subdhdar of the mahals bordering 
on Sikh territories succeeded in negotiating a treaty with the Sikh 


472 


PROGRESS OF THE BRITISH POWER (1785-1798) 

chiefs in March, 1785. It contained the following claiuse: “of what¬ 
ever territory on his side or that side of the Jumna, independent of 
the royal territories, may be taken in concert with each other from 
the Hindus and Mussalmans, one third should be given to the Sikh 
chiefs”. 2 Macpherson’s Government saw in this a danger to the poli¬ 
tical interests of the East India Company and to the territory of the 
Nawab-Vaztr. Pressure was brought to bear upon Mahadji. A satis¬ 
factory explanation was demanded of his late negotiations with the 
Sikhs. Mahadji Sindia agreed to include the East India Company 
and the Nawab-Va^ir as his friends and to add “Let there never be 
any injury offered to their country.” The Sikh Sardars received 
some encouragement from Lt. James Anderson, Company’s Resident 
at the Court of Sindia, broke away from Mahadji, made an offer*of 
an alliance to the Company through Sir John Cumming, who com¬ 
manded the Company’s detachment on the frontier of the Vastir. 
Macpherson’s Government which did not desire any friendly connec¬ 
tion between the Sikhs and the Marathas, assured the Sikh chiefs 
that under no circumstances would the English take any part against 
them and this helped materially to complete the estrangement with¬ 
out any commitments. 3 

War with Tipu Sultan: 

Lord Cornwallis was responsible for the following moves in his 
relations with country powers: (1) non-participation in the war 
between the Maratha-Nizam coalition and Tipu, (2) successful 
negotiation with the Nizam regarding Guntur Sarkar and arrears of 
peshkush, (3) formation of triple alliance and war with Tipu,*and 
(4) securing of the assignment of the Karnatak revenue in 1792 and 
a new settlement with Awadh. 

The Marathas at this stage did not meditate any attack on the 
powerful East India Company, and their policy seemed to be directed 
to the conquest of the weaker neighbours in the north and south. 

. The systematic encroachment of Tipu led to the formation of an alli¬ 
ance against him of the Nizam and the Marathas. But the Maratha 
attempt to enlist British support against Tipu was not successful. 
The British expressed willingness to assist the Marathas in case of a 
joint attack from Tipu and the French, but beyond this they would 
not go. The British attitude towards the Maratha-Mysore war is 

best described in the words of the Secret Committee to the Grover- 

0 

nor-General and Council: “Your principal attention must be to 
avoid shaking the friendship and confidence of the Marathas and 
at the same time to remove, if possible, any unfavourable impression 


473 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


which your assurance (if published) may have made upon Tipu”. 4 
In spite of the anxiety and chagrin caused by the rejection of Mara¬ 
tha request for British help Nana Phadnis was not antagonised. 5 But 
Tipu must have formed a very unfavourable impression of British 
attitude and this perhaps explains his anxiety to conclude the war 
with the Marathas and the Nizam. 

Cornwallis had explicit orders to demand from the Nizam the 
Sarkar of Guntur. By the treaty of 1766 with the Nizam as revised 
in 1768 the British held the Northern Sarkars except Guntur which 
they were to have after the death of Basalat Jang to whom it had 
been granted for life. They paid a tribute of seven lakhs to the 
Nizam for four of the five Sarkars and they were to pay two lakhs 
more when they would get Guntur. Basalat Jang died in 1782. 
But Nizam ‘Ali retained the possession of the Sarkar and the British 
Withheld the peshkush . Capt. Kennaway was sent by Cornwallis to 
negotiate. The Nizam was also eager to negotiate. His renters mis¬ 
managed collections and he was not getting much from Guntur. He 
could also see for himself that he would gain rather than lose from 
a connection with the English. He surrendered the Sarkar in Sep¬ 
tember 1788. The necessary financial adjustment was made not long 
after on the basis of the payment of the arrears of peshkush and the 
balance from the revenue of Guntur since the death of Basalat Jang. 
The Nizam also evinced a great anxiety to enter into a defensive 
alliance which would ensure his security against Tipu Sultan and 
the Marathas. In this connection Cornwallis wrote to the Secret 
Committee on 1 November, 1789: “As his Highness’ political situa¬ 
tion with the Marathas has long approached almost to a state of de¬ 
pendence on the Poona Government, we make no alteration in the 
terms of our agreement with the Nizam without its being construed 
by the Peshwd’s ministers as an attempt to detach him from them.” 
Cornwallis considered that a rupture with Tipu was almost inevit¬ 
able in the near future. He, therefore, did not want to antagonise 
the Marathas and was not unwilling to reassure the Nizam. His ex¬ 
pedient amounted in the words of Malcolm to a trespass on the spirit 
of non-intervention as proclaimed by Parliament in the Act of 1784. 
He wrote a letter to the Nizam in July, 1789 in which he asserted 
that the treaty of 1768 was still effective. The Nizam would get the 
help of two battalions of sepoys and six cannon whenever he would 
apply for them provided they were not employed against the Com¬ 
pany’s allies viz., the Maratha chiefs, the Nawabs of Awadh and 
Arcot and the Rajas of Travancore and Tanjore. 6 Tipu’s name was 
not included. Article 10 of the treaty of 1768 provided for the trans- 


474 


PROGRESS OF THE BRITISH POWER (1785-1798) 

fer of the Karnatak Balaghat to the Company, at that time possessed 
by Haidar ‘Ali. The Nizam now wanted that this article should be 
carried into effect. Cornwallis wrote, “circumstances have totally 
prevented the execution of these articles and the Company are in 
full enjoyment of peace with all the world. But should it hereafter 
happen that the Company should obtain possession of the country 
mentioned in these articles, with your Highness’ assistance, they 
will strictly perform the stipulations in favour of your Highness and 
the Marathas”. 7 In the words of Wilks all this amounted to the con¬ 
clusion of “a very intelligible offensive alliance” 7 ® against Tipu and 
it was well calculated to produce a war with him. 

Tipu’s attack on Travancore on 29 December, 1789, precipitated 
matters and led to the stabilization of British alliance with the Nizam 
and the Marathas. In June 1790, the Treaty of Triple Alliance was 
completed. 8 In Lord Cornwallis’ letter, the treaty with the Nizam 
was declared a fourth treaty, the three former treaties being those 
of 1759, 1766 and 1768. The league was formed with a view to 
punish Tipu and “deprive him of the means of disturbing the general 
tranquillity in future”. Article 13 of the treaty further provided: 
“If after the conclusion of peace with Tipu, he should attack or 
molest either of the contracting parties, the other shall join to punish 
him, the mode and conditions of effecting which shall be hereafter 
settled”. 9 In connection with the Third Anglo-Mysore War it is 
necessary to ascertain why Cornwallis spared Tipu. Sir John Shore 
thus analysed the motives of Cornwallis in his political reflection on 
the state of Hindustan written about 25 March, 1793. 10 

(1) “An entire partition would have thrown a decided weight 
in the scale of the Marathas, already too powerful. 

(2) “Policy certainly dictated the propriety of an independent 
sovereign over the Mysorean State, possessed of power 
sufficient to serve as a barrier, but inadequate to the object 
of a successful invasion. The question could only be in this 
case whether that independency should be left with Tipu 
or be transferred to the ancient sovereigns of Mysore.... 
his substitute must have been supported by the same power, 
which restored him to the throne.” 

Cornwallis boasted not without reason: “We have effectually 
crippled our enemies without making our friends too formidable”. 

After the outbreak of the war with Tipu, Cornwallis thought it 
necessary to assume the direct administration of the Karnatak on the 
lines followed by Macartney during the Second Anglo-Mysore War. 


475 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

The entire revenues of the Nawab had been restored to him in 1785. 
In February, 1787, it had also been arranged by the Governor of 
Madras, Sir Archibald Campbell, that the Nawab was to get nine 
lakhs of pagodas from his revenues and 12 lakhs were paid each year 
by the Nawab to his creditors according to the arrangement of the 
Board of Control. When war came in 1790 Cornwallis assumed pos¬ 
session of the revenues of Kamafak. It was further provided by 
treaty in 1792 that the Company was to have entire control of the 
Kamatak in case of war but was to restore it to the Nawab on the 
conclusion of peace. The Company was empowered to occupy speci¬ 
fied districts in case the Nawab’s payment fell into arrears. The 
Nawab was to pay to the Company in future nine lakhs during peace 
and 4/5 of his revenues in war. He was to pay his creditors six lakhs 
instead of 12 in future. As Mill said, “Cornwallis did not see far 
beyond first appearances—management during a limited and pre¬ 
carious period precluded that minute knowledge on which alone 
could be founded an assessment, just either to the Company or to the 
inhabitants.” An efficient administration by Indians was also im¬ 
possible in view of the provision of war emergency, and even during 
the war emergency people “had an interest in courting the Govern¬ 
ment which they were again to obey”. 

Settlement with Nawab-Vazir: 

Cornwallis was also responsible for a new settlement with the 
Nawab-Vazir of Awadh. In this connection he referred to Macpher- 
son’s system as “the dirtiest jobbing”. Asaf-ud-daulah was negligent, 
profuse and debauched. But his personal character alone does not 
explain the evils from which Awadh suffered. Macpherson, on the 
testimony Cornwallis himself, was only too ready to provide for per¬ 
sons not in the Company’s service, riding contracts, monopolies and 
other privileges to be secured from the Nawab. British contractors 
claimed there a right of pre-emption, of exemption from duties in 
their provision for investment. Between September 1793 and 
February 1794 an enormous sum of 2 crores and 39 lakhs were ex¬ 
ported in specie and this immense and constant drain of specie add¬ 
ed to the prevailing distress. To this estimate of the export of 
specie should be added the sum sent down to Calcutta to answer 
bills drawn for the payment of troops and on private account. 
Asaf-ud-daulah wanted the additional brigade at Fategarh to be with¬ 
drawn and his pecuniary burdens reduced. Cornwallis agreed to 
make a reduction of the sum payable by the Nawab from 84 lakhs to 
50 lakhs, but he refused to remove the detachment at Fategarh as he 


476 


PROGRESS OF THE BRITISH POWER (1785-1798) 

considered that one British detachment in Awadh was not sufficient, 
British military prestige having suffered considerably during the 
Second Anglo-Mysore war. 

In connection with Cornwallis’ relations with country powers 
we should note that he tried very much to have a treaty of guarantee 
as between the Marathas, the Nizam and the British. Article 10 of 
the Treaty of 1792 included a mutual guarantee against the sove¬ 
reign of Mysore. 11 He tried to secure an express treaty with that 
single object in view. The Governor-General knew that the Indian 
horizon was never free from clouds and he did not want to have an 
entangling alliance. He wanted to include in the proposed treaty 
an article by which the allies were not to assist one another “until 
they were convinced that the party requiring assistance had justice 
on his side and all measures of conciliation had proved fruitless”. 12 
Cornwallis was anxious to conclude this treaty. The Nizam was also 
eager to have it. But the Marathas were really disinclined to enter 
into it as it would mean security for the Nizam against Maratha 
attacks. The Marathas claimed the recognition of their right to levy 
chauth on the Indian powers. Cornwallis wanted that the British 
power should assume the position of a mediator between the various 
Indian chiefs. Naturally there could be no treaty of guarantee. 
Lord Cornwallis wrote, 13 “with regard to the presumptuous Maratha 
claim of Chauth, I wish that as far as relates to ourselves, it should 
not only be treated with contempt but the Marathas should also 
know that it can never be mentioned by them without exciting our 
displeasure and indignation, and it may likewise be proper that they 
should clearly understand that we do not look upon ourselves as in 
the most distant degree engaged to support them in such a claim up¬ 
on any other power in India.” 

Administrative Reforms: 

But Lord Cornwallis’ term as Governor-General is better known 
for the internal reforms that he carried out. Whether all of them 
benefited the people of India is disputable, but there can be no doubt 
that they strengthened the foundations of British Government in 
India, raised its prestige and gave it a long lease of a century and a 
half. 

The first crying evil was the corruption among the civil ser¬ 
vants of the Company and the private trade they carried on to the 
detriment of the Company’s interest. As conquerors the civil ser¬ 
vants thought themselves as superior to the natives of the country 


477 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


and as foreigners subject to no local restraint. The Company’s ser¬ 
vants felt that they had come to India to shake the pagoda tree and 
return to the home country with as big fortunes as they could col¬ 
lect by devious means. Even highly placed officers like Clive, Mem¬ 
bers of the Bengal Council and Judges had joined the race and went 
home laden with their ill-gotten wealth, lived in great style, bought 
parliamentary seats and were spreading their pestilential influence 
in the English society of the day. Cornwallis abolished sinecures, 
put an end to private trading, packed away the most corrupt officers 
and granted generous salaries for covenanted servants of the Com¬ 
pany, expecting in return that they administered their charge with 
clean hands. The Collector was given an important place in the dis¬ 
trict hierarchy. He at first presided over the old civil and new re¬ 
venue court. But soon Civil Zillah courts were set up which dealt 
with both civil and revenue matters. They were supervised by four 
provincial courts at Calcutta, Murshidabad, Dacca and Patna. Ap¬ 
peals in important cases lay to the Supreme Council sitting as the 
Supreme Court. The Collector, however, retained his magisterial 
powers for retaining prisoners under trial or execution of sentences; 
dealt with cases of affray and inflicted punishment within certain 
limits, the more serious cases being referred to Faujdari Adalat. 

The conduct of criminal justice was also investigated by Corn¬ 
wallis. He found defects both in the law and its administration. 
Criminal justice was in the hands of Indians, mostly Muslims, and 
punishments were at variance with English ideas of justice. “I con¬ 
ceive”, Cornwallis wrote on 2 August, 1789 “that all regulations for 
the reform of that department would be useless and negatory whilst 
the execution of them depends on any native whatever”. So 
Cornwallis changed the personnel—Muhammad Reza Khan who pre¬ 
sided over the Nizdmat Adalat was removed in 1790 and the court 
reestablished under the Governor-General and Council aided by a 
Kazi and two Muftis. 

In the place of district courts with Indian Darogas four courts 
of circuit were established. Each was presided over by two cove¬ 
nanted civil servants assisted by Indian advisers. The courts were 
to make tours twice a year throughout the districts. Appeals from 
them lay to the Supreme Court. An elaborate Code of Regulations 
drawn up by George Barlow was printed and published to guide the 
officials of the new courts. 

Important police reforms were carried out to supplement the 
judicial changes. In 1791 Superintendents of Police were created 


478 



PROGRESS OF THE BRITISH POWER (17854*98) 

for Calcutta with the function of maintaining order and arresting 
criminals. Next year in the districts powers of criminal jurisdiction 
were taken away from the Zamindtirs and small districts were put 
under a daroga subject to supervision by the Company’s representa¬ 
tive. This system was perpetuated in the Regulations of 1793. 

Special attention must be devoted to Cornwallis’ Permanent 
Settlement of Bengal land revenue. Jonathan Duncan, John Shore 
and Charles Grant who had made a special study- of revenue collec¬ 
tion, were his main advisers. In 1790-91 the subdh of Bengal yield¬ 
ed land revenue of Rs. 2,68,00,000. In place of annual settlements, 
Shore had suggested decennial settlements. Cornwallis, faced with 
a country in ruins, decided on Permanent Settlement making the 
zamindtirs or rent collectors permanent land-owners. The settle¬ 
ment secured for the Company a fixed amount of revenue without 
fluctuation and with the prospect of expansion when more land 
would be brought under the plough. There was also advantage aris¬ 
ing from the abolition of the entire revenue machinery— Tahsilddrs, 
Qtinungos, Patwtiris and a host of revenue officials. The zamindtirs 
were given property rights, not theirs, and relapsed into a selfish 
careless class. The ryot who toiled on the land and created wealth 
for the zamindtir and the government was sadly neglected under the 
settlement. The status of the ryot was impaired and it was not until 
1859 that the Bengal Land Act afforded him some relief. 

Sir John Shore succeeded Cornwallis. He was famous for his 
unrivalled knowledge of the revenue system of India. He was chosen 
for his pacific habits. At the time of the passing of the Charter Act 
of 1793, the Company’s spokesmen in Parliament had referred allu¬ 
ringly to “a large superabounding sUm which would be annually re¬ 
ceived from India”. They hoped that Sir John Shore would make 
good this assurance. 

Battle of Khar da: 

The most important event of Sir John Shore’s administration 
was the Nizam’s defeat at Kharda in March, 1795 by the Marathas 
in consequence of the adherence by Shore to the policy of non-inter¬ 
vention. This British failure to maintain the integrity of the Hyde¬ 
rabad State has been condemned by most British historians. As the 
proposed Treaty of Guarantee could not be effected, the Nizam re¬ 
mained exposed to Maratha attacks. On 1 January, 1794, Kennaway, 
Resident at the Nizam’s Court, described him to the Govemor-Gener 
ral as prepared to form with the English engagements which would 


479 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


render them masters of his country for ever. The Maratha claims 
over the Nizam had been temporarily relaxed during the war with 
Tipu. Now they wanted to assert their claims. The English Gov¬ 
ernment’s offer of mediation was treated with “frigid indifference” 
by the Marathas. Was Shore justified, from the British point of 
view, in abandoning the Nizam to his fate? The arguments for Bri¬ 
tish intervention in the Nizam-Maratha conflict can be thus sum¬ 
marised. 

The Nizam had declared at the time of his entry into the alli¬ 
ance against Tipu that he did it only because of the confidence he 
reposed in English faith. As he was received into the alliance upon 
this declaration it was a virtual pledge for protection. At the time 
when he agreed to be the ally of the British in the war with Tipu, 
his alliance was so valuable that the British would have been ready 
to make it an offensive and defensive alliance if he had insisted on 
it. The Nizam was irr urgent need of protection. He had been led 
to expect it. After the war was over, expectations were kept alive 
by the negotiations of Cornwallis. The cession of Guntur and ad¬ 
justment of the peshkush gave him some claims on British support. 
The abandonment of the Nizam brought the British down from the 
high station in which they had overawed the princes of India. Ac¬ 
cording to Sir John Malcolm, the English could have prevented 
hostilities by the terror of their interference. He wrote, “no ground 
of political advantage could be abandoned without being instantly 
occupied by an enemy; and to resign influence, was not merely to 
resign power but to allow that power to pass into hands hostile to 
the British Government”. 14 

As against these arguments it is only proper to note that Shore 
weighed very carefully the reasons suggested for and against inter¬ 
ference by the Residents at Hyderabad and at Poona; and his deci¬ 
sion to agree with the conclusion of Malet, Resident at Poona, was 
the result of very mature consideration and justified by him on 
grounds of expediency. This ‘inept’ policy of non-interference in 
the Nizam-Maratha conflict was not due to the incapacity of a civil 
servant in his exalted position to deviate from the instructions of his 
superiors but was the mature conclusion of a statesman who weighed 
very carefully the pros and cons. Shore wrote in a letter in Feb¬ 
ruary 1795: “We were not bound by the terms of any existing treaty 
to defend the Rajah of Travancore, but the former treaty of peace 
with Tipu placed him specifically under our protection; and the rela¬ 
tive situation of that Raja and the Nizam is very similar as regards 
the principle of an authorised interference”. The Poona Court re- 


480 


PROGRESS OF THE BRITISH POWER (1785-1798) 

garded the Nizam as its tributary and dependent. The Nizam’s Gov¬ 
ernment according to Shore was ‘flimsy’, its policy characterised by 
“temporary expediency and palpable chicane”-. Shore also admitted 
that “the Maratha influence over the Nizam’s country is so incor¬ 
porated with the internal administration that it requires uncommon 
abilities, energy and perseverance to destroy it, and as it exists the 
Nizam can scarcely be called an independent prince”. Grant Duff 
admits that the Court of Hyderabad was trying *“to effect an evasive 
purpose and if British interference had enabled the Nizam to do this, 
it would have been regarded as an injustice to the Marathas” 15 and 
it could not be denied that the Nizam’s minister precipitated this war 
by insult and defiance. Shore’s arguments on the ground of expedi¬ 
ency were the following: The Nizam being weak, the Maratha 
power alone would serve as a counterpoise to Tipu. He, therefore, 
wanted to retain the friendship of the Marathas. Tipu, maimed and 
mauled, had not yet ceased to be dangerous and he was moving 
heaven and earth to secure allies. The death of Mahadji Sindia, in¬ 
stead of weakening the Maratha State, tended to concentrate all 
civil and military power in the Peshwa’s hands, a state of things 
which was sufficiently menacing to the British. If the Marathas, pro¬ 
voked by British interference joined Tipu, it would be very difficult 
to sustain a war against them. 16 The Governor-General thought 
that the Commander-in-Chief, Sir Robert Abercromby, was not equal 
to the situation. He wrote, “I know not one equal to the conduct 
of a war and if the Marathas or Tipu were to attack us we should be 
in a deplorable situation”. Moreover, the mutinous discontent of the 
Bengal army further incapacitated Shore from taking any decisive 
action. Shore also believed that “victors in a native war would 
eventually quarrel over the spoils”. 

All this shows that Shore had very good grounds for this deci¬ 
sion not to interfere in the war between the Nizam and the Mara¬ 
thas. The increase of French influence in India in consequence of 
this non-interference has been largely exaggerated. Subsequent 
events proved that the basis of French influence in India was very 
unsound. But the loss of British prestige resulting from non-inter¬ 
ference cannot be denied. 

In the Nizam’s war with the Marathas the British subsidiary 
force did not accompany him. On his return from this disastrous 
campaign, the Nizam informed the British that the services of the 
two British detachments were no longer necessary. The Nizam also 
moved the corps under the command of the Frenchman Raymond 

481 

M.S.—81 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

to Cuddapah near the British frontier. But the rebellion of his eldest 
son ‘Ali Jah made him once again eager to seek British favour. 
He agreed to recall Raymond’s corps from Cuddapah and asked for 
the return of the British detachments. Before the British troops 
could arrive, ‘Ali Jah had been worsted and committed suicide. There 
was another rebellion of a member of his family shortly afterwards. 
The British detachments helped him very considerably in this war. 
British influence in the Nizam’s court was, even after Kharda, not 
inconsiderable, though the British plan of encouraging English ad¬ 
venturers to take services under him, was not successful. The 
Nizam was always eager to dismiss his French Corps provided the 
number of British troops was increased and the troops were avail¬ 
able for the purposes of defence against all enemies. This, of course, 
the British were not at this stage willing to do and the French Corps 
under Raymond, therefore, remained at Hyderabad. Thus French 
influence at Hyderabad existed only because the British would not 
undertake the defence of the Nizam and when they decided to do 
it, the French Corps could be easily surrounded and disarmed. 

Fortunately for the British, the death of Peshwa Madhav Rao 
Narayan in October 1795 caused the most serious division among 
the Maratha chiefs. The Nizam rapidly recovered from the blow of 
Kharda. At the same time the conditions that determined the 
foreign policy of Shore disappeared. The influence of Nana Phadnis 
was subverted and as Malet had foreseen, there was no longer that 
consistency and moderation which characterised Maratha counsels 
and there was instead in the words of Malet, “a wildness of spirit, 
prompted by the boundlessness of ancient and recent pretensions not 
containable within the limits of good order and good neighbour¬ 
hood”. 17 

Spoliation of Awadh: 

Even the mild, non-interventionist Governor-General joined in 
the game of spoliation of Awadh, his excuse being the threatened in¬ 
vasion of Zaman Shah. In 1797, he paid a visit to Lucknow. The 
Vazir had to agree to increase his military establishment by adding 
one European and one native regiment of English cavalry and for 
this he had to raise his former subsidy. But shortly afterwards 
Nawab-Voztr Asaf-ud-daulah died. Shore, acting on reports from 
Lucknow recognised Mirza ‘Ali, better known as Vazir ‘Ali, as his 
successor. But very soon there wds a spate of rumours about the 
spurious birth of the new Nawab. Shore once again went to Luck- 


482 


PROGRESS OF THE BRITISH POWER (1785-1798) 

now. He wrote about the succession dispute, “I never was involved 
in a scene of more perplexity and profligacy.” Vazir ‘Ali was de¬ 
posed and pensioned off, Sa‘adat ‘Ali, a brother of the deceased 
Nawab, was raised to the throne. The annual subsidy payable to 
the British was raised to 76 lakhs and the fort of Allahabad was 
made over to the English. The English regular army in Awadh was 
to be about 10,000. The number of the Vazir’s troops was to be 
strictly limited. The Nawab was not to have any communication 
with a foreign power, nor to have any European in his service, nor 
to permit any to settle in his dominion. The Court of Directors and 
the Board of Control approved of his arrangement and praised very 
much “the temper, impartiality, ability and firmness” displayed by 
the Governor-General who was, in recognition of his Awadh settle¬ 
ment, raised to the peerage as Lord Teignmouth. But the extra¬ 
ordinary maladministration in Awadh went on unchecked. For this, 
as has been shown, the British were as much responsible as succes¬ 
sive Nawab- Vazirs. The British were providing against Durrani 
menace at the expense of Awadh and the military burden imposed 
was too much for the resources of that State. A prodigal Govern¬ 
ment, an impoverished people, a bloated military expenditure, a com¬ 
bination of causes, some local, some due to British connection, made 
maladministration in Awadh almost the worst in the history of Bri¬ 
tish rule in India. 

Sir John Shore’s vigorous action in Awadh was due to the Dur¬ 
rani menace. Zaman Shah, grandson of Ahmad Shah Abdall, as¬ 
cended the Afghan throne in 1793. He wanted to revive the tradi¬ 
tion of Ahmad Shah Abdall. Soon after his accession he came to 
Peshawar in 1794, reconquered Kashmir, whose governor had re¬ 
volted after the death of his father. In 1795, he retreated precipi¬ 
tately after a week’s stay at Hasan Abdal as he heard the news of 
the invasion of West Khorasan by the King of Persia. His next 
Indian invasion took place in 1796-97. His route was Hasan Abdal- 
Rawalpindi-Rohtas-Gujarat-Gujranwala-Lahore. Zaman Shah had 
the intention of marching on to Delhi and actually pitched his 
tent four or five kos further onwards on the side towards Delhi. But 
there were commotions in Kabul and Zaman Shah instead of ad¬ 
vancing, had to go back. He left behind him a detachment under 
Ahmad Khan Shahanchi in the Doab. But these troops were over¬ 
whelmed by the Sikhs. Zaman Shah invaded for the last time in 
October 1798, and reoccupied Lahore, but very soon he received the 
unwelcome news that his half-brother Shah Mahmud had induced 


483 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

the King of Persia to invade Afghanistan. This was his last invasion 
and his reign came to an inglorious close in 1799. 

Sir John Shore regarded this revived Durrani menace not of 
course with unconcern, but he refused to believe that these ill- 
directed and ill-timed attempts of Zaman Shah were serious enough 
to alarm the English. He, however, strengthened the military de¬ 
fences of Awadh. He wrote in September, 1796 about Zaman Shah: 
“The execution of his intention will be hazardous unless he can ob¬ 
tain the co-operation of the Sikhs and hostages for the continuance 
of it and I have great doubt as to its success’’. In 1797, Sir John 
Shore took a more serious view and wrote, “many circumstances 
concur to make me suspect that the Shah’s views are more exten¬ 
sive than the mere expulsion of the Marathas from Hindustan 
and his expedition is planned in concert with Tipu for the ultimate 
purpose of depressing the British power in India” and he added, “it 
is certainly the duty of this Government to extend its vigilance and 
precaution”. His very vigorous action in Awadh can be explained 
by the reappearance of the Afghan threat. 

Sir John Shore was succeeded by Lord Wellesley in May, 1798 
and he thought of checking the Durrani monarch at the greatest pos¬ 
sible distance from the British frontier. Major General Craig re¬ 
garded British alliance with the Sikhs and the Rajputs as impracti¬ 
cable. Lord Wellesley claimed that the missions he sent to Persia 
first of Mehdi ‘Ali Khan and then of Malcolm “were responsible for 
the active measures adopted by the Court of Persia that produced 
the salutary effect of diverting the attention of Zaman Shah from 
his long projected invasion of Hindustan. The assistance afforded 
by Mehdi ‘Ali Khan under my orders to Prince Md. Shah originally 
enabled that prince to excite those commotions which have recently 
terminated in the defeat of Zaman Shah, in his deposition from the 
throne and in the entire extinction of his power. To the consolidated 
and active Government of Zaman Shah has succeeded a state of con¬ 
fusion in the country of the Afghans highly favourable to our secu¬ 
rity in that quarter”. 18 Lord Wellesley makes an exaggerated claim 
of having contributed to the disappearance of the Durrani menace. 
“Many and various things brought about the collapse of Zaman 
Shah’s empty schemes of ambition.” 

In Sir John Shore’s administration no attempt was made to 
straighten out the problem of British relations with the Nawab of 
the Karnatak and the ruler of Tanjore. Muhammad ‘Ali died in 
October, 1795 and Umdat-ul-Umara succeeded him. 


484 


PROGRESS OF THE BRITISH POWER (1785-1798) 


NOTES 

1 P.R.C., II, p. 28, Court of Directors to Governor-General, 21 July, 1786. 

2. P.R.C., I, 15A. 

3. PRC., I, 14. 

4 In this connection see Governor-General’s letter to’ the Poona Resident of 26 
Feb. 1787, P R C., H, 54. 

5. PRC., H, 37, 39, 42, 54. 

6 Cornwallis’ letter of 1 July, 1789. 

7. P R C., HI, pp. 42-45; Cornwallis to the Nizam, 7 July, 1789. 

7a. Wilks, Historical Sketches, III, 38. 

8- P R C., HI, pp. 115, 117, 118, 145-52. 

9- Aitchison, C. U., Treaties, Engagements (1863), pp. 58-59. 

10. P R C., H, p. 345-46. 

11. P.R .C., H, p. 257. 

12. Cornwallis to Malet, 7 Aug. 1972 cited by Malcolm, J., The Political History 
of India (Reprint 1970), p. 67. 

13- P R C., II, p. 256, also pp. 245-48. 

14. John Malcolm, Sketch of the Political History of India, p. 225. 

15 Grant Duff, History of the Mahrattas (1921), II, p. 242. 

16- PRC., IV, Introduction, pp. xiv-xv. 

17- Malet to Lord Cornwallis, 5 April, 1793; PRC., II, No. 175, p. 282. 

18- Martin, Wellesley Despatches, n, p. 134, 155-56. 


485 


CHAPTER XV 


DECLINE AND FALL OF THE MARATHA POWER 

(1799-1818) 

1. Decline of the Marat ha Power ( 1799-1802): 

When Napoleon was on the point of crossing the ‘French Lake’ 
to make a grandiose effort of expansion and glitter in the Levant, 
Lord Wellesley arrived in India to assume charge of the Company’s 
government. The imperial tide set in with the arrival of Lord Wel¬ 
lesley in India as Governor-General: “Evil days seem to be ahead. 
There seems to be no escape from destiny”—in these words at that 
time Nana Phadnis, in the sunset of his life, scanned the horizon of 
future and spoke about his disturbed spirit and the fate of the Mara¬ 
tha State. 

A sinister warning which sounded like the whispering of nemesis 
was given by Tipu to Hari Pant Phadke: “You must realize that I 

am not at all your enemy. Your real enemy is the Englishman of 

« 

whom you must beware”. 1 Peshivd Baji Rao II, Daulat Rao Sindia 
and RaghujI Bhosle II had sent vakils to Tipu Sultan on the eve 
of the Fourth Mysore War and the latter had requested the former 
to remain neutral in the war against the English. 2 The Peshivd is 
reported to have said that Tipu’s death had been like the loss of his 
right arm. 3 It was Nana Phadnis who had prevailed upon Baji Rao 
II to dismiss Tipu’s vakil. 4 But the readings of history were clear 
to Nana Phadnis when he warned the Peshivd saying: “Tipu is 
finished; the British power has increased; the whole of east India is 
already theirs. Poona will be the next victim”. 5 

It is true that Lord Wellesley’s first problem in the south was 
the Tiger of Mysore, but very few Maratha statesmen could guess 
that the Governor-General was at the same time studying their 
motives and watching their activities. In his numerous despatches, 
Lord Wellesley referred to the ‘treachery, low cunning, captious 
jealousy and perverse policy’ of the MaratMs. 6 The pivot of his 
Maratha policy was to treat the members of the Maratha state as 
independent powers and to weave a cobweb of engagements with 
them. On the fifth day after taking office, Lord Wellesley impressed 
upon the Peshivd the necessity of continuing friendly relations with 


486 


DECLINE AND FALL OF THE MARATHA POWER (1799-1818) 

the Company and returned the jewellery which Raghunath Rao had 
pawned with the British Government. 7 As early as 8 July, 1798, 
Wellesley directed Palmer, the Resident at Poona, to make a treaty 
with the Peshwd to exclude the French from his army, and to fur¬ 
nish him with a strong force from Bombay on the condition that the 
Peshwd should arrange for the regular payment of the troops. 8 The 
‘just, reasonable, temperate and moderate proposals’ for a secret 
treaty with the Peshwd were renewed in 1799, 9 on 12 April, 1800 
and on 30 November, 1801. 10 Col. Close made friends with the Euro¬ 
pean officers of Daulat Rao Sindia who importuned the Peshwd not 
to negotiate any treaty with the English without his concurrence. 11 It 
is significant to note that Wellesley transferred Palmer for his 
failure to manoeuvre the Peshwd into the acceptance of British 
suzerainty. 12 

Lord Wellesley obtained a stranglehold over the Gaikwar State 
in 1802. 13 An and Rao Gaikwar sought financial and military assist¬ 
ance from the British at Cambay against his cousin, Malhar Rao 
Gaikwar and Arab mercenaries. Jonathan Duncan, the Governor of 
Bombay, sent Major Walker with a force of two thousand to Baroda. 
Walker concluded a treaty with Anand Rao Gaikwar’s Dewan at 
Cambay and brought Malhar Rao Gaikwar of Kadi to submission. 14 

To Colebrooke, the Resident at Nagpur, Raghuj! Bhosle I ex¬ 
pressed his desire to join in an alliance against Tipu and become a 
mediator between the Company and the Peshwd. But as his conduct 
during the whole course of negotiations appeared to be insincere 
and illusory, 15 Colebrooke urged Lord Wellesley to abolish the resi¬ 
dency of Nagpur. These facts clearly indicate how Lord Wellesley* 
was preparing patiently for a judicious final stroke. His sound im* 
pulses and unfailing sense of reality in politics did not play him 
false. 

The Maratha state, like the Holy Roman Empire, was ‘a 
curious and baffling political puzzle’. Its whole texture was neither 
solid nor rational. There were cross purposes at work and the de¬ 
generation was emphasised by internal convulsions. Shahu II, the 
Chhatrapati of Satara, was a prisoner in his palace; and he was look¬ 
ed upon by the Peshwd as a costly appendage. Shahu’s brother 
Chhatra Singh reacted violently against the wretched condition to 
which the Raja had been reduced. The two brothers were anxious 
to free themselves from the. thraldom of the Peshwd and regenerate 
the Maratha State by bringing about the cohesion of the several mem¬ 
bers of the state. They overpowered the Peshivd’s managers, Apte 


487 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


and Abhyankar, at Satara in March 1798. Shlvaji III, the Chhatra - 
pati of Kolhapur, his able minister Ratnakar Pant and the widows 
of Mahadji Sindia made a common cause with Shahu II and Chhatra 
Singh. Their combined army defeated the Peshufa’s commander 
Madhav Rao Raste, on 16 June, 1798. Parashuram Bhau of Tasgaon, 
who was then confined at Mandavgan, was released by the Peshtm 
to restore the situation. Parashuram Bhau broke down the Satara 
Raja’s resistance. 16 But he was defeated and killed in an encounter 
with the joint forces of Kolhapur and Chhatra Singh at Pattankudi 
on 17 September, 1799. 17 After Parashuram’s death, his son Rama- 
chandra Pant along with his three valiant brothers besieged Kolha¬ 
pur. The Peshwa and the Sindia despatched ManajI Phakde, Maloji 
Ghorpade, Vinchurkar, the Pratinidhi and Captain Brownrigg with 
a strong artillery and trained battalions to the assistance of Para¬ 
shuram’s sons. The Chhatrapati of Kolhapur was defeated in 
December 1799, and compelled to take shelter at Panhala. 18 Lord 
Wellesley watched with great interest these domestic entanglements 
and distractions in the Maratha State. 

Peshwn BajI Rao II, son of Raghunath Rao, was the villain of 
the piece. He was installed as the Peshxvd at the age of twenty-one 
on December 5, 1796, by Nana Phadnis with the consent of the great 
feudatories of the State—Sindia, Holkar, Bhosle and the Nizam. 
Elphinstone has painted his character in the following words: 

“He is eager for power, though he wants the boldness necessary 
to acquire it, and is tenacious of authority, though too indolent to 
exercise it. Even his indolence is broken in by his habits of suspi¬ 
cion and vigilance, and there is no part of his character that is to 
be found unmixed and entire. His love of consequence makes him 
fond of the company of low dependants, where he can enjoy his 
superiority unrestricted. 

“He is vindictive to the extreme, he never forgets an injury, and 
spares no machinations to ruin the object of his resentment. To his 
habitual insincerity he joins a talent for insinuation and a natural 
love of artifice and intrigue. He has a general distrust of others. 

“He is a slave to superstition; half of his life is spent in fasts, 
prayers and pilgrimages. A large part of his revenue is consumed 
in magical practices. His superstition, however, imposes no restraint 
upon his pleasures and the greater part of his time that is not occu¬ 
pied by religion is devoted to vicious indulgences. Though he affects 
great purity in his own person, scarcely a day passes that he does 
not spend some hours with his favourites in large assemblies of wo- 


488 


DECLINE AND FALL OF THE MARATHA POWER (1799-1818) 

men, when he enjoys the coarsest buffoonery and witnesses most dis¬ 
gusting scenes of debauchery”. 119 

The author of Peshwyanchi Bakhar, Krishnaji Sohoni, who was 
an officer in the last days of the Peshwa and therefore, a close ob¬ 
server of events, was constrained to remark, “words fail to describe 
Peshwa BajI Rao, who unlike any other member of the family, 
was lacking in manly character, suspicious of nature, incapable of 
choosing wise advisers and was altogether wanting in military 
talent”* 20 

He was not the man who could arrest the decay and dissolution 
of the Maratha State that had set in before his accession, but he ac¬ 
celerated it by his antics. In the new administration Nana Phadnis 
became his Prime Minister, with Trimbak Rao Parchure as his assis¬ 
tant. The Peshwa was jealous of Nana Phadnis; but at the same 
time, he was constantly hard-pressed by Daulat Rao Sindia for 
money. Nana Phadnis, Baloba Tatya, the chief minister of the 
Sindia, and Parashuram Bhau were all supporters of BajI Rao IPs 
rival brother, Amrit Rao. On 31 December, 1797, Nana Phadnis was 
arrested by Michael Filose, an officer of Sindia, and was sent a pri¬ 
soner to Ahmadnagar. Being distracted by the clamour of soldiers 
for payment of arrears, Daulat Rao Sindia employed his father-in- 
law Sarza Rao Ghatge to raise money from Poona. For three 
months Sarza Rao created a reign of terror in the Maratha capital 
like that of Nadir Shah in Delhi. 21 Responsible opinion now came to 
Nana’s side and Daulat Rao Sindia had to release him on 15 July, 
1798. On 17 January, 1799, BajI Rao II reluctantly gave formal 
leave to Daulat Rao Sindia. 

The last phase of Nana Phadnis’ administration (1798-180Q) 
v/as not a fitting epilogue to his career. He was only a puzzled and 
ostensible Prime Minister, and he left the administration in the 
hands of Naro Pant Chakradeo. 22 In his last days the precision and 
punctiliousness of the ‘Maratha Machiavelli’ weakened and he ruined 
Maratha national interests by selfishness and want of statesmanlike 
vision. After Nana Phadnis’s death in March 1800, Daulat Rao 
Sindia managed the Peshwa’s administration, but his measures did 
not lead to any wholesome change. Shortage of money led to daily 
mutinies by the Sindia’s long unpaid soldiers. The Peshwa and the 
Sindia quarrelled over the treasures of Nana Phadnis. Fearing that 
the PeshWa intended to fly flom Poona, Daulat Rao Sindia kept a 
guard for some time over his palace. 23 BajI Rao II now followed the 
imbecile policy of making Sindia and Holkar dependent on the Poona 


489 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Government by encouraging their friction in Malwa. Obviously, the 
Maratha State was rapidly heading for the crisis of 1802. 

The affairs of Daulat Rao Sindia, who possessed eastern Malwa, 
the territory west of the Jamuna and the upper Ganga-Jamuna 
Doab, were not very satisfactory. Daulat Rao Sindia (son of Mahadji 
Sindia’s nephew Anand Rao) was officially installed as successor to 
Mahadji Sindia on 10 May, 1794. Dull of intellect and with practi¬ 
cally no education, he had fallen in public esteem by his debauchery, 
vices and frivolous amusements like kite-flying and jackal-hunting. 24 
There was also a growing discontent among the subjects against his 
father-in-law Sarza Rao Ghatge who ill-treated the widows of 
Mahadji Sindia (Lakshmi Bai, Yamuna Bai, Bhagirathi Bai and 
Kesar Bai) by entering their apartments, whipping them and drag¬ 
ging them out for being sent off to some prison fort. The Shenvi 
party headed by Lakshman Anant Lad (popularly known as Lakhba 
Dada), Niarayan Rao Bakshi, Devji Gauli, Rayaji Platil, and Ramji 
Patil rallied round the widows who were held in high esteem. A civil 
war on a vast scale, known as the Widows’ War (1798-1802) now 
broke out against the grinding tyranny of Daulat Rao Sindia and his 
stooge Sarza Rao. Daulat Rao Sindia subsequently realised that 
he was only sinking deeper and deeper into the quicksands of 
that war. 25 

Holkar’s territories embraced the south-western part of Malwa 
and these were governed by Tukoji Holkar from 1795 to 1797. After 
the death of Ahalya Bai in 1795, there was chaos in Holkar’s State. 
Tukoji Holkar passed away on August 15, 1797. After his death 
violent quarrels broke out among his two legitimate sons, Kashi Rao 
Holkar and Malhar Rao Holkar. Kashi Rao was a weak-minded 
cripple and Malhar Rao Holkar was a ruffian; “his insane pride, 
reckless violence, habitual drunkenness and addiction to the preda¬ 
tory way of life had brought him to the level of a Pindari looter”. 26 
Yashwant Rao Holkar, the third son of Tukoji, born in 1776, was 
full of adventure and resourcefulness; Vithoji, the youngest son of 
Tukoji, trained for no worthy work, took to the predatory way of 
life. 27 Yashwant Rao and Vithoji were passionately attached to 
Malhar Rao. Kashi Rao purchased for 14 lakhs of rupees the help 
of Daulat Rao Sindia against Malhar Rao, who was killed in a sur¬ 
prise night attack at Bhamburda on 14 September, 1797. 28 It was 
but natural for Yashwant Rao to make an attempt to thwart the 
ambition of Daulat Rao Sindia to reduce the House of Holkar in vas¬ 
salage to himself. Yashwant declared Khande Rao Holkar, the in¬ 
fant son of Malhar Rao Holkar II, as the lawful head of the House 


490 


DECLINE AND FALL OF THE MARATHA POWER (1799-1818) 

of Holkar, with himself as regent and working head of the State. 29 
His bold challenge to Sindia rang throughout the Maratha empire. 

As fugitives from Bhamburda, Yashwant Rao and his faithful 
follower Bhawani Shankar were pursued from September 1797 to 
June 1798, but they managed to escape. Yashwant captured Mahes- 
war in January, 1799, and wrought widespread ravages in Malwa. 
His success as a leader of brigands drew to his side ambitious adven¬ 
turers like Shahmat Khan, Vazir Hasan, Mihrban Singh, Zaman 
Khan, Fateh Singh Mane and others. Most valuable among the new 
adherents was Mir Khan, a rising leader of Pa than brigands, who 
was a source of strength to Yashwant Rao Holkar. 30 Daulat Rao 
Sindia refused to release Khande Rao Holkar who had been kept 
confined in the fort of Asirgarh. He also refused to confirm the 
agreements between Mahadji Sindia and Tukoji Holkar and levied 
contributions by raiding Holkar’s villages in Malwa and Khandesh. 
In reprisal Yashwant Rao took to plundering Sindia’s possessions 
north of Ujjain 31 and defeated Sindia’s officer MacIntyre at Newri 
(16 miles north-west of the Unchaud pass) on 25 June, 1801. 32 But 
near Satwas, Captain Brownrigg, another officer of Sindia, defeated 
Yashwant Rao on 4 July, 1801. 33 Yashwant Rao redeemed his honour 
by the capture of Ujjain on July 18, 1801. 34 Though aided by the 
July shower, Yashwant displayed remarkable originality, boldness 
of plan, an eye for strategic situations and rapidity of movement. 
Yashwant Rao, however, suffered a defeat at the hands of Sarza Rao 
Ghatge on 14 October, 1801, 35 but he was still potent for mischief. 
He carried on a roving predatory campaign in Malwa, Khandesh and 
the Desh districts of Maharashtra. 

While Yashwant Rao was menacingly advancing towards 
Deccan, all was not well at Poona. VithojI provoked the wrath of 
the Peshwa by his devastations round Pandharpur. He was captur¬ 
ed alive by Bapu Gokhale, given 200 stripes on his body, tied to the 
foot of an elephant and killed with horrid cruelty. 36 BajI Rao II and 
his favourite Baloji Kunjar gleefully watched the sight. In this 
context, Yashwant’s final warning to the Peshwa should not be over¬ 
looked: “If you wish to avoid bloodshed, send to me at once Baloji 
and Dajiba Deshmukh on your behalf, and Baburao Angria and 
Nlmaji Bhaskar on behalf of the Sindia to negotiate terms”. These 
were the persons who were responsible for the murder of VithojI. 37 
Outwardly Yashwant assured the Peshwa that he would serve him 
faithfully, 38 but covertly he made preparations to avenge his bro¬ 
ther’s death. 


491 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


The Peshwd’s Karbharis had foolishly persuaded him to under¬ 
rate the strength of Yashwant Rao Holkar. On 8 October, 1802, 
Fateh Singh Mane scattered the forces of Nana Purandare, the com¬ 
mander of the Peshwd, at Baramati (40 miles s.w. of Poona) , 39 This 
was followed by Yashwant’s victory over Sindia’s general Sadashiv 
Bhaskar in the plains of Hadapsar on 25 October, 1802, incidentally 
also the day of Diwali. 40 The Peshwd fled from Poona. On 27 
October, 1802, he crossed the Western Ghats at midnight, spent a 
month at Birwadi near Mahad spinning out negotiations with the 
English for their support. 41 The Civil War in Maharashtra in 1802 
was the outcome of calamitous follies of the Peshwd and his great 
feudatories. Yashwant Rao Holkar’s triumph at Hadapsar drove the 
Peshwd into the arms of the English. 

In the new regime at Poona Yashwant Rao reserved for him¬ 
self the general command of the troops, while Amrit Rao assumed 
the headship of the State. They used every possible argument to 
convince Col. Close, the British Resident, of the justice of the cause 
of the party in power at Poona. Col. Close had remained attached 
throughout to the cause of BajI Rao II and continued to guide him 
from Poona. 42 The Resident was allowed to leave Poona on 28 
November. He met the Peshwd at Bassein on 16 December and next 
day began the discussions with him regarding the terms of the pro¬ 
posed treaty in the light of instructions received from the Governor- 
General. Balwant Rao Nagnath and Raghunath Janardan, the two 
advisers of the Peshwd, lost no opportunity of convincing their 
master of British integrity, magnanimity and regard for the plighted 
word, and the Peshwd signed an agreement which went far beyond 
his original intention of hiring British troops for a limited purpose. 43 

The proposals which the Peshwd had made on 25 October, 1802, 
supplied the basis for the treaty of Bassein which was “constructed 
after the latest and most approved model of subsidiary alliances”. 44 
It was signed before the commencement of the New Year and rati¬ 
fied by the Governor-General on March 18, 1803. By this treaty, 
the Peshwd agreed to receive from the Company on a permanent 
basis no less than 6,000 regular native infantry with the usual pro¬ 
portion of field pieces and European artillerymen attached, and with 
the proper equipment of warlike stores and ammunitions. For the 
payment of these troops, the Peshwd agredd to cede in perpetuity 
to the Company’s Government, territories yielding an annual in¬ 
come of 26 lakhs of rupees. These territories were situated in four 
different parts of the Peshwd’s 'possessions—Gujarat, the terri¬ 
tories to the south of the Tapti, territories between the Tapti and the 


492 


DECLINE AND FALL OF THE MARATHA POWER (1799-1818) 

Narmada and the territories near the Tungabhadra. Baji Rao II re¬ 
linquished for ever his right over the city of Surat. The Peshwd 
agreed to accept British arbitration in cases of disputes arising with 
the Nizam and to give up all claims for chauth on the Nizam’s domi¬ 
nions. He was to respect the treaty of friendship already contrac¬ 
ted (June 1802) between the Gaikwar and the English. The Peshwd 
was not to keep in his employment any European hostile to the 
English and was not to engage in negotiations with other States with¬ 
out previous consultation with the Company’s Government. 45 

The Treaty of Bassein was something more than a defensive 
alliance. Wrote Valentia, a contemporary English traveller: “The 
treaty of Bassein has in fact annihilated the (Maratha) Empire”. 46 
Lord Castlereagh, the President of the Board of Control, pointed out 
that it tended to involve the English ‘in the endless and complicated 
distractions of the Maratha Empire and hostility with the three 
greatest military powers’. He also deprecated the article in the 
treaty of Bassein by which the Peshwd was bound to accept a Bri¬ 
tish arbitration in all disputes. 47 Arthur Wellesley’s private opinion 
was that ‘it was a treaty with a cipher who, in the shape of a friend, 
is our worst enemy’, but in public, he offered the best defence he 
could for his brother’s policy 48 It has to be noted that Arthur wrote 
in 1806: “Upon the whole, then, I conclude that the treaty of Bas¬ 
sein was wise, just and a politic measure”. 49 Perhaps it would not be 
overemphasising its importance if we say that the treaty of Bassein 
put an end to Maratha independence, 50 gave the Company “the un¬ 
questionable supremacy over the Maratha State,” 51 and by its direct 
and indirect operations gave the Company the empire of India. 52 
There is no denying the fact that by this treaty, the head of the 
Maratha confederacy was brought under the complete control of the 
Company and the latter got a “lawful right to take steps for the 
Peshwa’s authority”. 53 

2. The Second Anglo-Maratha War: 

The new regime of Yashwant Rao Holkar at Poona was a flimsy' 
structure—his approach to various problems was characterised by 
short-sighted opportunism. His financial difficulties became acute 
with the increase in his forces to meet which he heaped terrible 
misery upon the city of Poona. 54 Yashwant Rao failed to seat Vina- 
yak Rao, son of Amrit Rao, in the place of Baji Rao II. While .he was 
trying to organise a Maratha confederacy he was writing to the 
British Resident requesting his help in an adjustment with the 
Peshwd. 55 YashwanPs negotiations with the Sindia were very slow 


493 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

and not fruitful either. 56 In the words of Lord Wellesley, “the situa¬ 
tion of Holkar is precarious and accidental”. 57 Yashwant Rao left 
Poona on 25 February, 1803, 53 leaving a small corps under Harnath 
Singh. Then he took the road to Hyderabad and Ahmadnagar to 
maintain his huge army by plundering. 59 Amrit Rao left Poona for 
Junnar on 20 April, 1803. On 13 May, 1803, declared a lucky day by 
the astrologers, the Peshwd, backed by British bayonets, entered 
Poona. The restoration of the Peshvxi was largely due to the con¬ 
summate planning and skilful execution by Arthur Wellesley. 60 The 
latter assured Amrit Rao of British protection against the Peshwd and 
also other chiefs. 61 

Daulat Rao Sindia was now called upon by Lord Wellesley 
through Collins, the Resident at Sindia’s court, either to give his 
consent to the terms of the treaty of Bassein and take a decision ‘up¬ 
on terms of equality and honourable to all parties’ or to be prepared 
for a war. 62 Daulat Rao was singled out by Lord Wellesley for the 
use of pressure tactics as he was convinced that the former alone 
possessed the means of offering any serious opposition to the Bri¬ 
tish. 63 It was also Wellesley’s ambition to destroy the French party 
at Sindia’s court. 64 Daulat Rao and Raghuji Bhosle exerted all their 
ingenuity to form a Maratha coalition. 65 They instigated Gosain 
Himmat Bahadur and Gani Beg in Bundelkhand to prepare for a war 
against the British. 66 A conspiracy for the overthrow of British in¬ 
fluence was afoot at the court of Baroda. 67 The Nizam seemed a bit 
inclined to support the confederates. 68 Yashwant Rao Holkar alone 
stood aloof. Daulat Rao, in response to /the Holkar’s demands, re¬ 
leased the infant Khande Rao and agreed^to settle the differences 
through the mediation of Raghuji Bhosle. 69 Bhosle’s ministers 
presented to Yashwant an order from Daulat Rao releasing Holkar’s 
territory in Malwa which Sindia had occupied after his victory at 
Indore. 693 But while their negotiations were proceeding at a slow 
pace, Lord Wellesley was going ahead with his plans. On 7 August, 
1803, he issued a proclamation of war; but Yashwant Rao still show¬ 
ed no disposition to join the Sindia and the Bhosle. He turned to¬ 
wards Burhanpur and then encamped at Bhikangaon. 70 Sir Thomas 
Munro observes, “Had Holkar taken a decided part against us or had 
the French been able to land a strong detachment, our difficulties 
would have been so much increased, that I doubt if we should have 
made any new conquests”. 71 

Various explanations have been given for Holkar’s not showing 
any ‘disposition to fulfil his word’, 72 and betraying the confederates. 
According to Duff, Yashwant excused himself on the ground that if 


494 


DECLINE AND FALL OF THE MARATHI POWER (1799-1818) 

all were to be engaged in the Deccan War, no one would be able “to 
take care of Hindustan”. 73 Besides, Yashwant knew that Daulat 
Rao’s first object after re-establishing his influence at Poona would 
be a war of extermination against him. 74 Malcolm tells us that Yash¬ 
want wrote a long letter to Sindia explaining his absence for want 
of money 75 Pearse holds that Yashwant Rao Holkar was afraid of 
assisting Daulat Rao Sindia lest he should become the chief power 
in India. 76 Arthur Wellesley and Collins believed that Yashwant’s 
“object was to keep himself out of the contest while urging others in¬ 
to it”. 77 In explaining the absence of Holkar from the coalition, 
Sardesai attaches considerable importance to Arthur Wellesley’s 
letter to the former dated 16 July, 1803. “I am anxious”, wrote 
Arthur, “to cultivate the good understanding which subsisted be¬ 
tween the Company’s Government and you” 78 It is significant to 
note that on the eve of the war, Amrit Rao intercepted a letter in 
which Sindia wrote to the Peshwa: “Let us make a show of satis¬ 
fying his demands. After the war is over, we shall both wreak our 
full vengeance upon him (Yashwant Rao)”. 79 Amrit Rao placed that 
letter in Arthur’s hands, and the latter had it diverted to Yashwant 
Rao. 80 Then Yashwant Rao wrote to Sindia and Bhosle from 
Bhikangaon: “I am ready to join you in this business according to 
your letter. But you, in spite of all your promises and oaths, have 
a different intention and do not consider an alliance v/ith me advis¬ 
able”. 81 The primary responsibility of the break-up of the Maratha 
coalition rests on Daulat Rao Sindia. 

Daulat Rao Sindia and Raghuji Bhosle met with quick reverses. 
Arthur Wellesley captured Ahmadnagar on 12 August, 1803. His 
problem was to guard among a hostile population the famine-stricken 
Poona district and the Nizam’s territory. 82 The essence of Arthur 
Wellesley’s rule of war was never to let the Maratha raiders remain 
undisturbed, never to attack them when holding a strongly defend¬ 
ed position, to force them on to move, and to strike them when 
thrown into disorder. 83 Stevenson fought skirmishes against the 
foraging parties of the Pindaris at Jafarabad. On 23 September, 
1803, in the hotly contested battle of Assaye (a village situated 
about forty-five miles north-east of Aurangabad), the combined 
army of Sindia and Bhosle led by Gopal Rao Bhau and Vithal Pant 
Bakhshi was soundly beaten by Arthur Wellesley. ‘It was a triumph 
more splendid than any recorded in Deccan history’, 84 but achieved 
at an enormous cost of men (663 Europeans and 1,778 Indian killed 
or wounded). Stevenson captured Burhanpur on 15 October, 1803, 
and Asirgarh on 21 October, 1803. Wellesley’s and Stevensons’e corn- 


495 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


bined army decisively defeated Bhosle at Argaon on 29 November, 
1803. Bhosle’s troops behaved with conspicuous gallantry. Arthur 
and Stevenson captured Gawilgarh on December 15, 1803. 

In the northern theatre of war, Lake launched his attack with 
impetuous vigour and captured Aligarh on September 5, 1803. Per¬ 
ron, the French adventurer, who was responsible for managing the 
northern possessions of Sindia, selfishly removed the most seasoned 
battalions far from the expected point of attack. Lake then defea¬ 
ted M. Louis Bourquien, Perron’s successor of Sindia’s army, at Pat- 
parganj near Delhi on 11 September, 1803. 85 Lake personally head¬ 
ed every charge of his infantry. Two days later he took into his 
possession the blind eighty-three year old Mughul emperor, Shah 
‘Alam II, and left Colonel Ochterlony in command at Delhi. Having 
concluded a treaty with the Raja of Bharatpur, Lake captured Agra 
on October 17, 1803. The remaining forces of Sindia were finally 
vanquished at Laswari (20 miles south of Bharatpur) on 1 Novem¬ 
ber, 1803. 86 Ambaji Ingle, who held the Subahdari of the Sindian 
province south of Agra and the whole of Malwa, fled from the battle¬ 
field. The battle of Laswari completed the destruction of Sindia’s 
power. The victory was purchased by Lake at a heavy price (822 
men killed and wounded including Major-General Weir and Major 
Griffiths) , 87 

Success attended the arms of the English in Gujarat, Bundel- 
khand and Orissa. Colonel Murray captured Broach on 29 August, 
1803, Champaner and Pavagad on 17 September, 1803. The pro¬ 
vince of Cuttack including Balasore was conquered in October, 1803. 
A large number of minor chiefs such as the Rajput and Jat princes, 
the Nawabs of the Doab, the Bundela chiefs, Himmat Bahadur and 
Shamsher Bahadur, and Ambaji Ingle were detached from Maratha 
allegiance. 

Lord Wellesley desired that Sindia and Bhosle should be sent 
to Calcutta to beg for peace at his feet. But Arthur Wellesley con¬ 
sidered it a better policy to make the subdued chiefs innocuous than 
to humiliate them. By the treaty of Deogaon (19 December, 1803), 
Raghuji Bhosle II ceded to the British Government the province of 
Orissa with its whole coast including Balasore, and the whole of 
the territory and share of the revenues to the westward of the river 
Wardha and south of the hills on which stand Narnaulla and Gawil¬ 
garh. However, he retained in his possession the two forts with dis¬ 
tricts below with a revenue of four lakhs. The province of Western 
Berar up to the river Wardha was ceded to. the Nizam. Bhosle was 


496 


DECLINE AND FALL OF THE MARATHA POWER (1799-1818) 

to respect all the treaties concluded with his feudatories by the Bri u 
tish Government. No British subject, European or American, was 
to be entertained by him without the consent of the British Govern¬ 
ment. RaghujI renounced his adherence to the Maratha state, re¬ 
cognised the treaty of Bassein and admitted Elphinstone as the 
British Resident in his court. 88 

Daulat Rao Sindia sent his agents Kamal Nay an Munshi and 
Vithal Pant who concluded the treaty of Siirji Anjangaon on 30 
December, 1803. He recognised the treaty of Bassein and surrender¬ 
ed his territories between the Yamuna and the Ganga and all those 
situated to the north of Jaipur, Jodhpur and Gohad. He ceded 
to the British Government Ahmadnagar, Broach and his possessions 
between Ajanta and the Godavari. Sindia renounced his claims on 
the British Government, the Peshmd , the Nizam and Gaikwar. He 
confirmed all treaties made by the British Government with his feu¬ 
datories and recognised their independence. He agreed never to re¬ 
tain in his service any European, American or any British Indian 
subject, and he renounced his control upon the Mughul emperor. 
Daulat Rao admitted Malcolm as British Resident in his court, but 
he refused to accept a British subsidiary force. On his representa¬ 
tion, Burhanpur, Pavagarh and Asirgarh were restored to him. By 
a separate treaty concluded on 27 February, 1804, Sindia entered in¬ 
to a defensive alliance with the English. 89 

During the first phase of the second Anglo-Maratha War, Yash- 
want Rao Holkar’s conduct had been rather favourable to British 
interests. After the defeat of Sindia and Bhosle, he tried to raise 
a coalition of Indian rulers and entered into secret correspondence 
with the^Rajas of Jaipur, Jodhpur and Udaipur, Begam Samru, the 
Raja of Machery, the Rohilla chief Ghulam Muhammad and the Sikh 
chiefs Rao Singh, Mir Singh, Gurpal Singh, Banga Singh and Jadu 
Singh. 90 Yashwant sent an envoy to Daulat Rao on 5 February, 1804, 
in order to persuade him to withdraw from the British alliance. 
Daulat Rao prqmptly acquainted the British with these overtures. 91 
Yashwant thought that he would now be singled out for attack by 
the English and he was not unwilling to enter into a defensive alli¬ 
ance with the British Government on the same terms as had been 
the case with Sindia. But as a preliminary to peace with the English, 
Yashwant Rao demanded that the British should not interfere with 
his traditional claims of chauth upon some Indian chiefs. The ter¬ 
ritories which were actually in his possession should be guaranteed 
to him, and the territories formerly held by the Holkar family in 
the Doab and Bundelkhand such as Etawa and Haryana should be 

497 i 


M.S.—82 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


restored to him. If his request was not acceded to, he declared that 
countries of many hundred kos should be overrun and plun¬ 
dered and burnt. That he (C-in-C) should not have leisure to 
breathe for a moment, and that calamities should fall on lacs of 
human beings by the attacks of Holkar’s army which overwhelms 
like the waves of the sea”. 92 The high tone of the demands fore¬ 
doomed the negotiations to failure. In March 1804, Holkar ravaged 
Pushkar and Ajmer. His acts of brigandage at Jaipur were a direct 
challenge to the British Government as the Raja of Jaipur had al¬ 
ready accepted a British subsidiary force. 93 Another act of his bar¬ 
barity was the murder of his three British officers—Vickers, Dodd 
and Ryan—who had expressed their desire to resign from his ser¬ 
vice in obedience to the proclamation of the Governor-General. 94 
War was declared against Holkar in April, 1804. On 5 June, 1804, 
the Governor-General in Council wrote to the Secret Committee of 
the Court of Directors: “The reduction of that predatory power was 
manifestly a measure not only of just policy and necessary security 
but of ultimate economy with reference to the finances of the Honour¬ 
able Company”. 95 Lord Wellesley thought that one action was suffi¬ 
cient to annihilate the army of Holkar. 96 Arthur Wellesley also 
opined that a war against Holkar should not be more than a ‘Polygar 
War’, 97 and should not last even a fortnight. 98 Brigadier Monson ad¬ 
vanced about 50 miles from the Mukundra pass (about 30 miles 
south of Kota) and was defeated by Holkar. Monson was obliged 
to retreat to Agra towards the end of August, 1804, losing five batta¬ 
lions and six companies. Yashwant adopted the old Maratha preda¬ 
tory tactics and tried every means to crush the enemy. To his long 
catalogue of errors, more than to any other cause, the disastrous re¬ 
treat of Monson must be ascribed. 99 

Monson’s defeat encouraged Holkar to return to Hindustan. He 
had 60,000 cavalry, 16,000 infantry and 192 guns. Lieutenant Col. 
Ochterlony and Lieutenant Col. Bum repulsed the attack on Delhi 
by Holkar’s commander Hamath Singh. 100 The latter suffered a re¬ 
verse at Dig on 13 November, 1804. Holkar himself was routed by 
Lake at Farrukhabad on 17 November, 1804, 101 and was compelled 
to turn to Ranjit Singh, the Raja of Bharatpur, for supplies of money 
and arms. Ranjit Singh assigned the fort of Dig to Holkar and 
placed his diman Rai Singh and his son Lachman Singh with two 
fully armed battalions under the Maratha chief. 102 

Dig was captured on 23 December, 1804, and the remnant of 
Holkar’s army took shelter in the fort of Bharatpur. The siege of 
Bharatpur by Lake began on 7 January, 1805. Three attempts to take 


498 


DECLINE AND FALL OF THE MARATHA POWER (1799-1818) 

the fort by assault having failed, Lake converted the siege into a 
blockade. 103 The Jats of Bharatpur revealed the grim resolution of 
their race. Lake made hurried and overconfident attempts with an 
insufficient battering train. 104 Holkar’s forays against the besiegers 
failed. The Raja of Bharatpur, despite his success, realised he could 
not stand up to the British and sued for peace. He sent his vakils to 
Lake’s camp on 10 March, 1805, and exactly after a month conclud¬ 
ed a treaty. He paid twenty lakhs to the Company’s Government, 
renounced his alliance with the enemies of the British Government 
and his claim to advantages secured by the former treaty with Lake. 
The fortress of Dig was to remain with the English, and a son of 
Ranjit Singh was to reside with the commanding officer of the Bri¬ 
tish forces in suburbs of Agra and Delhi. From the British point 
of view, the treaty of Bharatpur was an honourable settlement. In 
the siege of Bharatpur, however, 3,203 men including 103 European 
Officers were killed and wounded. 105 This had something to do with 
the recall of Lord Wellesley in July, 1805 by the Court of Directors. 
Under the pressure of Wellesley’s forward policy, the debt of the 
Company increased from 17 millions in 1797 to 31 millions in 1806. 
Pitt thought that Lord Wellesley had acted most imprudently and 
illegally. 106 

Then began the last phase of Yashwant’s career. Through 
Sarza Rao Ghatge, Yashwant Rao received a cordial reception in 
Sindia’s camp at Sabalgarh. But he achieved nothing tangible be¬ 
cause of the temporising policy of Ambaji Ingle, the rekindling of old 
Sindia-Holkar rivalry and above all because of Sindia’s conviction 
that it was futile to fight against the English. 107 Daulat Rao Sindia 
concluded the treaty of Mustafapur with the Company’s Government 
on 21 November, 1805. Gohad and the fort of Gwalior were restored 
to him. But he renounced his claims on the territories north of the 
Chambal. The Company was not to enter into treaties with the Rana 
of Udaipur, the Rajas of Jodhpur and Kota and make claims on the 
territories south of the Chambal. 108 Meanwhile Lake had pursued 
Yashwant up to Amritsar, where the latter proceeded expecting help 
from the Sikh chief, Ranjit Singh. Yashwant Rao was compelled to 
conclude the treaty of Rajpurghat with Lake on the banks of the Bea$ 
on 24 December, 1805. He renounced his rights to every place to 
the north of the Chambal and all claims on Poona and Bundelkhand. 
He agreed not to employ any European in his service without the 
consent of the Company ;s Government and never to admit Sarza 
Rao Ghatge into his counsel or employment. Yashwant Rao was 
allowed to return to his own dominion by a route prescribed by the 


499 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

British Commander. The Company's Government agreed not to in¬ 
terfere in Holkar’s territories south of the Chambal. The forts and 
territories belonging to the Holkar family in the Deccan excepting 
Chandor, Ambar, and Shegaon, were to be restored to Yash want Rao 
Holkar. This was a conditional measure adopted as a security for 
Yashwant’s good behaviour during the period of 18 months. 109 Sir 
George Barlow made an alteration in the treaty and restored to Holkar 
Tonk, Rampura and all the territory north of the Bund! hills. Thus 
the Raja of Bundl, who had rendered valuable help to Monson, was 
abandoned to his fate. The declaratory article to the treaty of Raj- 
purghat, which was ascribed to the dread of the military talents of 
Yashwant Rao Holkar 110 came as a surprise to the latter. The treaty 
of Rajpurghat rang down the curtain on Yashwant Rao Holkar’s con¬ 
flict with the English. 

3. Fall of the Maratha Power ( 1806-1817 ): 

Sir George Barlow’s uncalled for generosity rekindled Yash¬ 
want's ambition to reunite the members of the Maratha confederacy. 
He commenced a complete reorganisation of his army and opened a 
gun factory at Bhanpura. 111 Sindia did little except holding whis¬ 
pered conferences. 112 The ceaseless campaigning, the dissipating 
habits and the frustration of his plans affected Yashwant’s mind and 
he sank into insanity from which he never recovered. There was 
complete anarchy in Holkar’s State during the period of his insanity 
(1807-1811). Death put an end to his sufferings on 27 October, 1811 
at Bhanpura—he had not completed the 35th year of his life. The 
Peshwa, who had described Yashwant as a monster, stopped his 
naubat (band) for three days on hearing of his death. 113 

Tulsa Bai, a mistress of Yashwant Rao, now assumed power in 
the name of his son, Malhar Rao, a four-year-old son of Yashwant 
from another wife. Tulsa Bai managed the Holkar state with the 
help of Mir Khan, Ghafur Khan and Zalim Singh of Kota. She pos¬ 
sessed beauty, talents, winning manners and learning; but at the 
same time she was cruel and dissolute. 114 Her difficulty was want of 
funds to meet the demands of the army. At the same time Sindia 
was attacking the defenceless possessions of Holkar in Malwa. Tulsa 
Bai was therefore in favour of accepting the terms of an alliance offer¬ 
ed by the English in 1817. But her mutinous soldiery urged a re¬ 
course to hostilities with the English. Roshan Beg was at the head 
of the disciplined regiments of Holkar. Ram Din, a north-Indian 
Brahmin, commanded Holkar’s cavalry. They carried Tulsa Bai to 


DECLINE AND FALL OF THE MARATHA POWER (1799-1818) 

the banks of the Sipra at Mahidpur (about 30 miles north of Ujjain), 
struck off her head, and cast her body into the stream. 115 

Daulat Rao Sindia’s indolent optimism had been severely shaken 
in the war against the English. After the death of Yashwant Rao, he 
attacked the undefended possessions of Holkar and even made an 
attempt on the lives of Tulsa Bai and Malhar Rao Holkar III. The 
Governor-General, however, reduced the power of Daulat Rao 
Sindia by the treaty of Gwalior on 5 November, 1817. By the treaty, 
Sindia agreed to assist the English against the Pindaris, and not to 
interfere in the internal affairs of Udaipur, Jodhpur, Kota and 
Bund!. 116 

In the regime of Major Walker at Baroda, Anand Rao Gaikwar 
and his brother Fateh Singh Gaikwar were virtual prisoners under 
the British guards. Walker’s appointment of a Regency Commis¬ 
sion in 1806, and the high-handed policy of his successor Captain 
Rivett Carnac provoked the formation of an anti-British party at 
Baroda headed by the Ranis of Anand Rao Gaikwar, Sitaram Raoji, 
Govind Rao BandhujI and Bhagwant Rao Gaikwar. The crisis was 
averted by Gaikwar’s principal minister, Gangadhar Shastri, 117 who 
kept the Resident of Baroda well informed with the details of their 
secret activities. By a treaty with the Company on 6 November, 
1817, the Gaikwar agreed to add 1,000 regular infantry and two 
regiments of cavalry to his subsidiary force, cede some of his dis¬ 
tricts to the Company for additional expenses and discharge a part 
of his irregular troops. 

RaghujI Bhosle II maintained an attitude of sullen indiffer¬ 
ence and refused to accept a subsidiary alliance. In 1809 he com¬ 
pelled Mir Khan to retreat from Nagpur. The efforts of Bhonsle and 
Sindia to capture Bhopal in 1813-1814 were foiled by Nawab Vazir 
Muhammad. RaghujI died in March, 1816. After his death his son, 
Parsoji Bhosle succeeded to the chief ship. He was sick, blind and 
paralytic and his cousin Appa Saheb became the regent of the State. 
The struggle for supremacy between Appa Saheb and Raghuji’s 
widow, Baka Bai, drove Appa Saheb into the arms of the British with 
whom the Regent concluded a treaty of subsidiary alliance on 27 
May, 1816. Soon after the event Appa Saheb succeeded to the Gadi 
on the death of Parsoji on 1 February, 1817. In July 1817, Appa 
Saheb had secret meetings with the vakils of the Peshwa and Sindia. 
He also befriended the Pindari leader Cheetu. All this came to the 
knowledge of the British Resident whereupon the Governor-General 
issued a stern warning to the Nagpur Raja. 118 On 24 November, 


501 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

1817, Appa Saheb, against the wishes of the British Resident, re¬ 
ceived robes of Sena Saheb Subah from the Peshwa . The Bhosle 
gradually became restive of British control. 119 

4. The Third Anglo-^Maratha War: 

The first few years after the conclusion of the second Anglo- 
Maratha War (1803-09) were marked by the greatest cordiality be¬ 
tween the Peshwa and the English. Released from the galling tute¬ 
lage of Nana Phadnls, as well as the dreaded rivalry of his power¬ 
ful feudatories, the Peshwa was free to follow his inclination in the 
arrangement of his affairs. He selected men after his own heart for 
office in government and gave himself up entirely to a life of vicious 
pleasure alternated by religious observances. The British Resident 
at Poona took care to see that he did not involve himself in foreign 
intrigues and was kept in good humour, and the presence of the sub¬ 
sidiary force hastened the restoration of tranquillity in the Peshvxi’s 
dominions. Out of the revenue of 12 million rupees per annum the 
Peshwa saved almost half and his treasury was now overflowing. 
The Peshwa was profuse in expressing his gratitude to the British 
“for saving him from destruction and demanding nothing in re¬ 
turn”. 120 

But the honeymoon did not last long. Col. Close had avoided 
discussion of unpleasant topics in which he had been helped by the 
non-interference policy of Barlow and Minto at the head of the Com¬ 
pany’s Government. But all this changed with the appointment of 
Elphinstone as Resident at the Poona Court in February, 1811. His 
direct dealing with the visitors to the Residency, his settlement of 
the Peshwa’s dispute with the Southern Jagirdars —the Patwar- 
dhans, Rastes, Desais of Kittur and Nipani—were highly displeasing 
to the Peshwa. The treaty of Pandharpur, as the settlement was 
called, obtained for the jagirdars a pledge of security from the Com¬ 
pany’s Government. This pledge of security to the jagirdars made 
a mockery of the Peshwft’s authority over his subjects. It was not 
so much their allegiance that he desired as their destruction. The 
arbitration effected by the Resident embittered the Peshwa’s mind. 
This was the first serious rift between the Peshwa and the English. 121 

The discussion of the Peshwa’s claims on'the Gaikwar of Baroda 
led to further deterioration in the Anglo-Maratha relations. Ganga- 
dhar Shastri, the Gaikwar’s envoy who came to Poona with Bri¬ 
tish guarantee to discuss the Peshwd’s financial claims over the 
Baroda state, was foully murdered at Vithoba’s temple at Pandhar- 


502 


DECLINE AND FALL OF THE MARATHA POWER (1799-1818) 


pur on 20 July, 1815. Elphinstone immediately demanded punish¬ 
ment of the authors of the crime. He asked the Peshwd to confine 
Trimbakji Dengle, his favourite, who, the Resident declared, was 
condemned by the universal voice of his subjects. After much pro¬ 
tracted negotiations the Peshwd yielded. But the arrest and im¬ 
prisonment of his favourite was looked on by the Peshwd as his own 
disgrace. At the same time the Governor-General conveyed to the 
Peshwd a message telling him that his authority no longer extended 
over his former feudatories, and the Company’s Government would 
not restore the old order of things. 122 This the Peshwd felt as a de¬ 
liberate insult added to injury, and his thoughts noW turned to re¬ 
venge and retaliation. Baloji Kunjar, his favourite minister, made 
a tour of the Maratha States and Raj I Rao put a crore of rupees at 
Bapu Gokhale’s disposal. 123 The Peshwd increased his revenues and 
forces, repaired his forts, and made fresh recruits at the annual fair 
ef Mahuli. 124 He sought the co-operation of the Burmese King, 125 
Ranjit Singh of Lahore, the influential people in Nepal, 126 Bhosle, 
the Raja of Satara and Sindia, against ‘the dwellers of the waters*. 
Baji Rao also made friendly gestures to the Patwardhans, the 
Panses, the Rastes and Appa Desai of Nipani. He also attempted 
desertion among the sepoys and European soldiers in the British 
army through his agents. 

All these preparations could not escape the vigilance qf tfhe 
British Resident who reported them to the Governor-General. Cir¬ 
cumstances compelled Lord Hastings to take up the broken thread 
of Wellesley’s Maratha policy. He wrote on 23 March, 1816: 
“Enough, however, had been detected to make it expedient that I 
should write to the Peshwd for the purpose of showing him that we 
are apprised of what he had been doing” 127 

On 10 May, 1817, Lord Hastings instructed Elphinstone to cir¬ 
cumscribe the Peshwd’s power and to obviate inconveniences found 
to exist in the performance of the articles of the treaty of Bassein. 
The Peshwd was compelled by Elphinstone to sign the treaty of 
Poona 128 on 13 June, 1817. His moral influence received a deadly 
blow and his material interests were affected seriously. The 
Peshwd declared Trimbakji Dengle as the murderer of Gangadar 
Shastri and promised to deliver him to the English. Until Trim- 
bakji’s delivery, his relations were to remain as hostages of the Com¬ 
pany’s Government. The Peshwd recognised the dissolution in form 
and substance of the Maratha confederacy and confirmed the treaty 
with the Southern jagtrdars. His claims on Baroda were commuted 
to an annual payment of four lakhs of rupees. The Peshwd agreed 


503 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


to let the farm of the revenues of Ahmadabad to Gaikwar for a sum 
of 4^ lakhs of rupees annually. He ceded in perpetuity to the Com¬ 
pany the fort of Ahmadnagar and surrendered his rights, interests 
and pretensions over Bundelkhand, Malwa, territories to the north 
of the Narmada except those he possessed in Gujarat, and also the 
fort of Mailghat, a possession on the Nizam’s frontier. The article 
in the treaty of Bassein regarding his obligation to send a contin¬ 
gent to act with the subsidiary force was annulled. The Peshwa 
ceded in perpetuity to the Company territory yielding 34 lakhs of 
rupees for the maintenance of a force of 5,000 cavalry and 3,000 in¬ 
fantry with sufficient military stores and ordnance. He promised 
not to maintain a foreign agent at his court. For the Peshwa, the 
terms of the treaty of Poona ‘made the British control more difficult 
to resist, but more irksome to bear’. 129 The third Anglo-Maratha 
War was indeed the aftermath of a decade of British diplomacy at 
the Court of the Peshwa . 

It has been pointed out that the hunt of the Pindaris became 
merged in the third Anglo-Maratha War. 130 The Pindaris, who were 
a horde of obscure freebooters and cruel marauders and heard of as 
auxiliaries in the Maratha army as early as 1689, rose like ‘masses 
of putrefaction in animal matter out of the corruption of weak and 
expiring States’. They had neither the tie of religion nor that of 
national feeling. They were all mounted on horse; they avoided 
pitched battles and their sole object was plunder. Their rendezvous 
was at Nemawar. Prolific in crime, their accursed prominent lea¬ 
ders like Hera Buran, Cheetu, Karim Khan, Dost Muhammad, Wasil 
Muhammad, Shaikh Dullo and Namdar Khan turned Malwa, Rajas¬ 
than and Madras Presidency into wilderness. The Pa than condot- 
tiere like Shahmat Khan and Mir Khan extorted money from mer¬ 
chants by tying cotton to their fingers and then setting it on fire. 
They extorted treasure from princes and men in power, and moved 
about with the materials of regular battles and sieges. Lord Hast¬ 
ings’ plan was to round up these predatory hordes and all those ele¬ 
ments that were abetting them. Malcolm met the Peshwa, the 
Nizam and Appa Saheb Bhosle for this purpose. There was no suffi¬ 
cient response from the Peshwa and Appa Saheb. Metcalfe formed 
special treaties with the chiefs of Kota, Bhopal, Bundi, Udaipur, 
Jodhpur and Jaipur so that none of them could harbour the Pindaris. 
According to the terms of the treaty of Gwalior, Sindia agreed to ex¬ 
tend his co-operation for the suppression of the Pindaris. Lord 
Hastings moved first to the British camp on the Yamuna opposite 
Agra and later to Bundelkhand. He gathered together a huge army 


5C4 


DECLINE AND FALL OF THE MARATHA POWER (1799-1818) 

of 113,000 men and 300 guns. The army of Hindustan consisting of 
four divisions were commanded by Lord Hastings and General 
Ochterlony. The army of the Deccan consisting of five divisions was 
under Sir Thomas Hislop with Malcolm as his political agent. Lord 
Hastings opened the campaign on 16 October, 1817. Karim Khan 
and Wasil Muhammad were routed on 13 December, 1817, at Shaha- 
bad never Jlialwar. Karim Khan submitted to Malcolm on 15 Feb¬ 
ruary, 1818, and he was given a small estate near Gorakhpur. Wasil 
Muhammad surrendered to Sindia and then committed suicide after 
an unsuccessful attempt to escape. On 3 February, 1818, Namdar 
Khan submitted to Colonel Adams at Devrapur near Bhopal. Mir 
Khan accepted the Nawabship of Tonk in November, 1817; Cheetu 
was devoured by a tiger in March, 1818. According to Sardesai, the 
Pindari war was only a grand British plan for extinguishing all 
vestiges of the Maratha power and establishing British supremacy in 
India. He says that the Pindari war and the Maratha war form com¬ 
plements of one and the same objective. 131 It is true that Baloji 
Kunjar met Cheetu at Nemawar and Trimbakji planned to unite the 
Pindaris against the English. 132 The Peshwd also sent an emissary 
to Mir Khan. 133 But it has to be noted also that the Pindari chiefs 
tried to secure the support of the Maratha chiefs, but received only 
a partial response. 134 The Peshwd himself gave useful suggestions 
to Elphinstone for the suppression of the Pindaris. It is also signi¬ 
ficant that one of the favourite plans of Yashwant Kao Holkar was 
the complete extirpation of the Pindaris whom he never allowed to 
sit down in his presence. Holkar even reproached Sindia for the en¬ 
couragement he had given to the Pindari chiefs. 135 The Pindari war 
gave the Peshwd an opportunity ‘to wipe out his disgrace and re¬ 
cover his possessions’, 136 and ‘to recruit a large army under pretence 
cf helping the British Government in suppressing the Pindaris.’ 137 
Prinsep rightly says that during the Pindari war, the Peshwd and 
Bhosle reckoned with certainty on their ability to overwhelm the 
small British force stationed at their respective capitals. 138 

It is not clear whether Elphinstone exasperated the Peshwd to 
violate the treaty of Bassein and thus offer a pretext to the English 
to declare war against him. 139 It is certain, however, that Elphin¬ 
stone found it impossible to keep peace with the Peshwd 140 who be¬ 
haved with studied disrespect towards the former. 141 Baji Rao II 
misjudged the political situation, played into Elphinstone’s hands, 
and supplied the legal justification for war. The slowly growing re¬ 
solution of the Peshwd ripened to action on 5 November, 1817, when 
his military adviser Bapu Gokhale set fire to the Residency build- 


505 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


ings. Bapu Gokhale with 18,000 horse, 8,000 foot and 14 guns 
launched an unsuccessful attack on the small force led by Captain 
Burr, who had 3,000 men and 5 guns on the plains extending from 
the Chatushringi hill to Kirkee near Poona. 142 In the battle of Kirkee, 
the British losses were 86 killed and wounded as against 500 of the 
Marathas. From Sirur General Smith arrived at Kirkee, defeated 
Bapu Gokhale at the battle of Yeravda on 15 November, 1817, and 
compelled the Peshwd to retreat to Purandhar. 

Appa Saheb, too, rose in arms against the British, but he be¬ 
trayed ‘the greatest weakness and want of judgment’. He took ad¬ 
vantage of the small British force, and with the help of three or four 
thousand Arabs, captured the Sitabaldi hill on 26 November, 1817. 
Captain Fitzgerald and the Bengal cavalry bravely defended the 
Residency of Nagpur. 143 Appa Saheb, who had 18,000 men and 26 
guns, was defeated after fierce fighting at the battle of Sitabaldi (2 
miles west of the old city of Nagpur) on 27 November, 1817. He 
surrendered on 16 December, 1817, and accepted the conditions offer¬ 
ed by Resident Jenkins. Lord Hastings directed Jenkins to confine 
Appa Saheb in the fort of Allahabad. Raghuji Bhosle IPs grand¬ 
son Bajiba Gujar (son of his daughter Banu Bai) was adopted by 
Parsoji’s wife Durga Bai, and seated on the throne at Nagpur as 
Raghuji III on 16 June, 1818. On way to Allahabad, Appa Saheb 
effected a romantic escape from Raichur and took shelter in the 
Gond country of the Mahadev hills. 144 On 8 April, 1819, General 
Doveton, with the help of Sir John Malcolm, wrested Asirgarh from 
its commandant Yashwant Rao Lad. In vain did Appa Saheb retire 
to Una in the Punjab hills to seek the assistance of the Sikhs. 145 
Subsequently, he sought shelter with Man Singh, the Raja of Jodh¬ 
pur, and passed away in 1840. 

‘Little flickers of sympathetic revolt* burned in Indore’. Young 
Malhar Rao Holkar III, his brave widowed sister Bhima Bai, Vithoji 
Holkar’s son Hari Rao Holkar, and Ramdin fought with desperate 
courage at Mahidpur on 21 December, 1817, and suffered a decisive 
defeat. Their artillerymen stood to their guns till they were bayo- 
netted. Malhar Rao, seated on an elephant shed tears on seeing his 
troops routed. 146 Negotiations for peace were opened by Malcolm 
with Tantia Jog. By the subsidiary treaty of Mandasor (6 January, 
1818), 147 Malhar Rao Holkar III agreed to accept the British suze¬ 
rainty, limit his troops to three thousand, maintain a British sub¬ 
sidiary force, submit all his foreign affairs to the arbitration of the 
Company, renounce all rights to the territories of Mir Khan and to 
all of Holkar’s territory north to Bund! and South of the Satpura 

506 

- / . 


DECLINE AND FALL OF THE MAKATHA POWER (1799-1818) 

range. Ghafur Khan received a jdgir at Jawra. Ramdin alone with 
his impetuous courage and relentless energy proceeded to join the 
fugitive Peshwa. 

Bapu Gokhale and Trimbakji Dengle continued to harass the 
British forces. Naro Pant Apte fetched Chhatrapati Pratap Singh, his 
mother and two brothers from the fort of Wasota and joined Bapu 
Gokhale on 14 December, 1817. On 11 February, 1818, Elphinstone 
issued a proclamation urging the subjects of the* Peshwa not to afford 
any assistance to him. 148 A number of jagirdars left the Peshwa’s 
standard. 149 Elphinstone rescued the Raja of Satara and treated 
him with courtesy. On 20 February, 1818, Bapu Gokhale was over¬ 
taken by General Smith at Ashta and killed in a hotly contested 
battle. 150 BajI Rao II was surprised by Colonel Adams near Shevni 
on 17 April, 1818. He surrendered to Malcolm at Mhow near Indore 
on 3 June, 1818. The Peshwa lost his title ‘Srimant’. His military 
following was disbanded. Trimbakji was condemned to life-long 
imprisonment in the fort of Chunar. Chhatrapati Pratap Singh was 
set up as a ruler of a small principality “as a sop to Maratha senti¬ 
ment”. Munro’s suggestion that the Company should stand forth 
as the Peshwa , was not accepted by Lord Hastings. The Governor- 
General at the request of Malcolm reluctantly guaranteed the 
Peshwa a pension of eight lakhs of rupees per annum. 151 BajI Rao II 
was allowed to live at Bithur, 12 miles north-west of Kanpur, for 
more than thirty years in splendid isolation till his death on 14 
January, 1851. There is no doubt that “the year 1818 marks a water¬ 
shed in the history of British India. In that year the British domi¬ 
nion in India became the British dominion of India.” 152 

5. Causes of the Fall of the Maratha Power: 

The history of ‘Sunset over Maharashtra* with its dramatic 
climax and grim aftermath has no simple explanation. It is a com¬ 
plex phenomenon and various explanations have been advanced to 
explain the fall of the Maratha power. “The rottenness at the core 
of Indian society”, 153 “the non-progressive social forces of the Mara- 
thas, their stagnant social order, their decadent social institu¬ 
tions’*, 154 “the lack of rational outlook and scientific knowledge*’, 155 
the lack of artillery as the vital basis of warfare, and well-trained 
soldiers equipped with up-to-date arms and led by competent 
officers, 156 the want of requisite knowledge of military strategy and 
the scientific processes in the use and manufacture of superior 
arms, “the value attached to trained battalions on the European 
model and elbowing out of the native infantry and cavalry ele- 


507 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

merits,” 137 “the insensate dissensions, inordinate folly and criminal 
self-seeking” 138 have been mentioned as some of the responsible 
causes for the decline and fall of the Maratha power. These views 
no doubt reflect a facet of the truth. Put if any one of them is open 
to criticism, it is their emphasis on a single factor to the exclusion 
of others. N. C. Kelkar enlarges the discussion and focusses our 
attention on inordinate passion for separate domain, the absence of 
national patriotism, well-drilled army, and modern guns. 139 Accord¬ 
ing to Sir Jadunath Sarkar “the victories of ShivajI and Baji Rao I 
created a reaction in favour of Hindu orthodoxy, it ran counter to 
the homogeneity and simplicity of the poor and politically depressed 
early Maratha society. It sapped the foundations of success” 160 thus 
encouraging forces of separatism. 

If is indeed difficult to lind out a definitive ‘starting date’ of the 
decline and fall of the Maratha power. S$n maintains that in the 
very prosperity of the Maratha empire lay the germs of its disinte¬ 
gration, decline and decay. “While engaged against a powerful 
external enemy the Marathas, for the time being, could forget their 
private differences, but hardly was the crisis over when they prose¬ 
cuted their quarrels recklessly, oblivious of everything else”. 161 
Tarachand finds unmistakable signs of the ‘cracking of Maratha 
polity’ before 1761. 162 Sharma asserts that the Panipat disaster, 
Raghoba’s desertion to the English and the treaty of Bassein were 
the obverse and reverse of the same coin. 163 In his opinion, “the 
greatest blunder” committed by the Marathas was their northern ad¬ 
venture. ‘Maratha barbarism’ in the north created a host of enemies 
and they failed to organise their conquests. Commenting on the con¬ 
sequences of the third battle of Panipat, Sarkar says: “But what a 
change from the Indian world of 1760! The contrast can be most 
easily realised if we imagine that the Marathas had triumphed on 
that 14 January” 164 Sardesai, however, thinks that the Panipat dis¬ 
aster decided nothing, but it marks a turning point by ushering in 
a new participant (the English) for Indian supremacy. 163 To Duff, 
“the plains of Panipat were not more fatal to the Maratha empire 
than the early end of Peshwa Madhav Rao on November 18, 1772”. 166 
Sardesai and Banerjee maintain that had Madhav Rao I been alive, 
Haidar and Tipu would not have been able to reign unmolested, the 
British power would not have been able to come forward so easily 
and there would have been no treaty of Bassein. Sardesai asserts 
that in eastern lands individuals aldne can make or mar a nation’s 
fortunes. 167 


508 


DECLINE AND FALL OF THE MARATHA POWER (1799-1818) 

Individual failings, however, arise from the social background. 
We should bear in mind that the Maratha state was gradually con¬ 
verted in consequence of the saranjdmi system from an ‘organic 
whole into an inorganic mass’, and ‘a loose confederacy of ambitious 
feudal chiefs’. 168 In the last decade of the eighteenth century, like 
the Chhatrapati, the Peshiuti too became the powerless head of the 
Maratha confederacy. 169 The new nobility—the Sindias, the Holkars, 
the Hastes, the Phadkes, the Patwardhans, the Bundelas and the 
Purandares—formerly regarded the Peshwd as their master whose 
bread they ate. But gradually they were influenced by the example 
of the old nobility—the Gaikwars, the Dabhades, the Bhosles—who 
claimed to hold their possessions by virtue of Shahu’s sanad and re¬ 
garded themselves as equals of the PeshuXi. Consequently all 
sardars began to think of themselves as independent rulers of their 
own principalities. 170 

The Maratha polity dissolved through internal stress. The con¬ 
flicts between Nana Phadnis and the House of Sindia, between the 
Peshvxi and the Chhatrapatis of Satara and Kolhapur, between 
Daulat Rao Sindia and Yashwant Rao Holkar, between Malhar Rao 
Holkar II and Kashi Rao Holkar, between Parsoji, Baka Bai and 
Appa Saheb, between Tulsa Bai and Ram Din, between Anand Rao 
Gaikwar and KanhojI Gaikwar, are some instances of this suicidal 
schizophrenia. 

It is difficult to overstate the evils which originated from the 
Sindia-Holkar rivalry. Its genesis is to be found in the political psy¬ 
chology of the times. It started as a race for obtaining power in 
Malwa and ended with a struggle for ascendancy in the Peshwa’s 
Darbar at Poona. The Poona Darbar followed the imbecile policy 
of maintaining its hold by encouraging this friction. Nana Phadnis. 
made Tukoji Holkar his instrument against Mahadji Sindia. It is 
tragic indeed that even pious Ahalya Bai Holkar constantly egged on 
Tukoji Holkar to assert himself on terms of equality with Mahadji 
Sindia. 171 Surprisingly enough, a point of prestige rather than any 
substantial material gain was sometimes the cause of this conflict. 
The Sindia-Holkar rivalry disturbed the peace of the land, bred sus¬ 
picion, fostered internal dissensions, hampered the establishment of 
Maratha hegemony in North India, and Anally broke up the Mara¬ 
tha coalition against the English. 

The internal stress in Maratha State was emphasised by admi¬ 
nistrative anarchy. “Nothing could exceed the state of anarchy 
which prevailed throughout the country; at the court, bribery, exe- 


509 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


cution and murders; in the provinces violence, rapine and blood- 
shed ,, . m It is significant that when santoshpatti or contentment tax 
was imposed as a mark of popular delight on Peshwfr BajI Rao IPs 
accession, the shopkeepers of Poona closed their business and went 
on strike. 173 The Huzur Daftar or the Imperial Secretariat was 
sadly neglected. “People were even permitted to carry away the 
records, or do with them what they pleased”. 174 We hear of so many 
cases of the failure of justice for the lack of settled procedure. 
Prinsep rightly pointed out that the army of Sindia and Holkar were 
the whole machinery of their government and were at all times kept 
in motion for the purpose of enforcing contributions from reluctant 
tributaries. 175 In Poona Residency Correspondence Volumes and 
Broughton’s Letters Written in Mahratta Camp, we read the unend¬ 
ing intrigues among Sindia’s counsellors, the bankruptcy of 
his government, the disorder in his territories, the chronic mutiny 
of his troops and the sufferings of the traders and tillers of the soil. 
Yashwant Rao Holkar, too, had no settled government. His empire 
was the empire of the saddle. George Forster wrote to Charles 
Malet, describing how the administration of Bhosle was fast de¬ 
clining in strength and activity. He referred to Raghujl Bhosle II’s 
seeming incapacity of governing and common dislike of his person. 176 
The domestic policy of the Baroda Government was equally deplor¬ 
able. Palmer rightly remarked that the Maratha State was “ill- 
qualified • for permanent conquests or civil government, however 
formidable might be the means which it possessed of ravage and de¬ 
struction”. 177 


The Maratha chiefs believed that the highest political wisdom 
consisted in finesse or diplomatic intrigue. 178 But diplomacy in their 
hands stooped to the low level of playing a waiting game, base trea¬ 
cheries and selfish intrigues. The niethods employed by Maratha 
diplomats were extremely crude. Against this the diplomacy of the 
English was remarkable as they were always careful to win over a 
section of the opponents. Lord Wellesley made two timely pro¬ 
clamations on 29 August and 16 September, 1803, and approached 
the Rajput chiefs, the Raja of Bharatpur and Bhaktwar Singh, the 
Raja of Macheri, in order to effect the diplomatic isolation of the 
Maratha chiefs. Lord Hastings and Elphinstone kept strict watch 
ever the Peshwa’s communications. Elphinstone had a regular 
postal system for communication with ‘native Courts of India’. 
There was hardly any chief in the Peshwa’s services who had not 
been won over by British money. 179 


510 


DECLINE AND FALL OF THE MARATHA POWER (1799-1818) 

The military organisation of the Marathas was ill-organised, ill- 
euipped and ill-disciplined. 180 In the army of Peshwd Baji Rao II, 
the rank of officer was given to men like Qadir Khan who was a but¬ 
cher. 181 Discipline was lax and the emphasis was on pomp and dis¬ 
play. Forbes tells us that the tails of grey horses were frequently 
dyed red and their manes plated with silk ribands and interspersed 
with silver roses. 182 At Laswari, Ambaji Ingle’s richly caparisoned 
elephant drew everyone’s attention. The Maratha chiefs and sol¬ 
diers became addicted to the vices of camp-life. In 1800, Daulat 
Rao Sindia covered the 140 miles between the Tapi and the Narmada 
in 18 days, whiling away his time in attending to dance and music 
of dancing-girls, tiger-shooting and kite-flying. Bhosle’s troops 
were imperfectly disciplined. Yashwant Rao Holkar commenced a 
complete reformation of his army only after his defeat in 1805. 
Elphinstone described the Maratha army as a “loose and straggling 
mass of camels, elephants, bullocks, nautch-girls, fakeers and buf¬ 
foons, lancemen and matchlockmen, banyans and mootasuddis”. 183 

According to some Maratha scholars, the Marathas neglected to 
develop artillery as their main support of defence. But Ranade 
rightly says that the Marathas did not possess the requisite know¬ 
ledge of scientific processes in the use and manufacture of superior 
arms. 184 The Marathas were also not very skilful in plying long- 
range guns; they lacked good gunners and artillerymen; they were 
handicapped by the absence of galloper guns; there were no pio¬ 
neers attached to Maratha artillery to repair roads. They were also 
far behind the British sepoys in the accuracy and rapidity of their 
fire. Daulat Rao Sindia had a splendid park of artillery at Assaye. 185 
At Patparganj, Laswari and Mahidpur, the British army was sub¬ 
jected to tremendous fire from the formidable train of Maratha 
artillery, 186 but the European commanders in Maratha service left 
on the eve of the war, and their trained battalions, for want of leaders, 
went down fighting against better-led and better-disciplined armies. 

In fact, the Marathas became obsessed with the belief that artil¬ 
lery was everything in war. They had not been trained for the push 
of the pike or for the crossing of the bayonets. 187 They forgot that a 
cavalry with galloper guns could successfully oppose numerous heavy 
artillery. There was no perfect coordination of action in the Mara¬ 
tha army between cavalry, infantry and the advance of artillery in* 
close support of moving infantry. With the notable exception of 
Yashwant Rao Holkar, who had 60,000 horsemen, the Maratha chiefs 
did not maintain the efficiency of cavalry. 188 Sindia’s cavalry was 
weak in number and poor in quality. Ambaji Ingle’s cavalry fled 


511 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


away from the battle-field without plying their swords. The 29th 
Light Dragoons scattered Gulab Rai Kadam’s cavalry like chaff. In 
contrast to all this, the British cavalry at Laswari covered 42 miles in 
24 hours, though their horses were not watered or fed for 20 hours. 
The spearhead of the British attack at Laswari was a single cavalry 
regiment—the 29th Light Dragoons. Deliverance came to Arthur 
Wellesley at Assaye from his cavalry. The Maratha cavalry was use¬ 
ful for light raiding only, and it was never trained to deliver shock 
attacks. 189 Our attention has also been drawn to the fact that the 
Maratha chiefs’ lack of knowledge of the geography of the country 
was suicidal for successful military operations. 

A nation’s liberty cannot be preserved only by foreign mercena¬ 
ries. The Maratha army was not homogeneous in composition—the 
Maratha chiefs recruited the Arabs, the Sikhs, the Rajputs, the Sin- 
dhis, the Rohillas, the Abyssinians, the Pathans and the Topiwalas or 
Europeans in large number to strengthen their army. There were 
about 5,000 Arabs in the forces of Nana Phadnis. 190 In the first de¬ 
cade of the nineteenth century there were European officers, the 
Hindustani sepoys—mostly Purbias or men of Awadh, the Rajputs 
and the Pathans in the Maratha army The force which Baji Rao II 
raised in February, 1813, was composed mostly of North Indian 
men. 191 It is remarkable that there was not a single man of the Mara¬ 
tha race in Sindia’s infantry and artillery that fought at Laswari. 192 
Preference for foreign mercenaries in the Maratha army is obvious 
from the rates of pay of soldiers. An Arab soldier was paid Rs. 18 
a month, a Christian and Portuguese soldier Rs. 15, a Hindustani 
sepoy Rs. 8 and a Maratha and Deccani soldier Rs. 6.* 

The Maratha chiefs made a serious mistake in entrusting the 
defence of their country to foreigners. 193 Lake remarked that if 
Sindia’s army had been sincerely led by French officers, the success 
of the English would have been extremely doubtful. Pohlmann, who 
had one full brigade at Assaye, marched away from the battle-field 
with his forces intact. 194 It was a French deserter who informed 
Lake about the difficulties and disorders within the fort of Aligarh. 
Captain Lucan, an Irish deserter from Sindia’s army, guided the Bri¬ 
tish storming party at Aligarh. Louis Bourquien fought half-hearted¬ 
ly at Patparganj on 11 September, 1803, and gave himself up as pri¬ 
soner to the English. The general view was that Perron’s conduct 
assured the English the supremacy of Hindustan. He gave anti- 
British counsels, but removed the best and the most seasoned batta¬ 
lions of Sindia’s corps from the expected points of attack. Napoleon 
rightly denounced Perron as a traitor to his profession. 195 


512 


DECLINE AND FALL OF THE MARATHA POWER (1799 1818) 

There were discordant elements and ignominious betrayers 
among the Marathas too. Natu, Yashwant Rao Ramchandra, Yash- 
want Rao Ghorpade, and Daulat Rao Ghorpade supplied valuable 
information to the British Residents. 196 Ambaji Ingle took to flight 
from Laswari at the first sign of battle. The Maratha chiefs failed 
to secure the willing allegiance of their followers. The Maratha 
nation, as a whole, did not participate in the Anglo-Maratha wars. 

Elphinstone observes: “The Marathas had at their command 
ample means of waging a successful war—armies, arms, ammunitions. 
Everything was ready. They only lacked a leader” He says that 
“it was the good fortune of the British that neither BajI Rao II nor 
Daulat Rao Sindia possessed the strength and spirit to stand forth 
boldly at a critical moment. If there was any other more intrepid 
man occupying the Peshwas position at that time, it was not diffi¬ 
cult to conceive how the British would have fared”. 197 The Peshwd 
was notorious for his hasty retreats from battle-fields or watching 
them from the top of hills. Sindia’s actions were marked by delay, 
indecision and theatrical demonstrations. As his dominions lay in 
the centre of the country, he had the advantage of operating on 
short inner lines, but this favour of geography was nullified by his 
imbecility and slackness. Yashwant Rao Holkar was the last typi¬ 
cal Maratha soldier to make a name in history. 

On the British side, the military preparations, the tactical 
moves and the most extraordinary exertions and gallantry were 
worthy of a race that deserves to win an empire. Lake gave con¬ 
stant exercise to his regiments according to a uniform system and 
personally headed every charge of his infantry. At Laswari, Lake 
rode in the front rank. He had two horses shot under him, and 
turning to look at his dying son, he led the infantry to the charge 
on the right of the 76th British Foot. Arthur Wellesley’s war pre¬ 
parations were perfect. He made Ahmadnagar his fortified depot 
for food and munitions, organised the famous Mysore bullock teams 
and designed coracles and pontoons of copper-sheet barrels. Arthur 
always forced the Marathas to move in order to throw them into 
disorder. In the second Anglo-Maratha war, British officers like 
T. V. Vandeleur, Maxwell and Macan displayed amazing combative¬ 
ness. Success was achieved by the most extraordinary exertions 
and determined fighting of the 19th Light Dragoons, the Madras 
Cavalry, the 8th Light Dragoons, the 29th Light Dragoons and the 
76th British Infantry. In the third Anglo-Maratha War, the cam¬ 
paigns of Lord Hastings and General Smith are notable instances of 
inspired leadership, resolution and movements. 

513 

M.S.—33 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Some historians are of the opinion that the Marathas made a 
mistake by the untimely abandonment of their old guerilla tactics. 
BajI Rao II, Yashwant Rao Holkar and Sarza Rao Ghatge advised 
Daulat Rao Sindia to adopt guerilla tactics. Holkar exasperated 
Lake so much with his guerilla tactics that the latter wrote to Lord 
Wellesley, “I never was so plagued as I am with the devil”. 198 

For such tactics, only Holkar’s myriads of light forayers and 
indigenous cavalry were well suited. But even Holkar and the 
Pindari hordes were ultimately firmly dealt with by the Company’s 
war machine. 

From the economic point of view, the Maratha State had no 
stable basis. Agriculture was dependent upon precarious rain¬ 
fall. Commerce was subjected to harassment. There was little 
industry. The evils of the feudal system were too deeply entrench¬ 
ed. The cultivator’s marginal existence was jeopardized by farm¬ 
ing and saranjami system, numerous civil wars and the exactions of 
the kamavisadars and the mcmdlois. Accounts were not properly 
maintained. Nana Phadnis’ hoarded treasure ran into several 
crores. It is true that there are numerous evidences to show the 
Peshwas concern for his ryots. But their agrarian legislation was 
Inadequate. The Maratha chiefs even authorised the plunder of 
their own territories for the subsistence of the troops. Their elastic 
sources of revenue were chauth and sardeshmukhi. The desultory 
warfare in the Maratha State in the last years is a gruesome tale of 
murder, pillage and desolation throughout Malwa, Khandesh and 
Desh districts of Maharashtra. The Maratha chiefs were greatly 
embarrassed for want of money. Their camps were never free from 
creditors. Sometimes, they had to raise money by mortgaging the 
future revenues of their territories. Their unpaid soldiers used to 
stage dhamas (coercive demonstrations) against their emplo¬ 
yers. 199 Daulat Rao Sindia had to face severe financial crises, sub¬ 
mit to dhamas on many occasions and rely on rich money-lenders 
and bankers like Gokul Parekh. His unpaid soldiers staged 
a dharna before the battle of Assaye. 200 The keepers of Asirgarh 
surrendered the fort on receiving cash from Arthur Wellesley to 
clear up the arrears of the garrison amounting to seven lakhs. But 
Daulat Rao Sindia possessed a privy purse of 50 lakhs of rupees 
which no distress was sufficient to dislodge. Other Maratha chiefs 
were not so fortunate in having a surplus or reserve fund to fall 
back upon. 

Much has been written on the ample financial resources of the 
Company. It is true that in the period following 1793, the major 


514 


DECLINE AND FALL OF THE MARATHA POWER (1799-1818) 

portion of India’s European trade passed into the hands of Great 
Britain. But it is true as well that at the end of the second Anglo- 
Maratha War, Lake’s army was five months in arrears. 201 To meet 
the dire want, a sum of 25 lakhs was taken out of the cash meant 
for China. Under the pressure of Lord Wellesley’s forward policy, 
the Company’s debt increased from 17 millions in 1797 to 31 millions 
in 1806. 202 

Various forms of moral cankers were also eating into the vitals 
of Maratha society—the popularity of erotic compositions of Anant 
Phandi and Ram Joshi, the wide-spread belief in witchcraft, the great 
demand of the services of astrologers, marriages of infant girls. Con¬ 
crete instances are on record of excessive indulgences in sensual 
pleasures, drunkenness and frivolous enjoyments of the most de¬ 
graded type on the part of top-ranking Maratha leaders like Peshwa 
BajI Rao II, 203 Nana Phadnis, Daulat Rao Sindia and Yashwant Rao 
Holkar. 

The Marathas lacked the corporate spirit so essential for their 
national independence. To every one in that age his own fief 
( watan ) was the only reality. Feudal system fostered individual 
selfish tendencies. The Maratha chiefs also failed to protect their 
subjects from excesses of their own armies. Peasants tended to turn 
towards anyone who could give them protection. The Maratha 
government was not influenced by the people and so the people did 
not take any interest in its permanence. 204 The cohesion of the 
Maratha people was not organic but artificial, accidental and there¬ 
fore, precarious. The Maratha chiefs could not sink their differences 
and unite, even in times of common danger, for the service of the State 
and nation. Nationalism of the 19th century was unknown to them. 

Casteism also added to want of social cohesion. Caste jealousy 
did play a part in the conflict between the Angrias and the Peshwas. 
As between caste and caste, the later Peshwas did not always main¬ 
tain the balance evenly. 205 The partiality towards Brahmins im¬ 
posed a heavy burden upon the finances of the Government. As 
Ranade remarks, “the infusion of the racial and caste elements 
among the military leaders of the nation was the most distinguish¬ 
ing mark of the latter half of the century. Ramdas’s high ideal was 
lowered and the usual consequences followed, such as decadence of 
virtues.” 2053 In the regime of Peshwa Madhav Rao I, we find Brah¬ 
mins claiming commutation for money payment as a customary 
favour shown to them. Ptshwfo Narayan Rao took up the orthodox 
party’s cause. Under the order of the Peshwas, the Paithan Brah- 


515 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


mins who refused to accept the verdict of the sastras were ex-com¬ 
municated. The British Resident at Poona thought that all mem¬ 
bers of the Brahmin caste were more or less benefited by the Peshwa 
regime which was “after all a Brahmin raj”. 206 

It has been said that the religious policy of the Peshwa was 
“reactionary to the extreme” 207 It should be called static rather 
than reactionary. We do not come across any punitive legislation 
against non-Hindus except in respect of cow-slaughter. The 
Muslims were not debarred from holding offices under the Peshwa s 
government. They were allowed free exercise of their religion 
without payment of any special tax. There were no discriminating 
tariffs. The Peshwds officially recognised the festival of Id-ul-Fitr. 
They paid homage to the dargas of Sayyid Sa‘adat and Shaikh Salla 
at Poona. Khairat Kharch or charity to Muslim institutions was a 
special item in their budget. The other Maratha chiefs were also 
liberal in their outlook. Muharram was the most popular festival 
at Sindia’s capital. Daulat Rao Sindia always joined the Muharram 
procession. Yashwant Rao Holkar fed faqirs at Ujjain and visited 
the tomb of Qutb-ud-din Bakhtyar Kaki in Delhi. The Gaikwars 
confirmed to the pious Muslim grantees all their lands, emoluments 
and privileges which they used to enjoy under the previous govern¬ 
ment. It was customary for the ruler of Baroda to be present at 
the time of the Id prayer. It would thus appear that the religious 
policy of the Peshwds and other Maratha chiefs was tolerant of all 
religions. 

Jadunath Sarkar 208 and Sen 209 hold the view that creative elan 
was arrested in the Maratha State as there were no well-thought out 
schemes of education and that the policies of the Maratha chiefs pro¬ 
ceeded from their intellectual limitations. It is true that the 
Peshwds were never profoundly stirred by winds of change or zest 
for new education. 

Kelkar and Sardesai recognise “the play of the contingent and 
the unforeseen” in the fall of the Maratha power. They think that 
nemesis overtook the destiny of the Maratha nation with the death 
of Ram Shastri in 1789, Hari Pant Phadke in 1794, Ahalya Bai Holkar 
in 1795, TukojI Holkar in 1797, Parashuram Bhau in 1799 and Nana 
Phadnis on 13 March, 1800. 210 

The tragedy of the Maratha power was the inevitable result of 
nascent, formidable and aggressive British imperialism bursting 
upon a sleepy, inert and medieval society. The Maratha chiefs 
lived in the lengthening shadows of the medieval feudalism without 


516 


DECLINE AND FALL OF THE MARATHA POWER (1799-1818) 

any idea of the sweeping changes that were then taking place in the 
western world. 


NOTES 

1 • Parasnis, D. B., Itihas Samgraha, Aitihasik Kirkol Prakaranen, Pt. Ill, Cited 
by Sardesai, G. S., New History of the Mardthds, Vol. Ill, p. 192. 

2. Bengal Secret Pol. Consultations, 27 Nov. 1800 (76). 

3. Home Misc. Series, 574, p. 598. 

4. P R C., VI, p. 27; Wilks, Hist. Sketches, II, p. 326. 

5 Sardesai, New History, Vol. m, p. 354. / 

6 Thompson, Edward, Making of the Indian Princes, p. 19. 

7. PRC., II, pp. 539-400; Sardesai, op. cit., p. 352. 

8. P R C., VI, p. 197. 

9. ibid, pp. 464-67. 

10 Papers re: Maratha War, 1808, p. 39. 

11. P R C., Vol. X, pp. 3-4. / 

12. Sardesai, op. cit., p. 356. 

13 Selections from Baroda State Records, Vol. II, p. 432. 

14. Sardesai, op. cit., p. 453. 

15. P R C., Vol. V, pp. 19-25, 87. 

16- Khare, V. V., Aitihasik Lekha Sangraha, Vol. X, pp. 43-50. 

17- Kavyetihas Sangraha Patre Yadi, No. 467, pp. 417-22.» 

18 Garge, Karweer Riyasat, p. 273. 

19. P R C., Vol. XII, p. 467. 

20. Peshwyanchi Bakhar (5th Edn. 1923), p. 223. 

21. Grant Duff, History of the Mahrattas (1921 ed.), II, p. 273. 

22 Gupta, P. C., Bafi Rao II and the E< I. Company, p. 20; Peshwyanchi Bakhar, 
p. 198. 

23- PRC., Vol. VI, pp. 593-94. 

24. Qanungo, S. N., Jaswant Rao Holkar, p. 51. 

25 Sardesai, op. cit., Vol. Ill, pp. 337-42. 

26 Sarkar, Fall of the Mughal Empire, Vol. IV, p. 138. 

27- ibid, p. 139. / 

28 PRC., Vol. VI, pp. 45-46. 

29 Qanungo, S. N., op. cit., p. 37. 

30 Malcolm, Sir John, Memoir of Central India (1880 Ed.), Vol. I, p. 166. 

31. Waqa-i-Holkar, f. 89a. 

32 PRC., IX, p. 256; Sarkar, Fall of the Mughal Empire, Vol. IV, p. 181* 

33. P R C., IX, 257; Sarkar, op. cit., p. 182. 

34. P.R.C., IX, 28; Holkar Shahi Itihas Sadhanen, II, p. 38; Sarkar, op. cit., 

pp. 183-84. 

35. P R C., IX, pp. 67-68; Sarkar, op. cit., pp. 187-88. 

36- Khare, Aitihasik Lekha Sangraha, Vol. XIII, p. 6027; PRC., VI, 405. 

37. Khare, op. cit., XTV, 6465. 

38. Peshwyanchi Bakhar, p. 203. 

39 Khare, op. cit., XTV, 6448. 

40. Khare, op. cit., XIV, 6465-6471. 

41. Khare, op. cit., 6482, 6503, 6509-11; Papers re: Maratha War. 

42. Sardesai, op. cit., p. 381. 

43. For Treaty of Bassein, see Wellesley Despatches, Vol. Ill, pp. 627-33 and 

Grant Duff, History, Vol. II (1921 edn.), pp. 330-31. 

44. Roberts, P. E., India Under Wellesley, pp. 192-93. 

45 See note at 43. The treaty is also given in Aitchison, Treaties, Engagements 
etc., Vol. Ill (1863) pp. 63-71, by Roberts at p. 193. 

46- Valentia, Voyages and Travels , Vol. II, p. 134. 

47- Wellesley Despatches, Vol. V, pp. 302-18. 

48- Owen, Selections from Wellington Despatches, Memo on Wellesley’s Govt, of 
India, pp. 23-39. 

49. Owen, ibid, p. 36. 

50. Sardesai, op. cit., p. 441. 

51. Gupta, P. C., op. cit., p. 66. 


517 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


52. Owen, Sydney, J., op. cit., Introduction, p. 46. 

53. Wellesley, A Vindication of the Late War, p. 18. 

54. Khare, ALS., XIV, 6534-37; Mardthx Riyasat, (Uttar Vibhag), III, pp. 216-17. 

55. P R C., X, p. 62, 75. 

56. P R C., X, p. 122. 

57. Martin, Wellesley Despatches , VoL IV, p. 144. 

58. Asiatic Annual Register, 1864, p. 117. 

59. P R C., X, pp. 92-96. 

60- Owen, S. J., Wellington Despatches, pp. 232-35. 

61- Owen, ibid, p. 271. 

62. P R C., X, pp. 126-21. 

63 Martin, Wellesley Despatches, Vol. IV, p. 187. 

64. Martin, ibid, Vol. II, pp. 216-12. 

65. P R C., IX, p. 336. 

66. P R C., IX, p. 286. 

67. Malet, Baroda State, p. 23. 

68 Wellesley, History of Events in India, p. 36. 

69 P R C., IX, pp. 321-24. 

69a. Malcolm, Sir John, Memoir of Central India (1880 Edn.), Vol. I, p. 189. 

70. Waqa-i-Holkar, p. 118b. 

71. Gleig, Life of Munro, Vol. I, p. 386. 

72. Thom, Memoir of the War in India, p. 324. 

73 Grant Duff, History of the Mahrattas (1921), II, p. 335. 

74. Ibid, p. 364. 

75. Malcolm, Sir John, op. cit., p. 189. 

76 Pearse, Memoir of the Life and Military Service of Lord Lake, p. 261. 

77. PRC., p. 122; Collins to G-G., 11 Aug. 1803. 

78 Owen, Sydney, Selections from Wellington Despatches, p. 262, cited by Sar- 
desai, op. cit., Ill, p. 405. 

79. Owen, S., op. cit., p. 350. 

80. Ibid. 

81 Waqa-i-Holkar, f. 120b. 

82. Fortesque, History of the British Army, Vol. V, pp. 16-18. 

83 Wellesley Despatches, V, p. 328. 

84. Grant Duff, op. cit., II, p. 343. 

85 Sarkar, Fall of the Mughal Empire, TV, pp. 289-91. 

86- Sardesai, op. cit., TV, pp. 289-91. 

87. Pearse, op. cit., p. 241. 

88- Aitchison, Treaties, Engagements, etc., Vol. Ill, (1863), pp. 97-99; also Grant 
Duff, op. cit., II, (1921), p. 361. 

89. Aitchison, Treaties, Engagements, etc., Vol. IV (1064), pp. 221-40; Duff, op. 
cit., pp. 361-362. 

90. Waqa-i-Holkar, p. 127b; Thom, Memoir of the War in India, pp. 327-332; 
Wellesley Despatches, TV, p. 100. 

91. Owen, Wellesley Despatches, p. 454. 

92. Martin, Wellesley Despatches, Vol. IV, p. 107. 

93. Sardesai, op. cit., EH, p. 423. 

94. Thom, op. cit., p. 326. 

95 Martin, op. cit., IV, p. 117. 

96- Martin, op. cit., Vol. IV, p. 196. 

97. Owen, op. cit., p. 425. 

98. Gurwood, Wellington Despatches, III, p. 233. 

99 Thompson, Edward, Making of the Indian Princes, pp. 107-09. 

100. Ibid. 

101. Thom, op. cit., (1803-06), p. 391. 

102. Waqa-i-Holkar, 157b. 

103. Thom, op. cit., p. 458. 

104. Owen, op. cit., p. xxvi. 

105. Grant Duff, op. cit., p. 384. 

106. Ross, Cornwallis Correspondence, III, p. 522. 

107. Duff, op. cit., p. 387. 

108. Aitchison, op. cit., (1864), IV, pp. 241-44. 

109. Ibid , pp. 289-92. 

110. Aitchison, op. cit., IV, p. 293; Duff, op. cit., II, p. 393. 


518 


DECLINE AND FALL OF THE MARATHA POWER (1799-1818) 

111. Malcolm, Memoir, Vol. I (1880), p. 200. 

112. Prinsep, History of Military and Political Transactions, I, p. 27. 

113. PRC., XII, p. 123. 

114. Malcolm, op. cit., p. 226. 

115. Malcolm, op. cit., pp. 254-55. 

116. Aitchison, op. cit., Vol. IV (1864), pp. 247-58; Duff, op. cit., p. 461. 

117. Forrest, G. W., Elphinstone’s Writings, p. 121. 

118. P R C., V, p. 449. 

119. Peshwaichi Akher, p. 188. 

120. P R C., VII, p. 233. 

121. P R C., XII, pp. 175-89. 

122. P R C., XIII, p. 188. 

123- Peshwaichi Akher, p. 188; Grant Duff, op. cit., pp. 468-69. 

124. Ibid. 

125. Private Journal of Marquess of Hastings, I, p. 369. 

126 Ibid. 

127 Private Journal of Marquess of Hastings, I, p. 183. 

128. P R C., Xm, pp. 186-93. 

129. Gupta, P. C., Bdji Rdo II and The Company, p. 157. 

130. Smith, V., The Oxford History of India, p. 254. 

131. Sardesai, op. cit.. Ill, pp. 481-83. 

132 Prinsep, pp. cit., Ill, pp. 481-83. 

133 Peshwaichi Akher, p. 188. 

134 Sardesai, op. cit., p. 482. 

135 Malcolm, op. cit., I (1880 edn.), p. 355. 

136 Bengal Secret Political Consultations, 1817, 21 Nov. (36). 

137. Duff, op. cit., II, p. 468. 

138 Prinsep, op. cit., II, p. 81. 

139 Basu, B. D., Story of Sdtara, pp. 7-8. 

140 Forrest, Elphinstone’s Writings, p. 163. 

141 Papers re: Pinddry and Mahratta Wars, p. 120. 

142 For Battle of Kirkee, see P R. C., XIII, p. 233 and Rawlinson’s article in 
Sardesai Commemoration Vol., pp. 46-52. 

143 Prinsep, op. cit., II, pp. 79-80. 

144 P R C., V, pp. 456-57. 

145 -Ibid, p. 474. 

146 Malcolm, op. cit., I, pp. 256-58. 

147 Ibid, pp. 259-60. 

148 PRC., Xin, pp. 299-302. 

149. Blacker, Marathd War, p. 262. 

150 PRC., XIII, pp. 306-10. 

151. P R C., XIU, pp. 503-14. 

152. Spear, India , A Modern History, p. 225. 

153 Sarkar, Fall of the Mughal Empire, IV, p. 343; Cf. Shivajx and His Times 
(1929), pp. 388-97. (Chap. XVI), for a discussion of the more deep-rooted 
causes. 

154 Nadkami, R. V., The Rise and Fall of the Marathd Empire, p. 375. 

155 Potdar, D. V., Review of Mardthe va Ingraj, p. 20. 

156 Sardesai, op. cit., HI, p. 516. 

157- Ranade, Miscellaneous Writings, p. 354. 

158 Tarachand, History of the Freedom Movement, I, p. 263. 

159. Kelkar, Mardthe va Ingray , pt. II, p. 17. 

160- Sarkar, Shivdji (4th Edn.), p. 357. 

161- Sen, S. N., Military System of the Marathas (1928), pp. 259-60. 

162. Tarachand, op. cit., I, p. 62. 

163- Sharma, Making of Modern India, p. 300. 

164. Sarkar, Fall of the Mughal Empire, II (1934), p. 355. 

165. Sardesai, op. cit., II, p. 455.' 

166. Duff, op. cit., (1921), I, p. 577. 

167- Sardesai, op. cit,, III, p. 515. 

168. Ranade, M. G., Miscellaneous Writings, p. 349. 

169. Ranade, op. cit., p. 349. 

170- Ibid. 

171 Selections from Chandrachud Daftar, p. 9. 


519 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


172. Duff, op. cit. (1912), III, p. 325. 

173. Khare, X, 3933. 

174. Macleod, J., Appendix to Elphinstone*s Report, p. xxix. 

175. Prinsep, Transactions, I, p. 23. 

176. P R C., V, p. 4 

177. P R C., VIII, No. 11, p. 34. 

178. Sarkar, Shivdji, p. 365 (1948 Edn.). 

179. Peshwyanchi Bakhar (5th Edn.), p. 217. 

180. Sen, Military System of the Mardthas, p. 259; see Maleti Report in P.R C., 
IV, pp. 266-77. 

181. Khare, op. cit., XTV, 6405. 

182. Forbes, James, Oriental Memoirs, II, (1813), p. 42. 

183. Colebrooke, Life of Elphinstone, II, p. 137. 

184. Ranade, M. G., op. cit., p. 354. 

185- Malleson, The Decisive Battles of India , p. 264. 

186 Pester, War and Sport in India, p. 155; Forbes, Oriental Memoirs, II, p. 63. 

187- Sarkar, Fall of the Mughal Empire, IV, p. 309-10. 

188- Sen, Military System of the Mardthas, p. 268. 

189. Sarkar, op. cit., pp. 309-10. 

190- Peshwyanchi Bakhar (5th Edn.), p. 196. 

191. Sardesai, op. cit., Vol. Ill, p. 446. 

192. Sarkar, Fall of the Mughal Empire , Vol. IV, p. 298. 

193. Sen, Military System of the Mardthas, p. 267. 

194. Fortescue, V, p. 232, cited by Sen in op. cit. 

195- Sardesai, op. cit., p. 414; see also Roberts, P. E., India Under Wellesley, 
p. 224. 

196. Sardesai, op. cit., p. 488. 

197. Colebrooke, Life of Elphinstone, I, p. 372. 

19&. Martin, Wellesley*s Despatches, Vol. IV, p. 46. 

199. P R C., Vm, pp. 106-08. 

200. Sarkar, Fall of the Mughal Empire, IV, p. 323; Khare, A L S ., XTV, 6734. 

201. Sardesai, New History of the Mardthas, HI, p. 433. 

202. Ross, Correspondence of Cornwallis, III, p. 522. 

203. Khare, op. cit., XTV, 6710; PRC., XII, p. 467; Malcolm, Memoir, I, p. 212. 

204. Peshwyanchi Bakhar, pp. 211-12. 

205. Ranade, M. G., op. cit., pp. 350-51. 

205a. Ranade, M. G., ibid.; See also H. G. Limaye, Life & Writings (1948), pp. 72-73. 

206. P R C., n, p. 132, 342. 

207. Qanungo, K. R., Historical Essays, p. 103. 

208. Sarkar, Shivdji, (1948), p. 359. 

209. Sen, S. N., Military System of the Mardthas, p. 269. 

210. Sardesai, Main Currents of Mardthd History (1933), pp. 205-06. 


520 




CHAPTER XVI 

CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH RULE IN INDIA 

( 1799 - 1823 ) 

Subsidiary Alliance System: 

Lord Wellesley (Mornington) by his annexations and absorp¬ 
tions, established Great Britain as the ascendant power in India. 
The outright annexations, made after the war with Tipu, have 
already been referred to. Lord Wellesley resorted to arbitrary 
methods by which territorial acquisitions were made. In the case 
of three States—Tanjore, Surat and Farrukhabad he took over' the 
administration leaving to the ruler his title and a fixed income. But 
the most important development in British relations with ‘country 
powers’—Mysore, Hyderabad and Awadh, reveal very fully the 
nature of the subsidiary alliance system. The Treaty of Bassein, 
concluded by Wellesley with the Peshwd precipitated the second 
Anglo-Maratha War, and the subsequent subsidiary treaties with 
other Maratha Chiefs are best studied in connection with the Anglo- 
Maratha conflict. 

The subsidiary alliance system did not originate with Lord 
Wellesley. As Malcolm says “alliances of the same character as 
those formed by Lord Wellesley had been entered into by almost all 
bis predecessors from Lord Clive downwards”. British alliance 
with Shuja-ud-daulah and his successor Asaf-ud-daulah of Awadh had 
some of the features of a subsidiary alliance system though in a rudi¬ 
mentary form. The treaty concluded with the Nizam in 1768 also 
contained a clause assuring him that some British contingents would 
be sent to his help when called upon to do so. Wellesley’s sub¬ 
sidiary alliance system, in its mature form, had the following fea¬ 
tures:— 

(a) A subsidiary force was permanently stationed within the 
frontier of the allied State. 

(b) A part of the territory was surrendered for the mainte¬ 
nance of the force. 

(c) The subsidiary State was not to negotiate with any other 
power without previous consultation with the Company’s 
Government. 

(d) It was not to take any European into its service except 
with British consent. 

(e) A British Resident was stationed in the subsidiary State. 


521 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

In this connection it should be noted that there were some varia¬ 
tions in the terms of the Treaties with different States. Article 15 
of the subsidiary treaty with Hyderabad dated 12 October, 1800, 
declared: “The Hon’ble Company’s Government hereby declare 
that they have no manner of concern with any of His Highness’s 
children, relations, subjects or servants, with respect to whom His 
Highness is absolute.” But the sixth article of the treaty with 
Awadh “reserved the positive right of interference in the internal 
management of that part of the country retained by the Nawab 
VazTr’*. The subsidiary treaty with Mysore of 13 July, 1799, be¬ 
longed to a special category. It provided for a suitable subsidiary 
force for which the Maharaja would discharge the increased expense. 
“In case the Governor-General in Council apprehended failure in 
the supply of funds he shall be at liberty to introduce such regula¬ 
tions and ordinances as he shall deem expedient for the internal 
management and collections”. 

Mill’s comments on this subsidiary alliance system in its mature 
form deserve to be quoted in full. “The oppressions of the native 
governments were limited by their weakness. When they received 
the use of English strength their oppressions were limited by noth¬ 
ing. Among small sovereignties of India misgovernment produced 
weakness and weakness invited conquest. The misgovernment, for 
example, of the Karnatak and Awadh would infallibly have pro¬ 
duced the conquest of the one by Tipu, of the other by the 
Marat has.” 

The system thus supported weak and vicious rulers. Though 
all interference in internal government was disclaimed, in some cases 
interference became generally inevitable. Wellesley’s charge 
against Awadh was chronic misrule. His own brand of subsidiary 
alliance by sapping the spontaneous energy of the protected state 
could not certainly improve the character of its government. As 
no national or patriotic vigour was now necessary, decay became 
very rapid. Wellesley could, however, justify his subsidiary alliance 
system in its imperial aspect. It enabled the British to maintain an 
efficient subsidiary army whose expenses were paid by Indian rulers. 
Wellington wrote: “The consequences have been that in this war 
with the Marathas, which it is obvious must have occurred sooner or 
later, the Company’s territories have not been invaded, and the evils 
of war have been kept at a distance from the sources of our wealth 
and power”. This policy in its imperial aspect formed the line of 
least resistance and the military line remained in advance of the 
political frontier. 


522 


CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH RULE IN INDIA (1799-1823) 

The expansionism of Wellesley is best studied in detail iin 
his relations with the Nizam, the ruler of Awadh and the chiefs of 
Tanj ore, Kamatak and Surat. Philip Francis said in parliament in 
March, 1804, “the fable says the fierce, rebellious lamb would never 
suffer the mild, gentle, moderate wolf to be quiet”. (Hansard: Parlia¬ 
mentary Debates, Vol. I, pp. 866-67). 

The Nizam: 

The subsidiary treaty of 1 September, 1798 was of a temporary 
nature, contracted “for the gentle conquest of an army of 14,000 
men under the command of French officers in the service of the 
Nizam”. After the fall of Tipu, Wellesley made his next move. The 
Nizam was now promised protection against all enemies in a revised 
subsidiary treaty, clause 2 of which provided that the British Gov¬ 
ernment “would not permit any power or state whatever to com¬ 
mit with impunity any act of unprovoked hostility or aggression 
against the rights or territories of His Highness”. To ensure this 
protection against the Marathas the subsidiary force was increased 
to eight thousand infantry, one thousand cavalry and the usual pro¬ 
portions of artillery. The Nizam assigned in perpetuity all that he 
had acquired from Mysore in 1792 and 1799. The Treaty of 12 
October, 1800, also guaranteed him protection against subjects or 
dependants who withheld payment of tribute or excited rebellion or 
disturbance. As payment was made in perpetuity, the Nizam could 
not fall into arrears. Moreover, the territory he ceded was not tradi¬ 
tionally a part of his dominions. Bitterness was not, therefore, gene¬ 
rated by this treaty. But the Nizam had to disband large numbers 
of his own troops and they were responsible for local disorder for a 
long time. Wellington described the state of the Nizam’s country as 
late as January 1804 as ‘chaos itself.’ 

Awadh: 

In January 1799, the Governor-General demanded of Sa‘adat 
‘All of Awadh that he should disband his large, useless, expensive 
but dangerous army, to be replaced by new British contingents in 
addition to the existing troops of the Company. The Nawab was un¬ 
willing to agree to what Mill calls ‘total annihilation of his military 
establishment’. He was paying the instalments of his subsidy punc¬ 
tually, but it was argued that at one stage while the danger from 
Zaman Shah was great, he had demanded the services of a part of 
British troops in his capital for the protection of his person and 
authority from his disorderly troops. The British demand amounted 
actually to “peace-establishment in Oudh to the perpetual extent 
of war-establishment for defence against the Afghans”. This claim 


523 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


was based on the 7th article of Sir John Shore’s treaty, but the Gov¬ 
ernor-General very conveniently wanted the ‘occasional augmenta¬ 
tion’ to become a ‘permanent establishment’. Mill rightly says “such 
is the logic of the strong man towards the weak”. (Mill’s History o/ 
India, Vol. VI, pp. 142-43). 

At one stage of the negotiations the Nawab-Vazir, in disgust, 
had perhaps expressed a desire to abdicate. The Governor-General 
wanted him to abdicate by a secret treaty in favour of the East India 
Company. “The vivacity of the Governor-General in the pursuit of 
his object was too great’’. The Nawdb-Vazir naturally withdrew his 
offer of abdication. 

Wellesley now literally compelled the Nawab-Vazir to agree to 
disband his own army and maintain an augmented British military 
establishment. The Nawab began to pay his increased subsidies in 
regular Kists and when a demand for territorial cession was made, he 
protested. But the imperious Governor-General was not to be de¬ 
nied. The Nawab held out for more than seven months. He wanted 
an exclusive authority in that portion of his dominion that would 
be left to him. The Governor-General sent his brother Henry Wel¬ 
lesley to negotiate. He wanted an appearance of consent. The un¬ 
fortunate Nawab had to yield, “a passive, helpless and reluctant obe¬ 
dience”. In November 1801 a new subsidiary treaty was signed by 
which he ceded what are now known as Gorakhpur and Rohilkhand 
divisions, besides the lower portion of the Ganga-Jamuna Doab. In 
the remaining portion of his dominion the Nawab-Vazir was “to act 
in conformity to the counsel of the officers of the Company”. It is 
relevant to note that the plea of misgovernment which was used 
against him at one stage of the negotiations does not appear to be a 
very convincing argument. It was used to reinforce others. The 
Nawab was not able to ensure better government in his reduced 
dominions and he later actually told the Governor-General that he 
did not possess sufficient authority in his dominions, and that he was 
galled by the interference of the Resident. But the Governor-Gene¬ 
ral declined to exempt him from a restraint which, in his own words, 
only ensured “that degree of interference and control which is indis¬ 
pensably necessary for the support of British influence in Oudh”. 
(Martin, Wellesley Despatches, Vol. II, pp. 679-80). Wellesley was al¬ 
ways thinking imperially and his manner, as Sir Alfred Lyall points 
out “showed very little patience, forbearance or generosity”. 

The advantage derived by the British Indian Government from 
Wellesley’s arrangements in Awadh could not be denied. The 


524 


CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH RULE IN INDIA (1799-1823) 


Nawab’s military power was now totally extinct. The British main¬ 
tained a very considerable portion of the Bengal army at the Nawab’s 
expense and as the territory was permanently ceded, regular pay¬ 
ment was also assured. Awadh w^s now entirely surrounded by 
British territory except in the direction of Nepal. It was no longer 
a buffer state and Sindia’s possessions in the north and those of the 
British in this region now lay contiguous to each other. As Wel¬ 
lington put it “the frontier was not increased. The Company were 
equally bound to defend and had actually defended the same fron¬ 
tier in 1798 and 1799. .. so that all will gain strength without the 
smallest degree of disadvantage or weakness”. 

For the settlement of the ceded provinces, Wellesley appointed 
a board of commissioners. His brother Henry Wellesley, famous 
later in England as the diplomat Lord Cowley, was appointed as the 
Lieutenant Governor. A preliminary settlement was made and in 
1803 the Bengal Code of regulations was introduced. It should also 
be noted that the Nawab of Farrukhabad, whose territory extended 
for about 150 miles along the western bank of the Ganga, was per¬ 
suaded in June 1802 to cede his country in perpetuity to the English 
in return for a pension. The Nawab was under the suzerainty of 
Awadh but was by treaty under special British protection. It should, 
however, be noted that “the ground upon which the necessity of 
taking the country was founded, the bad character of the Nawab, was 
discovered and that before the conclusion of the business to be false”. 

Karnatak ( Arcot): 

Wellesley was perhaps justified in his decision to end the ad¬ 
ministration of the Nawab of the Karnatak. The subsidy paid by 
the Nawab for the maintenance of the British army bore so large a 
proportion to his revenues that he was forced to incur debt. The 
Company’s servants becoming creditors, there existed a divergence 
between their interests and those of the Company. The poor inhabi¬ 
tants suffered miserably. Wellesley decided to end this very un¬ 
desirable state of things. He might have adopted a straightforward 
course and “a technical and legal screen need never have been erec¬ 
ted”. He declared, however, that a mass of papers had been found 
which proved that a secret correspondence existed between Muham¬ 
mad ‘All, his son Umdat-ul-Umara and Tipu Sultan. A sort of ex- 
parte judicial investigation was made. The so-called inimical cor¬ 
respondence was really ‘a mass of rubbish’. It contained only expres¬ 
sions of friendly sentiment in the usual flamboyant Persian style. 
Even then these were merely Vakil’s reports—second-hand evidence 
at best. On the basis of this, to declare that Umdat-ul-Umara was a 


525 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


public enemy was preposterous. In his usual grandiloquent style 
Wellesley declared that the Karnatak Nawab had forfeited his throne. 
Unfortunately for the Governor-General Umdat-ul-Umara died\ on 
15 July, 1801, when the decision was to be communicated to him 
that he was to be pensioned off. Of his boy successor a demand was 
made in indecent haste to agree to surrender his administration and 
retain the title and a liberal pension. On his declaring his inability 
to agree to this arrangement, the offer was made to a nephew of the 
deceased Nawab, Azim-ud-daulah. He accepted because he had 
everything to gain and the whole civil and military administration 
was taken over by the British. (P. E. Roberts’ India Under Wel¬ 
lesley, pp. 101-107). 

Surat and Tan] ore: 

Another such unceremonious act of dethronement was that of 
the Nawab of Surat. In this case, however, Wellesley made a new 
claim that the Company succeeded to the power of the Mughul em¬ 
pire. Sarphoji of Tanj ore also sank into a pensioner, the terms of the 
Governor-General being dictated to him. 

Awadh, Arcot, Tanj ore, Surat and Farrukhabad were too weak 
to oppose what was demanded of them, but the Maratha opposition 
to the establishment of British ascendancy, inevitable after the sign¬ 
ing of the Treaty of Bassein on 31 December, 1802, continued 
even in July 1805 when Lord Cornwallis came to India as the suc¬ 
cessor of Lord Wellesley. He summed up the position thus—“We 
are Still at war with Holkar and we can hardly be at peace with 
Sindia”. In the despatch which the Court of Directors sent to the 
Board of Control for their approval, known as Draft No. 128, they 
censured Lord Wellesley and thus summed up the political situation 
in India: “The territories which we have lately acquired under 
treaties and by conquest are of so vast and extensive a nature and the 
engagements lately concluded with the several chiefs and rajahs so 
complicated that we cannot take a view of our situation and of the 
political relation in which we now stand towards the various Indian 
powers without being seriously impressed with the wisdom and 
necessity of that solemn declaration of the legislature, ‘that to pur¬ 
sue schemes of conquest and extension of dominion in India are mea¬ 
sures repugnant to the wish, the honour and the policy of the nation’.” 
(Home Mis. Series, 486, pp. 153-54). 

Cornwallis died on October 5, 1805. His successor, Sir George 
Barlow, in his relations with ‘country powers’ tried to act according 
to the declared principle of the foreign policy of the Court of Direc¬ 
tors. The Jamuna became the British frontier in the West. Favour- 


526 


CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH RULE IN INDIA (1799-1823) 

able terms were granted to Sindia and Holkar. But the treaties of 
Bassein, Hyderabad and Lucknow remained, and all territorial 
arrangements made by Wellesley prior to the second Anglo-Maratha 
War were left undisturbed. 

Three extracts from Sir George Barlow’s minutes explain very 
fully why in some cases he deviated from a system of non-interfer¬ 
ence and adhered to Wellesley’s subsidiary system. Barlow thus 
wrote about the subsidiary treaty with the Nizam: “The object of 
this alliance was to combine in perpetuity the interests of the two 
States, to concentrate their strength for their mutual safety and for 
the maintenance of peace and participation of the hazard and advan¬ 
tages of unavoidable war; that its stipulations were not conditional 
but absolute; that it became interwoven in the system of respective 
governments and complicated with the relations which both govern¬ 
ments separately and conjointly bore to other states and that new 
relations and new obligations of public faith and honour had been 
engrafted upon it and had grown up with it.” He even justified in¬ 
terference in the internal affairs of the Nizam. He wrote, “the adop¬ 
tion of that system necessarily presupposed a just conception on the 
part of His Highness of the true principles and solid advantages of 
the alliance and a sincere disposition to maintain it. It presupposed 
a degree of firmness, discernment and dignity on his part which 
would lead him to reject the councils of profligate and interested 
advisers who would endeavour to persuade him that the obligations 
of dependence and degradation are synonymous”. Barlow would 
not also make any change in the Treaty of Bassein in deference to 
the wishes of his employers. He wrote, “in the dissolution of the 
alliance with the State of Poona the question of our public faith is 
involved not only with the Peshwa but with His Highness the Sou- 
bahdar of the Deckan, the Treaty of Bassein containing stipulations 
in favour of His Highness of which the foundations were laid in the 
Treaty of Hyderabad, concluded in October, 1800”. 

Sir George Barlow has been described by some as “the meanest 
of the Governor-Generals”. He dissolved the ties es f ablished recent¬ 
ly with the chiefs of Rajputana and the cis-Sutlej Sikh chiefs by Lord 
Lake. But his policy was not one of total reversal as was proved 
by his refusal to modify existing relations in the south. According 
to Barlow’s arrangements west of the Jamuna, Macheri and Bharat- 
pur were the only States that continued to have a defensive alliance 
with the Company. But it was impossible to make the Jamuna a 
barrier. As Lake had written, “it was fordable in several places 
above Agra even before the 1st October and it was not a boundary 


527 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

of any strength at any place above the junction of the river with 
the Chambal for more than a few weeks of the rainy season.” The 
Court of Directors themselves felt that Barlow’s abandonment of 
Jaipur to Maratha attacks was not perhaps proper. In their letter 
dated 30 October, 1805, they even wrote, “to recede is often more 
hazardous than to advance”. 

Lord Minto’s Administration: 

Lord Minto came to India in July 1807. The period of his ad¬ 
ministration extends upto October 1813. Sir John Malcolm wrote, 
(Malcolm, Sir John, Political History of India, p. 244): “The Gov¬ 
ernment of Lord Minto had no result more important than the im¬ 
pression it conveyed to the authorities at home of the utter impracti¬ 
cability of perseverance in that neutral policy they had desired to 
pursue. It was a progressive return to a course of action more 
suited to the extent, the character and the condition of the British 
power”. 

Lord Minto sent Metcalfe as an ambassador to Ranjit Singh. 
The Treaty of Tilsit, concluded between Napoleon and the Czar 
Alexander in July 1807, had made the British foreign office nervous. 
In view of the possibility of a Franco-Russian advance in the direc¬ 
tion of India the British Indian Government sought to win over the 
rulers of Lahore, Kabul and Teheran. Malcolm was sent to Persia, 
Elphinstone to Kabul, Metcalfe to Lahore. But in the meantime 
taking advantage of the British policy of non-intervention west of 
the Jamuna, Ranjit Singh, master of Lahore and Amritsar had at¬ 
tempted in two expeditions in 1806 and 1807 to bring the Sikh chiefs 
between the Sutlej and the Jamuna under his control. These cis- 
Sutlej Sikh chiefs, in their alarm had approached the British Resi¬ 
dent at Delhi but had received no encouragement: This was the state 
of things when Metcalfe came to the Punjab on his mission. Ranjit 
Singh must have argued in his mind, “if the British really thought 
his friendship essential he might as well get a price for it.” Before 
the negotiations had advanced, Ranjit Singh embarked on his third 
cis-Sutlej expedition which has been compared by a contemporary 
chronicler to an earthquake. All the cis-Sutlej chiefs practically 
acknowledged his overlordship and paid a nazarana. As he came 
back from the expedition Metcalfe under instructions from the Gov¬ 
ernor-General demanded that he must surrender all the places he 
had conquered in his third expedition and that the cis-Sutlej Sikh 
chiefs “are and will remain under the protection of the British Gov¬ 
ernment”. The political situation in Europe had improved for England 


528 


CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH RULE IN INDIA (1799-1823) 

on account of the Spanish insurrection, the victories of Sir Arthur 
Wellesley at Talavera and -Bussaco and the signing of the Treaty of 
Dardanelles between England and Turkey. Lord Minto was no 
longer anxious to have an anti-Gallican alliance. He rather wanted 
to check the rising Sikh power, “to oppose the extension on the 
Indian side of the Sutlej of the ambitious military power which 
would be substituted upon our frontier for a confederacy of friendly 
chiefs rendered grateful by our protection and interested in our 
cause”. Ranjit Singh was not prepared for a sudden change in the 
political situation. At one stage he even meditated war. British 
troops under Sir David Ochterlony were sent to Ludhiana to back 
British demands. At last Ranjit Singh yielded. His consciousness 
of his inability to meet the British power at this moment, his fear 
that the Sikh chiefs on the other side of the Sutlej would take ad¬ 
vantage of the impasse, compelled Ranjit Singh to yield. A treaty 
was concluded. Ranjit Singh retained the territory he had possessed 
on the left bank of the Sutlej before the coming of Metcalfe, but he 
was not to maintain in that territory more troops than were neces¬ 
sary for internal duties. Now the car of Juggernaut rolled over the 
small cis-Sutlej states. The Sutlej, instead of the Jamuna, became 
the British frontier. 

Lord Minto also took vigorous measures against the refractory 
chiefs of Bundelkhand, reduced the celebrated forts of Ajaygarh and 
Kalinjar and established tranquillity in Bundelkhand. Amir Khan, 
the Pindari chief, menaced Berar. The Raja of Berar did not solicit 
British aid, but Minto assembled a considerable force on the eastern 
border of Berar as also on the south-western frontier of Bundel¬ 
khand. Colonel Close occupied Sironj, the, .capital of Amir Khan. 
Amir Khan, however, escaped. Minto could have, with the force at 
his disposal, conquered Malwa, but he desisted from an active policy 
of conquest. Negotiations for a subsidiary treaty with the Raja of 
Berar were carried on for some time, but then the Governor-General 
turned his attention to the conquest of Java and the negotiations 
were not brought to any conclusion. Lord Minto would have per¬ 
haps returned to the subsidiary system of alliances if his preoccupa¬ 
tions elsewhere had not prevented him. He wrote to the Resident 
at Poona on 11 Nov. 1811: “It is not the intention of these re¬ 
marks to question the policy of those subsidiary alliances or the 
great and beneficial influence on the condition of the British Empire 
in India in times past, present and to come. They have added most 
materially to our power and Resources and they have placed for ever 
at a distance dangers far greater than any to be apprehended from 

529 


MS.—34 




the evils 

selves the,res^ii^e${i|! 2 tbeir mw&Amwizw&sz 


of coirective meas^rps 

dency to dissolution. ” i ;sj[[ B nsoillsO-iins ns evsri oJ anoixns legnol 

srfi <10 oolaaetxe-erii aaogno of 4 .mwoa rbljcLtniali edi iberfo oi 

, Lord Hastings and me Nepal War: t T 

xlornw iawoq ynsmim airoiirclms snt io [Snug ofii to sbiz nsibnl 

Lord Hastings; i.ttoe suedessoinofiljcurd. r Mint dp Wist €rd\teW]Dj?- 

General of India Qetofeetr/i@13ito dahuaryf d823>3 iHeim famous 
in Indian. daistof^falior the)Mppxessionjciif the PjndSristanS thfesfinaf 
overthrow; of thesj Maratha powers^ idBaite nhisr &dmmiStraJt&ohk 1 t first 
achievement's the defeat i^thefQnrM)^ rlle^aaitveHMmowpdor 
his military serncea in the AmeficannwHr jefc land?. Mi& 

pxlSn^andi ap- 

pointed ‘Jadffcdf 

! a m «si 

&*§*«•* ^#4>T^i«b^l> 9 0P*fftrf8^^ffl fl Hi&afaSlfefi O3 t8S8fe 
^tiotos?te^tMi;sfligiSikM4'«!a^ieteSh^^er^ ) S^k^ aH t dfti- 
pire. Thfey M&vT« il^a?dnaffi&Hg5mfe«A^y4#ftfd!hilfe, j< ^ 

-as over theiplains/Heemii theirvK$f mthe 

sweeping a finger sari ;Theii> bviaguaffsitij SverteT bo laid > ftd.afe i ac4£fl$Stet 
soon”. With Ranjit Singh Lord Minto had establishgd frMndijHrelS- 

g?S?P din g 

_„„ r _ v hP'tif)rflPrg nt KachmilK wac Phonlrorl Kv T?o 

% s ire^i 

M' kant" 

-clash' 1792- 

they turned south to 

azaZl sZtsA aoxaumr aaolD JenoipT) ^oniroT 

mbw 

SBrhkhpur and ^ 

ifbree%fi#ovefwheliiiSi. rf 

“having failed, War hegan in'NoveSihe? lo! no UmB0 

r»rnc\ t fro Hrwtcxet arf i hfta tP 




anoitsifoapOr 9(fJ fails jsvsi to Jasnpnob erttoi noitasite zid fasnmi 

P° m ^ J,°m MS#rj^chte«f- 



fBpDi 

Mniasn 3Q, o«rtWHi* sweat. 

£ 3° the ,prip?ipal 

Gurkha station in Garhwal. The thir^ .undan.W^d^ ^ -ii* 


frorff ) «»r WMSaf '%§* 



- .c-avsn Y“ 


ifaooD 3HI 


atman< 

.,. /, ^aoo oT 

men with 60 guns. 


te march 
was jtft; march 
_ , ... , feifeseesiBBWa- 


imoD oi 

. .. _... r J guns. ^ 

ni0re S 3 ^ M9^s! 0 91i3lW9^«6i«i% 

. .. (Sao 


iK—.g.M 




CONSOLIDATION (1799-1823) 


aimed droops of docal militia; The Gurkhas trusted in their bravery, 
thbk- v.eaiyidifiicuM terrain and the inexperience of the British in hill 
i#ai?fape. 3dGdEe^e’^dOTsion:)mad^>^n attack on the small fp^pf 
-Katanga. The Gurkha commander, Balbhadra Singh, was a very in¬ 
trepid sdldieri>irGCile§pie attempted an impatient assault, was killed 
and;^he^iiit^h Another determined asaanJI 

lailin^ibombardment was resorted to. The Gurkha commandant 
^aiydwedfthe place with the iremnants of h%garrison, escaping with- 
htddJkult^ J$tll says that the moral effect of this brilliant de- 
imm of tan, insignificant entrenchment on the minds of both parties 
wa& ? the pripfiipaj protracted cpntj^$nce of th^ap 3 |^pm 

J£adanga theJBrit^hjIorce advanced towards Nahan, took it-and then 
J^ak c ^dn ; ^ assaultit they were again d^ 

feated. The defgghipent| 9f I befjpre-a 

Marley accomplished nothing and. two, J of j his outposts were over- 

nosmijvl ons lewnJusO iq noiaSPa sirh fed* oJon.ot Jnsoningia ax il , . 

powered. Qchterlqny. in.the extreme west, however, succeeded in 

^cf A yiomi9r nailnSr Jc mipaw-S 9voig_ isvn iff- . . dJ IqTaow 9ffi ■ j 

getting better of Amar Singh Thapa, the most celebrated of the Gur- 

snr ncrnoiaxmOD Bn23lfD mm smf.mo enf no noini tic f.nxxB nsav i 

kha^ commanders. He succeeded in capturing two of the most 1 m- 

t VBM m etayxiq £ ,nx Dafiifrnmox ngmSl tirnBn .isnfq 

Portant Gurkha forts—JNamgarh and Ramgarh. He also succeeded 

Jgixo oj .D92Qqqua. ax .qineonfi'O: 9T3pmajgCm u , . nguorfT” _ 

in securing the submission of the chief of Bilaspur, a very steady ad- 

anoiffim ’mo ytimoi hCJbY .edifice; na gn2 r ib ilssym neowfod 

.Ifinoitnevnop bn& Ismiol ylorem sib 

i Hastings, decided, 

JSiepaiese province of Kumaon bordering upon RohUkhand jvi|fe ri? 

-Wnf°[ tewe raised anugyy&f 

M Major Hearsey. Gardner succeeded in pushing the 
.g^lias up to AUnora. But Hearsey advancing up the Kali river 

by the Gurkhas and taken prisoner. However, British 
troops Gurkhas who were forced back, had to sUr- 

render the whole district of Kumaon with all the forts $nd withdraw 
to the west of the Kali river. Ochterlony’s communications were 
now clear and he advanced another step. compelled the Gurkha 
, 1 ^er s ^W ) ^§y}gJt/J’h 1 ?ipa to surrender the strong fort; of Malaun 

east of the Kali river. 

^tak t §l 5 g 9 f ^^^%ted, xlB ^y n p^ed Sfitish 

f F° m the Sutlej.stfi th^K^ariver 

fb^oElSl*: 

independence of the. Sikkim. Raja, who had, allied himself with the 

9 f#,Sritish,%sidency at Khatmandu„-.,Bi?t the 
war ^fte^^^epdant at the Gurkha capital, the treaty,, though 

t fe pli ft i w b9t60TEgIarriB oa omoood bad yoriJ" 
to a , Ae ae^ndoeainpmtn tfnowrBbfcgaifc .ih IFebrtiary 4 I 8 I 6 . ^ICDschteifchy 
had) abput 2 Q,W )0 men, divided into four brigades. 'One advanced 


n 

ni 



THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

upon Hariharpur, another up the Gandak to Ramnagar and the main 
body under Ochterlony marched straight up to Khatmandu. Och- 
terlony had an uninterrupted career of success. He came up with 
his enemy at Makwanpur, about 20 miles from Khatmandu and suc¬ 
ceeded in defeating them. The rapid success of Ochterlony’s opera¬ 
tions and the consciousness that the capital now lay open to assault, 
induced the Nepalese Darbar to ratify the treaty. The treaty of 
Sagauli signed in March 1816 made some modification in the terms 
concerning the cession of the T&rai “a considerable tract between 
the Michi and Gandak rivers, exclusive of a small space on the Saran 
frontier but comprehending Bhotwal, was restored to the Nepalese”. 
A portion of the Tarai was given to the Raja of Sikkim. The Raja 
of Sikkim also signed a protective treaty in February 1817. (History 
of British India by H. H. Wilson, Vol. II, pp. 52-53). 

It is significant to note that this cession of Garhwal and Kumaon 
to the west of the Kali river drove a wedge of British territory be¬ 
tween Sikh dominion on the one side and Gurkha dominion on the 
other. Ran jit Singh commented in a private conference in May, 
1815: “Though apparently sincere friendship is supposed to exist 
between myself and the English Sahibs, yet in reality our relations 
are merely formal and conventional. Therefore, I had thought often 
to myself that if ever the English Sahibs would act differently in 
their ‘dealing with me, I would call upon the Gurkhas and make 
friends with them, and in case they showed any hesitation I intend¬ 
ed to make over the fort of Kangra to them to win their comrade¬ 
ship. Now they have gone away from the mountains... I never 
expected such a thing to happen as would make the mountain re¬ 
gions become empty of them so suddenly”. ( Events at the Court 
of Ran jit Singh, p. 192). 

Suppression of the Pinddris: 

After the successful termination of the Anglo-Nepalese war, 
Lord Hastings reduced Hathras, whose chief, a British tributary, had 
become contumacious. The next important achievement of Lord 
Hastings was the suppression of the Pindaris, “who had arisen like 
masses of putrefaction in animal matter out of the corruption of weak 
and expiring states”. Extension of the subsidiary system and dis¬ 
bandment of the Indian troops of the ‘country powers’ had consider¬ 
ably increased these lawless elements. As Sir Thomas Munro said, 
“they had become so amalgamated with the whole of the loose part 
of the military population of India that it had become a system, not 
a particular force that was to be subdued”. They have been corn- 


532 


CONSOLIDATION OF BRITISH RULE IN INDIA (1799-1823) 


pared to swarms of locusts. The anarchy produced by the Pindaris 
could be compared to the state of affairs around the shores of the 
Levant in Pompey’s days. The number of these freebooters in 
Malwa was estimated by Captain Sydenham at 30,000 horse. Tod’s 
estimate was 41,000. The numbers certainly varied, for their ranks 
were recruited whenever there was any prospect of plunder from 
the troops of Sindia, Holkar and Amir Khan. There were a certain 
number of leaders, possessing territories and forts and a body of at¬ 
tached adherents. In the time of Lord Hastings the three chief 
leaders were Cheetu, Wasil Muhammad and Karim Khan. The con¬ 
nection between Amir Khan and the Pindaris was very intimate 
some years before, and even in the days of Lord Hastings they look¬ 
ed up to him and were associated with his followers by similar 
habits of life. The army of Amir Khan lived by plunder in a defined 
sphere. The Pindaris lodged their families and wealth in their 
haunts “situated upon or near the great range of the Vindhya moun¬ 
tains between which and the right bank of the Nerbudda there in¬ 
tervenes a strip of fertile country interspersed with ridges of low 
hills and forests”. Malwa, Marwar, Mewar and other states of Raj- 
putana were devastated by them. Some of them began to plunder 
Berar and entered the dominions of the Nizam and the Peshwd. In 
their quest for new lands to plunder they began to raid the terri¬ 
tory of the Company—Mirzapur and South Bihar in 1812 and Nor¬ 
thern Sarkars in 1816. The Directors in England at last ordered 
that necessary steps should be taken to root out this evil. Lord 
Moira knew that this could not be done by a purely defensive 
system. 

As soon as it was generally known that the British Government 
was willing to abandon the system of non-interference, the Rajput 
States, harried and plundered by the Pindari bands, became anxious 
to enter into treaties of alliance. Udaipur, Jodhpur, Kota and Bundi 
and thirteen other Rajput states entered into treaties that guaran¬ 
teed them protection. The tributes due to other powers were trans¬ 
ferred to the British Government, each being guaranteed against any 
attack, external or internal. Each was definitely told that indepen¬ 
dent external relations were forbidden. They were at the last gasp 
of their existence and they were glad to enter the company’s system. 
The Nawab of Bhopal also signed a treaty and became a British ally. 
The Jaipur chief for some time procrastinated and was the last of 
the Rajput States to enter the British political system. Negotiations 
were also opened with Amir Khan, the Pindari chief. In November 
1817, his Vakil concluded a treaty with Metcalfe. He was recognised 


533 


J0ITAQ1JO2H0D 


* ee • ;! AX the MARATtlA’ 

as the Nawab of Tonk and got the^money to pay»Msr««neft fttais 
fifrears^ 9 Chiefs bn-the borders af ©Urfdelkhahd bimte ifurtfeeii liMts 
of Malwa—Krishnagar, Kfiftaili" Banawa*as*PaM«l3ga»fti Biingatpai 

afso^ntered into tMl British'syfe^nrHBjqeD yd bsismiJaa aaw swlSM 

zHaBi liaitt ~c res aiadtngn ariT ,000,It- asw stemWaa 

moii^Mte 5 $ Lord Hastings-political and mUrta^, ;fj3rJte ,m 

tirpation §1 the Pin^ri§-we f e ^ JlR 

w% fm < and feMm s uns wsdafe 

fa mb a|l sid Sfefe n ? rthei % d 4M 0 8fii o O he . 3 TO¥fiM 1 ?grM 

by ftie Governor-General himself, the T ID.eccan arttj&rJjeing led by 

-MoOr^dT .nM4 : i£a one ■ ;mtfiBfiuM H&lvv ,olym v ) 3l9W FlBD^ari 

Sir Thomas Hislop. The operations began from Handia Qp the. Nar- 

oiBoiitnwisy- asw jumpiirt offf bna^sfli! ctfA 

mada. The Maratha chiefs, suspected to be kindly, to the Pind^ns 

4ooT Y3fit aarmaBn Dipa id svbF opi Jti cte-je f oifflBd^aiB9Y W 

were fenced off by clever strategical movements. By the .end of 

salimia , OidT rf . ®. ioosbb easw J5nsf min qt qrr ds 


Vasil Muhammad committed suicide and Cheetu was devoured.by a, 
tiger in Asirgarh jungles. But the hunt of the Pindaris became, 
itierged in the third Mkratha war. As A MSlcofm..^roie,..^roni 
approbation of his superiors, Lord Hastings carriedflne^ p|ans r Joi 
Lord WMlfesley to comple¥i8if Wai fc y&y^wj^ere Weir pro- 
]g£k&s to a successful issue had^ beefl 1 artesfetf twel^e^yea^^iDefore^ 

-xTiot aril bici ot nsgsd vsrii isbniilq ot ahnsi werrioi tasup uadi 

1 rThus ended the terrible anarchy : and disorder, qfo Raj putana and 
Malwa. Central India was- tranquillised. T The! extension of -British? 
influence? was, based |n these regions upon sthef destruction; of* the prek 
d^tory system* As it has been said^ the ipolitical 1 frarhework^ofe ©rM 
tish India was finished in all essentials. During the subsequtenfc 
years only details were changed. The central power, once domi¬ 
nant, nkfdrally gri^^tf f ^kli 1 scattered u tln|mselyes 

againSt this Central power in vain. Lord'tlksilng^s sea? r/o 1 longer 
proclaimed that the Governor-General was a servant of the Great 
Mughul. The supremacy now belonged to the British GoVerhmpnt 
andnwas Accepted by th<e Indian rulers. 1 19f ^° n99tiinf Bns 

„ 2 nsit oi 9 w siswoq isrito ot sub aatudrxi sriT .noitostoiq merit best 

vns tanisgB boat nsisug gmsd doss <i asm ms vqO HaiiiiH sdt oi bonsl 
-nsqshni tsrft blot ylaJinfiab asw riosS .Isnisini 10 Isnisixa posits 
qasg jgBl sdi Is aiaw ysdT .nsbbidiol 9iaw anoiMsi Isnialxa tnob 
.metaya aVnsqmoo srii lains ot bsl'g eiaw ysdi bns ooasiaixs lisrit io 
.ylls riaiiiiH b em sosd bns yJssii s bsngia osis isqodH lo dswsTI eriT 
io tasl 9 fit 3 Bw bns b9tfinit8BiDOiq 9mit omoa io! ieido luqisL sriT 
gnoitBitogsH .msteya isoitiloq riaitiiH sdi i9tn9 ot asistS iuqtsH edt 
ledmsvoH nl .lorrio iisbnH srit iimA ritiw bsnsqo o?is sisv/ 

bsaingoosi ?.sw oil .silfiotsM ritiw yisoit b b9bulonoo U'^bV aid <VIBI 


534 



Y0AM3HTO3 AHTAHAM 3HT 


IriisifiM 9fit ni leiislem viBioqmsincrj isnxgiio aidt sTongi. fans bfiod 
bri£ daitiiH Jnsteib lo a'gniiiiw no anoiBiiIonoo 100 seed fa he ogsugnsl 
a'itsvirfS yd noianlnoo ol C^^^jTElt v 

-inoirfo rnilguM srfi no io TBriBlsmofi sir! to noijsisdil sdi 101 Jlovoi 

•f^bMtOTTR^lPlVfe n Knb °Mlt!Ti\RY SYSTEM 

-STEM 10 W 9 IV D 9 qiBW B fI9Vl \ veH 219 WOllOl _2 [ 
gfid srnii snT .fan jOF -THE ■MA'RaTHAS rtoibsi teinimbs e /1 t 
-iiluD fans gsljslniaoq loorioS rllimS InsoniV sdi egneReda oi ornoo 
bsisvooaib ylwsn 9di lo hdntroduftimi .svilosqaisq to otic . ; b sir 7 

SliiVaJi^ Su^ifom^friwn 1 a small f ‘'frito a big State 
covering almost half of Maharashtra. The administrative and mili¬ 
tary system of the State! gre# ah& chahgdd over a century. It Was 
susceptible to time, place and personalities and bore the marks of 
the history of the Marathas. All generalisations about the glories 
61* dej*i^i®Shs' of the^^^!M^rath5s 3 ibe fejpt to be a^ 1 false as facile gene- 
rJffi&aftfbf&^bo& anyf!iiii| s e!!sW. J - Wheh T Vineeht Smith or Percival 
Spgjfif. 1 oBfefeiH/e' thii f 4fii 3 M^raffia^4Ml^W rise above the level of 
ptilA^liPs^^SSechbihg^ them, Irfan HabiH asserts L that the Pindaris 

to lose the normal 

bfcd^g^uiK^df^hd i ^^&ps D &eek^tb^rove too much from too 

t3 3 i%ttiehibe* that Mount-' 
stifSft MjSffiMoSlif wHy/ f fflK&£ x ^he downfall in 1818, was 

ap|>6iiiiM'the adrbifiist er the Maratha country 

cftiff inlfe&te ’Btitiisbf Mle in M^hlteiMbaJ °ekpresseS himself laWii& 

hnWwahted to preserve as 
iMi6fe B df f fe^lis 9 fiB' > codM. 3 Mhffi Gourde M^t^riaT is available in the 
Si 1 dKfdMicI^S of s Shi^ftafid 3 b1d papers of his times 

tftfe°BHsS4? Itffim%arnshodhak Mandal 
J£>n SfoKa & Jms& eehtdry. These sources, supplemented 



tftfe J^offfidn hf Mhratha' administration over a century and the 

clH^inj^lJi®til2k^ib^' ci¥ l ltei^tlia armies. Ranade, Kelkar, Raj-' 

.biXS^a^mmJLTT^Il gkLM^obarHiL 21 ri_ baieftmmu .d&,te£Li msz cu^ 


je; .75§nr«arKsn*,'oaraesai and modern scholars like Shej- 
w&fkii^, ahd'KihftarhiriitilMh^^is hew source material, have 

SftetS^Sgive accounts of the system. 4 All these 
soihheS 3 ^# the leaiA^ Hhc^S^ased on thhin, in addition to Ayna - 
patra 5 and Elphiristfahe’^ Reph^t oti ihe T&trivories Conquered from 1 
th0SiPMfy'mi(l&i9h givel usi a^good account as to how the Maratha 
Gqy^||omOhtBiupetioneddnBth^il7th and 18th centuries and how their 

(mobilized arid fought, j Shall we ostrich-like bury our 


53 5 ? 



THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


head and ignore this original contemporary material in the Marathi 
language and base our conclusions on writings of distant British and 
Dutch merchants whose trade was thrown in confusion by Shivaji’s 
revolt for the liberation of his homeland, or on the Muslim chroni¬ 
cles which breathe antipathy to the Hindu rebel in every sentence? 
Vincent Smith and his followers have given a warped view of Mara¬ 
thi administration as it obtained in the homeland. The time has 
come to challenge the Vincent Smith School postulates and culti¬ 
vate a correct perspective, taking account of the newly discovered 
material and the works of Ranade, Sarkar, Sen and Kulkarni. 

Administration: ShivajVs period: 

The King: 

Monarchy as an art found one of its brilliant exponents in 
Shivajl. He was truly a Carlylean hero as King. “His mission was 
order. He was here to make what was disorderly, chaotic, into a 
thing ruled, regular.” 6 His government was rationally organised 
and was guided by noble ideals of beneficence. His reforms remind 
us of measures usually associated with a civilized state. Shivajl 
attempted to wield the scattered elements of his people into a nation 
and organize them as a political community. The Maratha State 
under him could be described as a national monarchy. The activities 
of his government were not merely confined to law and order and 
collection of revenue, but embraced the entire life of the commu¬ 
nity. As the author of the Shiva Bharat says, “The Maharashtra 
country attained its literal significance, viz., the great nation, on 
account of Shivaji’s efforts. The people of Maharashtra became rich 
and happy.” 7 In every department of administration and grasp of 
details, Shivajl invites comparison not only with the famous Indian 
rulers and administrators like Asoka, Akbar and Sher Shah, but 
Europeans like Napoleon, Frederick the Great, and Americans like 
George Washington. He represented the principle of harmony in 
society and acted as the Protector of Dharma (Righteousness). Tra¬ 
dition says that Shivajl offered his kingdom to his Guru Ramdas and 
‘acted merely as dust on his Master’s feet,’ 8 but in practice he ex¬ 
ercised the supreme direction, was the supreme executive and the 
commander-in-chief of his forces., The author of the Ajhapatra re¬ 
gards him as the creator of an altogether new order. 9 

Since the downfall of the Yadavas in 1318 A.D. the political 
history of Maharashtra is a story of humiliation of the upper classes 
and degradation of the masses. It was a period of complete national 

536 


ADMINISTRATIVE AND MILITARY SYSTEM OF THE MARATEJAS 

prostration. Feudalism had become the bane and blight of pre- 
Shi vaji Maharashtra. The whole country was covered with petty 
Watandars, who while pursuing their selfish ends, tyrannized the 
poor peasantry. The rivalries of these feudal barons were nume¬ 
rous, the feelings were hot and collisions frequent; these feudal lords 
were always engaged in savage blood-feuds which are recounted in 
Raj wade’s 15th volume of his Sadhanen in gruesome details. 

To make matters worse, the Deccan at that time was visited 
by a terrible famine. Thus the prevailing famine and feudalism 
with its concomitant evils of private war, blood-feuds, anarchy 
and oppression rendered the life of the masses miserable. Sir Jadu- 
nath Sarkar remarks: “In that dissolution of civil administration and 
social order which marked the twilight before the emergence of 
Shivaji as an independent king, no justice could be had, no legal 
rights enforced by normal peaceful agency, because such agencies 
had perished. The strong alone could hold their own, but they did 
not stop with self-defence and usually turned into usurpers of other 
people’s rights”. 10 Shivaji’s organization of a systematic and order¬ 
ly government with its emphasis on impartial justice and equal treat¬ 
ment to all “was the most conspicuous feature against this back¬ 
ground of disorder and anarchy”. 11 Cosmo de Guarda who wrote his 
Vide e accoens do famoso e felicissimo Sevagy in 1695 observes: 
“Such was the good treatment Shivaji accorded to the people and 
such was the honesty with which he observed his capitulations that 
none looked upon him without a feeling of love and confidence. He 
was exceedingly loved by his people; both in matters of rewards and 
punishments he was so impartial that while he lived he made no ex¬ 
ception for any person, no merit was left unrewarded, no offence 
went unpunished.” It was his high sense of justice and genuine 
concern for the welfare of his subjects that made an intense, appeal 
to the people of Maharashtra and they hailed him as their emanci¬ 
pator and deliverer. “Shivajl’s dominions,” remarks Sir Jadunath 
Sarkar, “first of all spread through the conquests of hearts which 
the honest and strong administrator alone can achieve among a simple 
ahd rustic population”. 12 

Another equally striking feature of the New Order was Shivajl’s 
concern for the common man, irrespective of wealth, caste or creed, 
in his scheme of national regeneration. By setting before them the 
goal of Swarajya (our own government) and by providing them 
equal opportunities for advancement in life, depending on merit, 
rather than heredity and pride of pedigree, he converted the extreme 
Individualism and turbulent spirit of the Maratha character into a 


537 


3AKTAHAM 3HT 3VITAflT?.mi!.«JA 


-tmv 

from 


_ ;r ihd‘1iifeie!? H f6rde 1 fef Iiberii»ISdii 9 df ttetdheai&iffdS “JlPftheisends 
a^gbr^fKt^^WP <iFth<P teathis '%as> • Bmdfcd dand sdBliifiate^ 
Pdi^a 5 Wthfe f5 gfiJ^%ct J tfflt SH^'^»e 9 fc f liatioiiwat4^t'WQ^ 
ilf^ 1 itSeSRfke?IP ifti'o j 5 #ffiW’-after ' 1 ‘k qM^- aHds^Sinftfli^i^qirtdea 

fbr®^A s ^^i^^v^ 3 ^ n9l:j P 91 ^ stfoiailloo briB iori siaw agailesi srit ( zuoi 
ni bs^nuoDSi sib rioidw abusl-boold 9 §bve2 m bsgisgne a^fiwlfi 919 W 
&dh$BW > rjid hmt> .ftf and (fcb 4 GQfflftcii i fif iS^Mj Mf r 4^^T s d'hhB w j;sH 

b 9 }i§¥m^Mi/ i 9lriF?s e telteii e Mp^#it#^iJwi t t i> Mn h fe°r n 

sfljsft, mwpMMmr^yQm^a sPWPfPM fipfe 
%i»^gt}a0!§ft > l > ff^i(j«iS.8itept 1 fii‘ J64 
W%K 9 |4»n^df ls %-<£8^^i# 9 J^ 

r wm§w e $% ! p i s$%iim%%m s sr 1 Sh w 
Wm | 6 

ftSfeiffiPs^rfo aiasrlqme eti rftiw inornmsvog yl 

-dasfh *afi#gTO(3aj5^ (WMK?iSM^ajl*Wftb 3li«d Mtftv-’ fimiMartsed^ 

Kink«ll* witH- I 'Ci ( Vil'«na sfeilitary-' affairs'df- his‘3 fSgvrp appbintddi one; 
mwsdg MfSarnbbm^&t^vs^Tiet^Mng} fsmmXTtki ^aes'’4afea>%iy- r 
1687, ^hi^i i Mddc4ctepifed 9 Jaiti;/k^auItea '#Ufi!nfecand'’A.btBadriaga^ 
aFi!iafeqtiia^J'iffltichs'{i-dasur^d 0 H^ ld&k’ed ier^'a /ddn»pete*iti Satnobat 
and appointed Mittdke}ipl5ah3t6ride i td thfe 'iidSt. i* * Itisipossible iNobrs 
Segsdfe'd’liP'tfie ffiektWhilfe.riJod refqoaq aid vd bovol vlgnibssaxa aew 
-X9 on sbsm $rf bsvii srf sliriw iarfj iBitifigmi oa asw ed atnamriainuq 

93f * MPk^ m%M$ 

{ §m§&^f^&w® e sm%§f ( ^F&w t 9i a ^whs^m* %s& 

TTSWIf^ffiSiiP Swfisfeo^i 


m 


i 



snola loteitBiiiimbB gnoite bne ta^nod aril 

Another officer who made his mark by dinf oeFhSrdiAVdrK ^ak’ 

B%« a 5/*A?¥o d -fcl? {$wM\nu$m&MwgP~ l 

m*mSMkwm 

NctajI Pr.lkar ^cam^the^mpM qf the cavalry and ^e ? |j^ 

.fffltan? no ^ASronSqsJlii ,9111 hi inamaonevbs 10I aaitinuhioqqo isupn 

ivnitiis'Surmiscdthat’NetajS 1 becaTneSarnobat'in'1659: sr Atfhe ! ffn ! ie ! 
of tte meeting 


X" 


sm 


ADMINISTRATIVE MJffiHMilM'Aftft M&t&IKFF THE MARATHAS 


aito^lvssibud ot^et ^Jnlfland^si4^ofiey^^sextsth0i enertr^sn^my. 

QaM®& toAMi%y fdMcthd fBfjiandbtyas 
dismissed from his post. Netaji Palkar’ : ^^iw®a;edded ^yrrKiidMtoji 


n his appointment KadatojI was 


Guiar m the post of 

aJatfMsita sdxm, go u 

honoured with thd fi 

'ills ,at basis 

Pratap Rao 

i * 

and, w 

i^A 


.HhSRMi* 

battle 01, Umrani \1S> April,'~lt>Y3). , Fratap' Kao ^as Sfliria* to ine 

icfiiicR < by"tlie' censure anft rusheS'l.at*‘tfe 15 eWerrw” at'^^f^skrl' '^’24 

M ^19l6l.Y38*aa59n,3lft - 



February, 1674) in a wild charge. 20 


was kille( 


ftfe^jj-vsftnaaj^jMo rfgygJrt’ desBftrateKafitiprMriagSi^.iPijlHMloX^S- 



Best 4^11^74,0 Bafyappfgrs to 

fc®D»& feppwifis W«Ji9fc ttefaiRU*>gnJ*ed!»»»>J}ft4l»lJheififi# MttAg 
aM’B f ,|he. Raja’s.^ftflagj:, mm& 

8?y§S%^^fe i .aanotmol beiiupoB yiwan to aoiterteiaimbs oriJ iq) 

Tjrr ^89JjgS9jIoo aid do, noitooqo-oo has Jaaxmoa arid. dll'm hip.w 

When Jay Singh invaded the Deccan in 1665 to chastise Shivaji, 

ty®: ^Ibeil^pi^trpri^^^ 

WU&M- te^§E o yM|iQ^SeSyj^ji,^ijied toaqoati Jw^ingRt Raghuq 

l^osi iMn^ithRa# £K#diesiaktical! 
Hpad^i and .^as? ^ber dgM) mM^ biiColionMiofib 

8BW* vreaaposffc nsdw iud J90frto liyia s yI9.19«i ion gsw srfbSttwUVl 



xra ouroi 
.asirrns lurisuM boisslofo rioiriw 


-lOD iVTB?2999n TiJO SfliVtlfitJ yu »ujutk i^uiu in uwiw jum *-»**» 

introduced was the appo } int|«eri^fi| gjlgg^feqliBr^^, 

a »sw ^lia ufnnA .siosmuoob leyoi Hb toi yrsaasoon ssw lesa aiH 

:■;■■ Thar&iis , someviwcdrtaifc&jp isbdirfw t=&fe v |tSt^f IIt! ®fi^jMW#' 1 5$* 
Amatyat. The Sabhasad'dtet6h\t\& MlSfe©^th^‘4ir^ ££f@£eh<?& tB^flS§ 2 ip fi 

5^1 



THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


pointment as under: “When Shivajl was sent back to the Poona 
jdcfir in 1640-41, Balakrishna Pant, cousin of Naro Pant Dikshit, went 
with him as a Mujumddr' 925 


In January, 1660, Moro Pant Pingle, according to Jedhe Shakavali 
became Mujumddr . When on 3 April, 1662, he was raised to the 
Peshwdship , Nilo Sondeo was made Mujumddr 26 The Mujumddr 
kept a big establishment consisting of about 300 clerks. He kept 
accounts of income and expenditure of the State. Nilo Pant died 
about the year 1663 and was succeeded in the post by his two sons, 
the elder one Naro Nilkanth being the de jure Mujumddr and the 
younger one, Ramchandra Nilkanth the de facto Mujumddr , as he 
possessed the necessary talent. 27 

The Qatiu Zabta or Code of Conduct was promulgated by the 
Raja at the time of his Coronation. 2 * Though doubts have been 
raised about the date of the document, 29 the Zabta may be consider¬ 
ed as a fair exposition of the duties of the eight ministers. 30 

(1) The Peshwd or Mukhya Pradhdn was to supervise the 
general administration of the kingdom. His seal on all royal docu¬ 
ments was necessary if they were to be effective. He was, when 
necessary, to lead the armed forces in battles, make arrangements 
for the administration of newly acquired territories. He was to 
work with the counsel and co-operation of his colleagues. 

(2) The Amdtya) or Mujumddr was the Finance Minister. He 
was to supervise the income and expenditure of the State. For this 
purpose the record-keepers and accountants of the Subdhs were to 
be subordinate to him. He was required to put his seal on all official 
documents and the statements of income and expenditure. Like the 
Peshwd , he was not merely a civil officer, but when necessary was 
to fight and protect territory. At the Coronation the post was held 
by the two sons of Nilo Sondeo. Naro Nilkanth was the elder of the 
two. But as he was lacking in ability, the work of the post was look¬ 
ed after by his younger brother Ramchandra Nilkanth. 308 He fully 
justified his choice and in later days was the leader of the hosts 
which defeated Mughul armies. 

(3) The Sachi'i) (Persian Surnis) was to examine all royal 
letters and put them in proper shape by carrying out necessary cor¬ 
rections. He was to serve in war and protect the acquired territory. 
His seal was necessary for all royal documents. Annaji Datto was 
the famous S&chiv of Shivaji who carried out survey of land, and his 
assessment is known as Annaji Datto’s DJiord. 


540 


ADMINISTRATIVE AND MILITARY SYSTEM OF THE MARATHAS 

(4) The Mantri (Waqnis) was a kind of Home Minister. He 
was not a mere chronicler as Sir Jadunath Sarkar would have us 
believe. According to the Zabta he was to deliberate on all politi¬ 
cal problem?. He appears to have had the powers of the Home Min¬ 
ister of the present day. Invitations (to Royal audiences?), chroni¬ 
cling of important events, fell in his province. His seal was neces¬ 
sary for royal documents. He was also required, when called upon, 
to fight and to protect the taluka. Gangaji Mangaji was the first 
Waqnis to be succeeded by AnnajI Datto in August 1661. Within a 
year Anna j I Datto became Sumis and his place was taken by Dattaji 
Trimbak. 

The duties of the Senapati (Commander-in-Chief), Pandit Rao 
( Danadhyaksha) and Chief Justice were clearly cut out. The 
Senapati was to look after military affairs, deal with the problems 
of his men and lead the army into battle. The Pandit Rao' was the 
Ecclesiastical head, looking into religious problems. The Chief 
Justice was to supervise the administration of justice. Justice was, 
in most cases, locally administered by village and Pargana Pan - 
chdyats or caste Panchayats. It was only when the p&rty wfis not 
satisfied with the decision of the Panchayats that the Subdhdar re¬ 
ferred the matter to higher authorities who, in the first instance, 
granted him a fresh Panchdyat and when that decision was also not 
satisfactory, the question came before the entire court. Such occa¬ 
sions must have been rare indeed. 

The Pandit Rao was the expounder of Hindu Law and the &as- 
tras; all matters of religion, religious disputes, grants to holy per*- 
sons and temples were referred to him. 

For the proper administration of the country, the-country was 
divided into three divisions; upper Konkan was placed under Moro 
Trimbak Peshivd , Southern Konkan under Annaji Datto Sachiv. 
The Desh country was put unter Dattoji Trimal Waqnis. Revenue 
and other collections were made through Karhurts, Tarajdars and 
Havaldars. Over them were Subdhdar s whose work was supervised 
by the Ministers. These three were to submit to the Raja the state* 
ments of accounts and were to deliver balances into the treasury. 31 
Obviously they did not remain at the court throughout the year, but 
functioned through their Mutaliqs or deputies. 

• 

It is said that at the time of the Coronation the eight members of 
the council got their Sanskrit names and stood round the throne to 
pour holy water from gold and silver jars on the King’s head. They 
stood in the following order, 32 


541 


3 AHTAHAM 2 FHT 


©H .19)?inil®^M>l$ ( $S> baa C s ebw ( 2 wtp»W) ’ib@fPMd&lT (P ) 
eu sipri Pe&hwti'iszhB'S rfiannhsL ii3 g$. isBefUiptiti oism £ Ion esw 
-itilog. il&tf&stg&iodilab of 2 ew od ^Biinumt ibioooA .©veiled 

~niM3?mg$ic&4$ 1° aiswoq erfi bed 9V£ft7Qt BMo .amelcfoiq lee 

-inoifp IsyoH oi) anoibsf i&nl Ng$ffidhlsfoi-q erii to isisi 

- 29093 d _ 8 BW [s 92 aiH .oofdvoiq aid xii lie! .einsv© ynsfcioqmi So,&nxlo 

•-in- 
>2 

Jf 

,* p.-w*' • .* « -*■* '»•* VI •*• A *» v* ^ '-i' vJ 1 W A W«» L ^«' r * <§ >*•* # 

negotiations in person. At best, they were his'^dyisq^S 
and secretaries who looked to the details, once the Raja laid Sown 

pte rU&l^m&i&W'KomWs tiSttiPa W^rMf^ 

85 ! fii# > Mc<^r^ liB ' ft£: vteJilim isils >Jooi oi aaw Jioq&wai 
eri.t 2 bw oM tibfruH edT .silted olni ymriB erfi bnel ban aom aid to 

isiid^w 8 .mif#» en k%^® c ?j3te «ffRM e $aSiM«grts6ia§fei8.* 

. " - • ' 





at 



.... ... TAW? 8 ^}^}W4?P! n «i 0 9^fifl a 9^ 1 Ml 

iSw^S^sflPlSSF itexW^Tafi t»\jSrtono°l riaail e raid batnsig 
-bod dTtoSjBin 8hi^jlisti&tate j w&j i&rfcfe political; ip^wear/Irestingohrithe 
crowned prince. Shivaji’s ministersphoi doubt, served/ himwelkand 

£iit l M)yfaffi d ^a i yj sS ssbhhb^* •&$<>**• 

^3$gn§teJe_aP$ 

feMPafla® 

ministers and often accepted their suggestions, the responsibility for 
fe^taatiftg^btity Hil sub- 

anaMatS* wh&oeissrWfr cmAtai^oimm : $ 

wMte^eFHM'Qaiw^b'ta‘3tei^ sa^WfeS lgff>5B.»0fe H&ttfe’Sf 
B8igav^ns^f!p!«i^B©a6lcilob^«llftffetgrl«flifiitrofiM a %f 0 tFi^ < &£gl i S 
W?ai andt4a#>So,festigie&ge itofep^idekt-ief Mftiy a-lffii^ebs 1 iiiilte <&g£ 

ofethe€^MB0lwfi'Mini9t6i^Wft#e* -fd£ta bf gb^Wiii 

iHdBt 2 pr*bs@|sH grit oi iimdua oi aiow 99'irfi aagrfT .araiainiM atii ijd 
u .iC«»a69ii grfi oini 899naladg^yjlft{^ g| . 9iaw bna ainuoope lo ainam 
iiid j 9 rilpc«rii_I iuod §/li i i%,niBfn97. .ion b|b ;/M£y >j v - IauoivdO 


oxf) js nifi. 

. •«. , . (T> . .?^Mfq|S e ip Skd^ftb 

the Munshi (Persian Secretary) who conducted the work of state 



<^3$ggfO!gi¥^ infefli®n/46t M&dhmsii IWte&’Ofiipiis 

taidsitoi^riM? ilepl?ies $oo2dl.bddpk»msdic i|M§^ r RSjlf^ 

flj^fcajbSQifre^^^ llettems \a fiiiM 

cf the highest judiciary. BalajI Avji, 


SA% 








ADMINISTRATIVE^ THE MARATHAS 


rf^ ^ildk^filija itlaatxhieowas ea#u^ted IWith She fa^lof ttaklf® down 
fth^j^jehlestM]? ofe i iGcodde^s1 Bl^y|i(yslh<»iSnHini0a.t^! b th?©&|^hSh^j& 
imcmth^t has (lunbiS ot nsmsG rnoil) ognsi hbsydb8 erit bsisvoD 
sndgmllBS .iCl M&om sdt !s salim bsibnud sno o) vttrf moil ritbBSid 
-aib S£ otni bsbivib v 3 i lod ?ii 9vsd bliiOW 

Swardjya is the term applied to those territories of Mahlfclshlta 

which formed, the independent kingdom of Shivail For efficient ad- 

usazmA. DSihtwn .iirol, aew, tonmodwc, b to ybq o’skcovb on'!' . . 

ministration r fne T entire kingdom was placed under °the supervision 

bavisoei inbUypli .tfioirum OfH gesqm tuods ..oj ^munns, 

of three ministers; Moro Pant Pipgle Peshivti was given charge oi 

baihmjiLsnp loads jn&tmsqpoB sat erie wnsleg gm.86 fupofnB odj Sign 

JNorth Konkan extending from Kalyan-Bmwandi to Kplwan-Salher, 

919W, 813111810.. MllODlpa. fill I' , .muflnB 130 SlTOtt 3¥fbsYA3 9W <^ nilB 

the r twelve MaVals and Lohgarh and Junnar; Annan Datto. Sachiv 

to Aiow sill ifirfl ^uoiycm aiJT .an-oaniBSuioaifiEYitiWj. DS^9rfma9Tte- 

looked after the South Konkan extending; from CHaul to Koppal apd 

sill to mu mow ont mods aidBiiBVB oi& alistebr. on tub: , .Todio uns 

was an a overaIl supervision bv these three ministers. butjhe actual 

>f r snow mam snT 


They were 4 assisted by an estabnsBmeril of 1 Wmr^r'SA&owM 
Chitnis (Letter-writer), Daftarddr (ItecoM-iteeperT, °PffCL$ 

8«tmte, P^tmse^&30^^ ^e^s'appomkedi byt ttoe^CeratradJ »uli^Siity. 35 
ShiMjlttook; particular oe&rei in se&eptingjoifioersnfodi oofhdifbMiig^tBib 
distnotl ajdministrdtionj Met :e&pected cfcise lMm,j ’ami 
Sl^hdPragtmberimenaefahighestoprbMtypinduiftryoand ^fbaK^ftn^utisf- 
^^libenti\io%frmndtooTte Mujumdav ^w&sxnot$to'ibei i literate 

^MlfobKpertli^i^ccbuntsilfsfiThe Havdlddr> was ml cha^ge^fhrevebiue 
#vj$ionsbeachi yielding 0 lOboutcfS^OOO'> Monk. 1 sTwo such or @vbdu& miyfu 
M0Ja^Ma-h^ciQ®fnaffsinsade'a • Prsftntigoverned by a sub§kdm^^ Okvjk 
B*8 r J®%kgi vetf atlistrofiof ShiVSjfe 
^gproduefcd bwith islightensodificktioh' by: JusticeY.EanadetnThd^ 
^§U0 ! fW&fi ^^idaduint©:lasriumber of ^di§^i^syuBttBtei^y c lfis 

aalfeistrali abbut Boona, gfere Wagif 
tego-W&h Mmlalp <Baswadj dtinnarband j1 Khed" ifie 9 

day m<k yarded! by leri#i teeniMiMontsft (U tp<pfm¥ WtilfS&tUftl Mi 

Karhad, corresponding with the. ^ye^tfebmpbrtiOfl^Of 



THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


with eighteen forts; (13) Prant Vellore —modern Arcot district with 
twenty-five forts; and (14) Prant Tanjore with six forts. The kingdom 
covered the Sahyadri range (from Daman to Bidnur) and varied in 
breadth from fifty to one hundred miles at the most.” Dr. Balkrishna 
v/ould have us believe that the kingdom was divided into 35 dis¬ 
tricts. 3 * 

The average pay of a Subdhdar was four hundred hons per 
annum, i.e., about rupees 100 per month. The Havaldar received 
half the amount as his salary and the accountant about one hundred 
and twenty-five hons per annum. The bordering districts were 
strengthened with larger garrisons. 39 It is obvious that the work of 
the district officers was collection of revenue and maintenance of law 
and order. But no details are available about the working of the 
district offices. The main work, however, was to classify lands, in¬ 
spect condition of crops and make settlement in the presence of 
village officers and the ryots. 

The villages from time immemorial, managed their own affairs. 
The Patel, Kulkarni and Chaugula collected revenue as settled by 
government Karkuns and despatched it to the district authorities. 
Thfey decided minor disputes and levied cesses both on government 
account and for village expenses such as strengthening the village 
walls, digging wells for water, maintenance of temples, holding 
annual fairs or occasional kirtcms. The village officers and artisans 
held inam lands and the officers received small presents on special 
occasions. Shivaji did not disturb village government, but expected 
from the villages loyal service for the peace he assured them. He 
abolished many extra cesses taken from the peasants. He establish¬ 
ed direct relations with the ryots doing away with the intermedia¬ 
ries like Deshmukhs and Deshpandes who in earlier times collected 
ten times what they paid to government, built strong palaces and 
defied the government of the day. 40 

As territory, treasure, ministers and army for defence are look¬ 
ed on as essential for a king, it is worthwhile examining the sources 
of income of the Marltha kingdom. Land revenue was the chief 
source, and from a few stray references in the Bakhars we get an 
idea as to how the collection was made. 

Public Finance: Land Revenue: 

Shivaji’s kingdom consisted of territories he wrested from the 
Sultans of Ahmadnagar and Bijapur and the emperor of Delhi. The 
southern districts bore the mark of Vijayanagar rule. Thus the re- 


544 


ADMINISTRATIVE AND MILITARY SYSTEM OF THE MARATHAS 


venue systems of four different States were prevalent in Maha¬ 
rashtra. Shivaji tried to bring financial unity in diversity by esta¬ 
blishing one common method for collection of revenue. The people 
of Maharashtra had suffered much from the wars between the Nizam- 
shahi rulers and the Mughuls. Large tracts of land were lying de¬ 
solate and agriculture and trade had declined. If these districts 
were again to be brought back to life and prosperity, they had to 
be assured of peace and the demand on peasant proprietors had to be 
a fixed one, settled on easy terms. Shivaji revived the principles of 
Malik Ambar’s revenue system. The Kathi or the measuring rod 
was to be five cubits and five fists in length. Twenty Kathi square 
made a bigha and 120 bighas one Chawar. 

u 

The first important step taken by Shivaji was to have a survey 
of the lands and then to assess the rent and other dues payable by 
the cultivators. These surveys were made at different times; the first 
v/as made by DadajI Kondadeo in ShahjI’s jdgir at Poona; the second 
one was begun by Moro Pant Pingle; and the last one was carried out 
by Annajl Datto which really covered most of the Maratha districts. 41 
The main features of Ambar’s system accepted by Shivaji were “(i) 
the classification of lands according to fertility; (ii) ascertainment of 
their produce; (iii) fixing the government share; (iv) collection of 
rents either in kind or money, and (v) abolition of the intermediate 
collecting agents as farmers of revenue.” 42 The State claimed two- 
fifths share of the land produce leaving three-fifths to the peasants. 
The Tagai and Istaw\d principles were accepted to bring new lands 
under the plough. New cultivators were given seeds and cattle, and 
loans advanced to them were recovered over a period of years. The 
cultivable waste lands were excluded when a village was assessed. 
When later, some of the waste lands were brought under cultivation, 
they were taxed moderately to begin with. There is some truth in 
Lalji Pendse’s statement that Shivaji was a conspicuous leader of 
the down-trodden peasantry against the big landlord class. 

Grant Duff has outlined the revenue arrangement of Shivaji. 
He bases his account on the chronicles and the men who operated 
the system in Peshwds’ times and gave him information for his His¬ 
tory (1826) and may, therefore, be accepted to be fairly correct. 
He says: “The assessments were made on the actual state of the crop; 
the proportionate division of this was three-fifths to the ryot and 
two-fifths to government. As.soon as he got permanent possession 
of any territory, every species of military contribution was stopped; 
all farming of revenue ceased, and the collections were made by 
agents appointed by himself. 

545 

M.S.«—83 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

“Every two or three villages were superintended by a Carcoon 
under the Turufdar or Talookdar who had charge of a small district 
and was either a Brahmin or Purvoe. A Maratha Havildar was sta¬ 
tioned with each of them. Over a considerable tract there was a 
Soobahdar or Mamlitdar who had charge of one or more forts in 
which his collections both of grain and money were secured. 

•'Shivaji never permitted the Deshmookhs and Deshpandyas to 
interfere in the management of the country; nor did he allow them 
to collect their dues until they had been ascertained, when an order 
was annually given for the amount. The Patels, Khots and Kool- 
kurnees were strictly superintended which (made) Shivajl’s govern¬ 
ment popular with the common cultivators.” 43 


“He discouraged the assignment of revenue or jagirdari system 
which he felt would cause such a division of authority as must 
weaken his government and encourage the village and district autho¬ 
rities to resist it. 

“His revenue regulations were simple and judicious. But dur¬ 
ing his short span of life, it is impossible to say how far they were 
attended to by his officers and what results they produced. Muslim 
writers and an English traveller, Fryer, describe his country as in 
the worst possible state, but this is probably due to prejudice. The 
districts directly under him experienced great benefit.” 44 


Besides land revenue there were other sources of revenue which 
classified as under: 45 


may be 

(1) Customs 

(2) Transit duties 

(3) Judicial fees and fines 

(4) Forest revenue 

(5) Profits of mintage 

(6) Presents by subjects and 
officers 

(7) Escheat and forfeitures 


(8) Plunder of hostile terri¬ 
tory 

(9) Booty in war 

(10) Chauth and Sardesh- 
mukhi 

(11) Capture of ships 

(12) Monopolies 

(13) Various kinds of cesses 


Customs: 


Shivaji became master of coastal territory; the ports of Kalyan, 
Bhiwandi, Nagothana, Chaul, Dabhpl and Ratnagin came under his 
influence. Foreign goods entering these ports or going out paid a 
small customs duty of 2 \ per cent. European travellers complained 
about the harassment of customs officers who perhaps overvalued 
goods or demanded bribe for their clearance. 


546 


ADMINISTRATIVE AND MILITARY SYSTEM OF THE MARATHAS 

Transit duty known as Rahddri or ZakcLt was another tax on 
goods and animals passing from one place to another. The officers 
operating it made it irksome by insisting on search of packages and 
persons. 

Judicial fees: 

In cases that went before a Panchdyat appointed by government, 
the winning party had to pay Harki and the losing party Gunhe- 
gdri or fine for crime. How much was realised thus, it is difficult 
to say. 

Treasure trove, fisheries and mines: 

The right to hidden treasure has always been claimed by the 
State in India from time immemorial. ShivajI claimed treasure 
troves by right. 

Mercantile marine: 

From 1659 ShivajI began building a navy, specially to bear 
down the Sidi’s opposition. Some of his ships traded with ports in 
Arabia and Persia. English records inform us that ShivajI possessed 
eight or nine ports on the coastal belt and ‘from every port he used 
to send two or three Or more trading vessels to Persia, Basra, Mocha, 
etc.’ How much he made out of this trade is not known. But the 
English records add that “his fleet consisted of very small vessels 
and with his men totally inexperienced to sea, not much danger 
could be apprehended from them.” 46 

These records mention that the Raja had the monopoly of salt 
trade. 

ShivajI’s navy was active on the sea and captured enemy vessels 
which were then ransomed by the other party. 

Forfeiture of watans and Inams were usual for disloyalty. 
ShivajI followed a conciliatory policy to win over the old aristocracy 
to his cause and allowed the Deshmukhs to draw their allowances 
from the land revenue after the general collection was made. At the 
time of his succession the watanddr usually offered a small present. 

Profits from mints: 

“Indian rulers did not set much store on the royal prerogative 
to coin money. One mint and one currency did not find much re¬ 
cognition in the Deccan.” 47 The Deccan Sultans and Mughul em¬ 
perors issued their gold mohurs and silver rupees but did not inter¬ 
fere with local currencies. The Government left these currencies to 


547 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

find their own value in the market. Goldsmiths and Sahukars 
(bankers) obtained licence to manufacture coins under conditions 
and restrictions laid down by the rulers; one of the conditions was to 
pay the State a licence fee. These coins bore the marks of the 
manufacturer and the place of their origin. Shivaji had his mint at 
Raigarh. His first coins were issued before 1674. Reverend Abbot 
had made a collection of about 25,000 coins of Shivaji. 48 All sorts 
of foreign coins were current in his kingdom. Fryer says that 
“Shivaji.forbids not the passing of any manner of coins.” 49 Sabhasad 
mentions 32 different kinds of gold coins and different kinds of 
silver. Gold coins were Gambars, Mohors, Putlis, Padshah Hons, 
Satlamis, Ibrahimis, Shivarai Hons, Kaveripak , Sangarai Hons, 
Devarai Hons, Ramchandra Rai Hons, Gooty Hons, Dharwar Hons, 
Fdlams, Pralakhati Hons, Adoni Hons, Jadmal Hons, Tadpatri Hons, 
etc. 50 -A hon was worth Rs. 3-4. The Maratha Mohor approximated 
to the Delhi mohur (Rs. 14.50). 51 Shivarai was the most widely 
circulated coin. The fractions of a pice were counted in cowries . 

Shivaji founded a new kingdom practically beginning from a 
scratch. He had to find means to raise his armies, equip them with 
arms, build forts, buy guns and ammunition. All these could come 
from the plunder of the enemy’s courltry and defeat of his forces. 
It is well known that the Raja obtained huge quantities of treasure 
and equipment when he defeated the Adil Shahi general Afzal Khian 
in 1650, Mughul general Kar Talab Khan in 1661, 52 and Bahadur 
Khan. He sacked the towns and marts of Kalyan, Bhiwandi in 1657, 
twice raided Surat (1664 and 1670), Khandesh and Berar in 1661, 
plundered Hubli, Vengurla, Raibagh and Dharangaon. 

ChavCth and Sardeshmukhi were the two instruments used by 
Shivaji to obtain treasure from the enemy country he invaded. He 
demanded from the subjects of his enemies, tribute roughly equivalent 
to one-fourth of the estimated revenue of the province to save them¬ 
selves from harassment of his armies. He seized rich people of 
hostile territories and obliged them to agree to the ransom. If Shi¬ 
vaji levied this chauth as early as 1661 and 1670 as Jadunath Sarkar 
says, 53 all the discussion about its origin from the Ramnagar Raja's 
demand on Daman villages is futile. Shivaji needed money for his 
wars and demanded it- at the point of the sword. 

He also posed as Sardeshmukh of the Deccan, the supreme re¬ 
venue collector, and demanded another ten per cent from his con¬ 
quests. 

Under the Peshwds. the emperor’s sanction was obtained to col¬ 
lect chauth and sardeshmukhi from the six subdhs of the Deccan for 


548 


ADMINISTRATIVE AND MILITARY SYSTEM OF THE MARATHAS 

which the Marathas agreed to serve the Mughul government with 
i.5,000 horse and pay a small sum as fee. Thus the enemy sources 
were gradually exhausted and the Marathas were enabled to extend 
their boundaries. In this sense Ranade and Sardesai compare the 
chauth with the subsidiary system. However, under the subsidiary 
system the control of the British over the other party was far more 
complete and exacting than under the Maratha system. The Mara¬ 
tha Government failed to extend the protection given by the British 
to their subordinate allies. 

The total income of Shivaji’s State is stated by Sabhasad to be 
a crore of hons 54 and there the matter must rest in the absence of 
evidence to the contrary. Sarkar’s statement that it was consider¬ 
ably less is his personal guess. 

Expenditure: 

But it would not be true to say that he amassed this wealth as 
a personal fortune. He maintained a large army of 200,000, and 
spent liberally on it. 54a He also paid the civil service, spent on build¬ 
ing new forts and repairing old ones, tanks, canals and other govern¬ 
ment buildings, encouraged learning by giving presents to temples 
and learned Brahmins. 

“Besides regular pays and allowances, soldiers and officials were 
given additional allowances for meritorious work. Shivaji conferred 
pensions, bounties and prizes for those who shed their blood for the 
cause of the Maratha state. The sons of soldiers who fell on the 
battle-field were absorbed in the State services. He directed that 
the widows of the soldiers who had no sons, should be maintained 
by an equitable pension. The wounded received monetary rewards 
according to the seriousness of wounds and captains of renown 
were sumptuously rewarded and given bracelets, necklaces, horses 
and elephants as marks of distinction”. 55 

He arranged for the defence of his forts and territory, made pro¬ 
vision for his forces and civil services, moderated the demand on the 
peasants and ruled justly. Rightly does Chitnis observe that his sub¬ 
jects felt that they must cultivate rectitude of behaviour to uphold 
the king’s rule which was of great beneficence. 56 Prof. Kulkarni after 
examining the heads of expenditure comes to the conclusion that the 
purpose of public expenditure was fully realized in the Maratha 
State of 17th century. 57 

Shivaji Successors: 

ShambhujI’s succession was contested. Some of the ministers 
like Moro Pant Pingle, AnnajI Datto suspected to be plotting against 


549 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


him were thrown into prison. Later, an attempt to poison him so 
enraged Shambhuji that he put to death AnnajI Datto, his brother 
SomajI, HirojI Farzand, Balaji Avjl Chitnis, Mahadeo Anant and 
twenty-five other persons. A Kanoji Brahmin, Kavi Kalash, became 
his confidant, and naturally senior officers became jealous of an out¬ 
sider who wielded so much power with their master. Though Sham¬ 
bhuji tried to run the administration on the lines laid down by his 
illustrious father, senior ministers and officers felt disgusted with 
“the Raja’s rudeness, caprice and violence of spirit, and could not 
render him the same devoted service as they did to the father.’’ 58 

While Shambhuji was engrossed in his domestic disputes, the 
Mughul emperor marched to the Deccan at the head of an immense 
army and arrived at Burhanpur in November (1681). Shambhuji led 
futile attacks against the Mughuls and frittered away his resources 
in wars against the Sidis of Janjira and the Portuguese. Aurangzlb 
destroyed the neighbouring kingdoms of Bijapur and Golkonda in 
1684-86 and 1687 respectively, and then turned his full fury against 
the Maratha king who had eluded him so far. The net closed round 
Shambhuji and he was taken captive at Sangameshwar in January, 
168S. After a month and a half, he was put to death in a cruel 
manner on 11 March, 1689. After this, many forts fell into the hands 
of the Mughuls and Shambhujfs successor, Rajaram, escaped to 
JinjI. 


Feudalization: 

In the interregnum from ShambhujI’s capture in 1689 to the 
home coming of Shahu in May 1707, conditions in Maharashtra were 
abnormal. The machinery of government as devised by ShivajI 
broke down. A number of Maratha captains raised forces on their 
own, led expeditions in Mughul territory and made collection of re¬ 
venues from which they reimbursed themselves. Shahu, when he 
returned home with a handful of body-guards, was called upon to 
establish his superior claims against local Mughul officers and the 
protege of his aunt, Tara Bai, and set up his authority over the war¬ 
lords. At first the patriotic tradition of his grandfather and the sup¬ 
port of the Mughul grandee Zu’lfiqar Khan, enabled him to hold his 
own against his rivals. But this initial advantage needed to be but¬ 
tressed by personal valour and leadership in a country bristling with 
arms. Shahu lacked the commanding talents and energy of his 
grandfather, and the patriotic tradition could not help him long; 
he was Scarcely able to hold his own against the party of his aunt 
when the support of Zu’lfiqar Khan was gone. Balaji Vishwanath 


550 


ADMINISTRATIVE AND MILITARY SYSTEM OF THE MARATHAS 

who became Peshwa in 1713, in face of mounting difficulties, came 
to realize that it was no . longer possible to adhere to ShivajI’s old 
constitution under which the king, aided by his eight ministers, 
was the sole ruler of his dominions. The king’s position as against 
the warlords who were themselves practically independent in seve¬ 
ral parts of the Deccan, had deteriorated. The only way to save the 
kingship being submerged and the country being involved in civil 
war and turmoil, was to accept the chiefs as vassals with practi¬ 
cally free reins in their territory, to acknowledge them as hereditary 
jagtrdars who would bring their forces to the common standard 
when called upon to do so, but who otherwise would have a free 
hand in the management of their jdcfirs. Shahu accepted the advice 
of the Peshwa , concluded an agreement with KanhojI Angria, Tara 
Bai’s chief adherent,, on these lines, and gave similar freedom of 
action to other chiefs. A revolution in feudalizing the Maratha 
State began. 

Shahu’s stay-at-home policy accelerated the process of feuda- 
lization and the want of capacity in his successors completed it. 
The chiefs who raised men and money for realizing the claims of 
chauth and sardeshmukhi in distant lands on their own, could not 
be expected to be subservient to royal commands and render minute 
accounts to court officers, when the sovereign himself gave no direc¬ 
tive and showed little interest in distant operations. BajI Rao, who 
succeeded to the Peshwdship in 1720, proved himself an able com¬ 
mander and effected large conquests in Hindustan. The Peshwa 
who could have saved royal authority from falling into disuse, him¬ 
self became the leading feudal chief and kept his conquests on the 
w T est coast and Hindustan, and was copied by other ministers and 
chiefs. The Pratinidhi, the Amdtya, the Shchiv, the Sendpati and 
other cabinet members, though they retained their nominal rank, 
became transformed into hereditary feudatories, and the new war¬ 
lords that had sprung into existence during the war with Aurangzib 
swelled their ranks. 

The position was confirmed by Raja Shahu himself. On his 
death-bed he wrote two rescripts. By the first he asked the Peshwa 
to wield supreme authority as there was none of his family to carry 
on the government wisely. By the second he directed his successors 
to maintain the Peshwa in power. 59 

The Raja having thus resigned royal authority, it was assumed 
by the Peshwa. Some of the chiefs like the Pratiiiidhl, Raghuji 
Bhosle and Gaikwar demurred, but were overawed by a demon- 


551 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


stration of force. The successor of Raja Shahu, Ramraja, was an 
adopted child, born and brought up in humble circumstances. He 
could not muster force strong enough to oppose the Peshwa and gave 
his written sanction that the Peshwd’s authority should be obeyed. 60 

The supreme, authority that the Peshivfa came to wield in 1750, 
he did not enjoy long. The Battle of Panipat (1761) made a serious 
crack in his position. His grand army was destroyed. His cousin 
and his counsellors were all killed on the battle-field and his trea¬ 
sury was empty. 

The losses in men and treasure and deaths in his family and 
among his friends unhinged Peshwa BalajI Rao’s mind and within 
six months of the Battle of Panipat, he died a broken-hearted man. 

His son, Madhav Rao, who succeeded to the Peshwaship, was 
barely eighteen years old. The eldest surviving member of the 
Peshwd’s family was Raghoba, BalajI’s brother, who expected the 
government to be conducted under his direction. Raghoba had little 
abilities and was unpopular with a party in the Peshwa’s family. 
An acrimonious dispute plagued the Peshwd’s court for over eight 
years dividing the loyalty of the chiefs. Raghoba was imprisoned 
in a fort in 1768, but the civil strife in the family did not abate. It 
was fanned into white heat when Madhav Rao’s successor was mur¬ 
dered (1773) at the instigation of Raghoba or of his ambitious wife. 
The court party led by Nana Phadnis made a solemn resolve to drive 
the usurper from the Peshwd’s Gddi and had to look for support to 
the powerful Maratha chiefs and make them concessions. The usur¬ 
per Raghoba fled from the capital and a newly born child, Sawai 
Madhav Rao, ascended the Peshw\a’s masnad. Sindia, Holkar, Gaik- 
war, Bhosle, Pawars and other Maratha chiefs now affected more 
independence in their own jaglrs, and claimed even the right of in¬ 
terference in the Peshwd’s domain. All the evils inherent in the 
feudal system now came to the surface. Though the Maratha power 
sprawled over a large part of the country, no centralized authority 
guided its policies. The different units, small and big, followed 
their own interests, acting on their own. If the interests of the 
Poona government were threatened by the Nizam or Tipu Sultan, 
it could not look to its feudatories to come to its help. The Raja of 
Jaipur could with impunity defy Sindia’s demands for tribute and he 
could look to Holkar for support in his defiant attitude. Even the 
Nizam played the Peshwd’s feudatories against his Diwan, and for 
years withheld the tribute. The British government took advantage 
of this position and by the end of the century affected to treat the 


552 


ADMINISTRATIVE AND MILITARY SYSTEM OF THE MARATHAS 

big feudatories as equal members of a confederacy and concluded 
separate treaties with the Gaikwar and the Peshwa, thus isolating 
other units. In the war that followed the treaty of Bassein in 1802 
the English fought the feudatories separately. The British army 
marched through the PeshuAd’s territory and defeated the armies of 
Sindia and Bhosle, while Holkar looked on. Holkar’s turn came 
in 1804. He was' defeated at the battles of Dig and Farrukhabad. 
In 1817 the Peshwa became restive under British restraint and call¬ 
ed on his erstwhile subordinates to join in a general rising against 
the British. But the call came too late and went unheeded. Sindia 
and Bhosle had been paralysed and the Pindari troops which were 
active, were a mere rabble and hunted down to their lairs by the 
British. The Peshwa himself was run to ground and threw himself 
on the mercy of his.opponent. Thus ended very ignominiously the 
career of the Maratha State which once had become the terror to the 
Mughul empire. 

The organization of the Maratha State was thus very peculiar 
and without a precedent. The Raja of Satara, the formal head of 
State, who bestowed dignities and posts on the Peshwa, other minis¬ 
ters and chiefs, looked on himself as a vassal of the Mughul em- 

r- 

peror, who himself was a shadowy figure and wielded no power. 
The Padishah was never consulted by his Maratha vassal on any 
matter of policy, and after 1750 never mentioned in any of the 
treaties and engagements relating to the territories in the Deccan. 
The Raja was a prisoner and a pensioner of the Peshwa . The Raj- 
Mandal or council of ministers ceased to function and its members 
became jdgirdars supervising not only revenue collection but also 
the civil and criminal administration in their assigned districts. 
The Peshwa so long as he retained the primary, formulated policies 
and gave direction to state affairs to some extent. But this was gone 
after the death of Madhav Rao Peshwa in 1772. The chiefs assumed 
greater independence and none concerned himself with the com¬ 
monwealth. The bond of union holding the Maratha people under 
one banner snapped completely. “The change meant” as Ranade 
points out, “the conversion of the organic whole into an inorganic 
mass”. 61 The Maratha State that spread over more than half of 
Indian territory, was not one united power directed and operated 
by one powerful will, but hundreds of big and tiny islands of autho¬ 
rity, each following its own course. 

Financial weakness: 

One result of feudalization* showed itself in the weakness of the 
financial position of the Maratha State. ShivajI though he was coil- 


553 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


stantly engaged in warfare with his neighbours, left an overflowing 
treasury. 62 The balances were frittered away by his son ShambhujI 
and the long protracted war that followed his death, put a heavy 
strain on his successor, Rajaram. Raja Shahu when he came to the 
throne in 1707 inherited a great tradition but an empty exchequer. 
In- the arrangements that were later made for his government he had 
little direct control either over finance or the army. His feudatories 
were to fight his wars and supply his public and domestic needs. 
The Rdybdbti or the Raja’s share of the chauth was to be collected 
by the Pratinidhi, the Peshwd and the Sachiv. Other chiefs were 
also expected to pay a portion of money to the treasury. 63 The col¬ 
lections were neither regular nor adequate and the poor Raja often 
found himself in dire distress. The State never seems to have had 
funds adequate enough to perform its duties in a competent manner, 
though the burden of taxation was in no way light. 

Peshwd Baji Rao who launched on a vigorous programme of 
expansion of Maratha power, had to raise large armies and became 
involved in debts. A stage was reached when the bankers who had 
already advanced him lakhs of rupees, refused to make further ad¬ 
vances. In his correspondence with his Guru Brahmendra Swami, 
he often complained that while his subordinates were enriching 
themselves and amassing fortunes, he himself had fallen into that 
hell of being beset by creditors, and had to pacify Sahukars and 
Siladars. “I am falling at their feet” he writes, ‘‘till I have rubbed 
the skin from my forehead”. 64 

His successor Balaji Rao was in no better position. The rivers 
of gold from Hindustan and the Karnatak, he lamented, only served 
to enrich his army leaders, but disappeared before they reached the 
Maratha country. 65 According to the Peshwd Diaries the debts con¬ 
tracted by this Peshwd between 1740 and 1760 amounted to a total 
of a crore and a half rupees. Owing to the disaster at Panipat 
matters became worse in the elder Madhav Rao Peshwd’s time. 
That prince when he died, left a debt of 24,00,000 rupees. 66 

The system of Maratha conquests added to the financial diffi¬ 
culties of the State. Maratha chiefs would invade a part of the coun¬ 
try, spread over it like flood-waters and then recede within a few 
months. The local rulers, to stave off the fury of Maratha arms, 
would agree to pay tributes which were recovered only partially 
and many times remained in arrears. The back of the local resistance 
was never broken; it raised its head as soon as Maratha armies re¬ 
tired. The feudal ievies, never paid regularly by their chiefs, often 


554 


ADMINISTRATIVE AND MILITARY SYSTEM OF THE MARATHAS 

plundered the countryside through which they passed, bringing 
odium to their leaders. 


State Revenue: 

Assessment on land was the main source of state income. It 
absorbed almost forty per cent of the gross income from land. In 
addition there were professional taxes; customs levied on goods in 
transit; customs levied at ports, dahakpatti which jagirdars and 
zamindars were called upon to pay from time to time; duty on sales 
in the weekly market; duty on sales of cattle; cess on digging wells; 
levy on widow marriages; in fact, every economic activity was taxed. 

The nominal revenue of the whole Maratha empire at this time 
was estimated at ten crores of rupees. Of this, though the actual 
amount realized was seven crores and a quarter rupees, much of it 
was minutely sub-divided in grants of jdgirs and indms and barely 
three crores were received in the Peshwd’s treasury, which was 
hardly sufficient to maintain the State in a state of efficiency. 

Local administration: 

The Village: 

The changes at the upper levels in the state did not affect much 
of its organization in the home country at the lower levels where 
government impinged on the masses. The self-contained' village 
remained the primary unit of administration. Each village had a 
headman, the Patel (the pattakila of ancient lithic and copperplate 
records), who came from peasant stock and who combined the func¬ 
tions of revenue officer, magistrate and judge, and acted as inter¬ 
mediary between the village and Government officials. Though he 
held his office by a grant from the Government, his office was here¬ 
ditary and was the subject of sale and purchase, and his emolu¬ 
ments, which varied slightly from village to village, consisted of 
rent-free lands and receipts from every villager of a fixed share of 
his produce. These receipts ranged from a daily supply of betel- 
leaves, provided by dealers in pdnsupdri, to tax on the re-marriage 
of a widow; and in return for these emoluments and for his^recogni¬ 
tion as the social leader of the community, the Patel was expected 
to shoulder the responsibility for the village’s welfare and good con¬ 
duct. The Kulkami, or village clerk and record-keeper, who was 
always a Brahmin, was second in importance to the Patel, and like 
the latter, was remunerated by a variety of perquisites. He was 
Often expected to share the Patel’s responsibility for the good beha¬ 
viour of the village community, and ran an equal risk of oppression 


555 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


and imprisonment by casual invaders or tyrannous officials. The 
Mahar was another important functionary of the community. He 
was the watchman of the village. He knew the boundaries of indi¬ 
vidual fields, kept an eye on all and sundry passing through the 
village and was on the look-out for thieves and trespassers. He was 
the messenger and provided escort for government treasure to the 
headquarters of the pargana. 

Excluding the Chaugula who had custody of the Kulkarni’s 
bundles of correspondence and who assisted the Patel, the communal 
duties and wants of the village were performed and supplied by the 
Bara Balute or twelve hereditary village artisans, who received a 
recognized share of the crops arid other perquisites in return for 
their services to the community. The personnel of the Bard Balute 
was not invariably the same in all parts of the Deccan, and in some 
places they were associated with an additional body of twelve vil¬ 
lage servants, styled Bara Alute. 

As a revenue officer the Patel “allotted the lands to such culti¬ 
vators as had no landed property of their own, and fixed the rent 
which each had to pay; he collected the revenue for government 
from all the ryots, conducted all its arrangements with them, and 
exerted himself to promote the cultivation and prosperity of the 
village. Though originally the agent of Government, he came to be 
regarded as equally representative of the ryots, and was not less 
useful in executing the orders of the Government than in asserting 
the rights, or at least in making known the wrongs of the people”. 67 

District: 

The backbone of the Maratha district administration was sup¬ 
plied by the mdmlatdar , who was in charge of a division styled par- 
go na or prdnt, and by the kamavisddr > his subordinate or deputy 
who administered a smaller territorial area of the same kind. The 
mdmlcCtdar, who corresponded roughly to the subahdar or mukhya 
deshadhikari of Shivajl’s days, and the kamavisddr were directly 
subordinate to the Peshwd's secretariat at Poona, except in the case 
of Khandesh, Gujarat and the Karnatak, where a superior official 
styled sarsubahdar was interposed between them and the govern¬ 
ment. Originally the mamlatddr and the kamavisddr were appoin¬ 
ted for short terms only, but in practice they managed frequently 
to secure renewals of their term of office in a district. As the direct 
representatives of the Peshwa they were responsible for every branch 
of the district administration, including agriculture, industries, civil 
and criminal justice, the control of the sibandi (militia) and the 


556 


ADMINISTRATIVE AND MILITARY SYSTEM OF THE MARATHAS 

police, and the investigation of social and religious questions. They 
also fixed the revenue assessment of each village in consultation 
with the Patel, heard and decided complaints against the village 
officers, and were responsible for the collection of the state revenue, 
wrhich in case of recalcitrance they were accustomed to recover 
through the medium of the sibandi. 

The mdmlatddr combined in himself executive and judicial 
functions, but he was not the complete autocrat which this would sug¬ 
gest. His powers were restrained by custom, by the check of the 
hereditary zaminddrs and darakhdars —a set of officers appointed 
from the centre in each pargdna or district. In theory the mdmlat - 
ddr’s accounts were not passed by the secretariat at Poona, unless 
corroborated by corresponding accounts from these hereditary offi¬ 
cials; and in all disputes regarding land, the Deshmukh was expected 
to produce his ancient records, containing the history of all watans, 
inams and grants, and the register of transfer of properties, which 
he maintained in return for the annual fee or perquisites received 
from the villagers. The safeguards not infrequently proved illusory, 
for there was nothing to prevent the mdmlatddr obtaining official 
approval of his returns by methods of his own while the Deshmukh’s 
registers were irregularly written up and often very incomplete. 

The second check upon the mdmlatddr was provided by a staff 
of hereditary darakhdars or office-holders, appointed to the various 
provinces or major divisions of the Maratha dominions by the Cen¬ 
tral Government; they were directly subordinate to the Peshwa, and 
reported direct to the Government in Poona. The officials were 
eight in number, viz., the diwdn or mdmlatddr 1 s deputy, muzumddr, 
phadnis, daftarddr, potnis, sabhdsad, and chitr\is; and they were ex¬ 
pected to act as a check, not only upon one another but also on the 
mdmlatddr, who was not empowered to dismiss any one of them. 

Huzur Dafitar or the Peshwd’s Secretariat: 

The central authority was represented by the Huzur Daftar. 
Under the supervision of the Phadnis, 200 Karkuns of the Huzur 
Daftar (Peshwd’s Secretariat), dealt with the revenue transactions 
and the expenses of all civil, military and religious establishments. 
The Huzur Daftar was divided into several departments, the chief 
of which were the Chdlte Daftar and the Ek Beriz Daftar . The 
Chalte Daftar under the direct supervision of the Phadnis was 
divided into several branches:* (a) the Phad checked all accounts 
and kept Rozkirds (records of daily transactions), (b) the Beheda 
framed the estimate budget, depending on the abstract of the actual 


557 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

receipt and expenditure of the revenue during the past year (tale- 
band) and the estimate of possible income and expenditure for the 
current year (ajmds), (c) the Saranjdmi department kept accounts 
of saranjdm and dumalla lands (lands under dual authority). In 
the Ek Beriz Daftar were kept classified accounts of all departments. 
It also framed the tarjumd (the total receipt, expenditure and 
balance of the government income for the year) and the khataunis 
(abstracts of all expenditure arranged alphabetically under their 
proper heads). The Huzur Daftar sank into insignificance during 
the administration of Peshwd Baji Rao II, because the Peshwd farm¬ 
ed the revenues of entire provinces. 673 

Civil Justice: 

The Maratha judicial system looks rather imperfect to the 
modern observer used to the paraphernalia of codes and laws passed 
by the state and the courts of justice which apply these laws to dis¬ 
putes brought before them. Justice was administered in a much 
simpler way; the community was left to its own resources to get its 
disputes settled. In villages the complainant took his plaint to the 
Patel who after trying to get the dispute settled through his own 
influence, called on a few village elders to sit together and hear the 
parties. The saraunsh or the summary of the evidence was noted 
by the village writer with the decision, the execution of which was 
the duty of the Patel or the mamlatddr. In both the cases the main 
object aimed at was amicable settlement, and arbitration was, there¬ 
fore, the first step in the disposal of a suit. If arbitration failed, 
the case was transferred for decision to a panchayat, appointed by 
the Patel in the village and by the shete mahdjan, or leading mer¬ 
chant, in urban areas. An appeal lay from the decision of a paxu 
chayat to the mamlatddr, who usually upheld the verdict, unles$ the 
parties concerned were able to prove that the panchayat was pre¬ 
judiced or corrupt. In serious or important suits, however, it was 
the duty of the mamlatddr to appoint an arbitrator or a panchayat, 
the members of which were chasen by him with the approval and 
often at the suggestion, of the parties to the suit. In such cases the 
panchayat's decision was subject to an appeal to the Peshwd or his 
legal minister, the nydyddhash. 

The system of panchdyats left a good deal to be desired frorp 
the standpoint of modern legal administration. These bodies were 
slow in action and uncertain in their decisions. The attendance of 
the members was irregular, depending as it did entirely upon the 
individual’s sense of duty or fear of public opinion. The powers of 


558 


ADMINISTRATIVE AND MILITARY SYSTEM OF THE MARATHAS 

the panchdyat were limited; it was exposed to constant obstruction, 
and it possessed no authority to enforce its decisions, which were 
left to the mdmlatddr to carry out or neglect as he pleased. It had 
likewise no power to compel the mdmlatddr or other locaJ 
official to supply a petty officer for this purpose. Yet despite its pri¬ 
mitive character and its liability to be improperly influenced, the 
panchdyat was a popular institution, and the absence of a decision 
by a panchdyat in any suit was almost always regarded as complete 
justification for a retrial of the issues. Among themselves, within 
the confines of the self-contained ancestral village, the peasantry 
did obtain a fair modicum of rude justice from the village panchdyat. 
What they failed to obtain either from the panchayats or from the 
government was any measure of redress against the merciless op¬ 
pression of their superiors. 

Criminal Justice: 

In the Peshuxi’s times the Patel was the unit of the police force. 
He was responsible for the maintenance of law and order in his 
village. He was helped by the chaughula, the Kulkarni, and general¬ 
ly by the villagers in general. But his chief resource lay in the 
village watchman, or Mahar. It was the latter’s duty to keep watch at 
night, scrutinize strangers, and report suspicious individuals to the 
Patel. When a theft was committed, it was the Mahar’s duty to de¬ 
tect the thief. And, as he was always moving about tbe village 
either to collect his share of grain or his fee, there was little there¬ 
in that escaped his observation. He was also a skilled tracker and 
could often follow the footsteps of the criminal to his home or hiding- 
place. If the thief’s foot-prints led to another village, the watch¬ 
man of that village had to take up the pursuit, and the last village 
to which the foot-prints could be traced was held responsible for 
the losses caused by the theft. 

Over the headman was the Mdmlatddr, who kept up a force of 
slbandis, or irregular infantry, and a small body of irregular horse. 
They were posted at the district headquarters, but moved out when 
necessary. They were, however, intended to oppose violence rather 
than to detect crime. The Kotwals were charged with the compre¬ 
hensive duties of maintaining public order and supervision of 
markets in all towns. 

This system, rudimentary although it seems, worked admirably 
well until the time of Baji Rao II, when the disorders in the king- 
dom strained to the breaking point. To remedy the weaknesses of 
the district police, Baji Rao created a body of officials known as 


559 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

taptisnavis, who corresponded with the modern Criminal Investiga¬ 
tion Department, and whose duty was not only to detect crime, but 
to prevent it by superior vigilance. This arrangement worked well^ 
and as Elphinstone has admitted, violent crimes were rare and few 
complaints reached him of the insecurity of property. 68 

The punishments inflicted were confiscation of property, im¬ 
prisonment for various terms, internment and fines, flogging, mutila¬ 
tion of limbs, slavery, penal servitude, banishment, social boycott 
and execution. In case of forcible marriage, the usual form of 
punishment was confiscation of property or imprisonment. Punish¬ 
ment in adultery cases was inflicted by penal servitude or mutila¬ 
tion for female offenders. Fines were imposed according to the re¬ 
sources of the offender. Treason, murder, dacoity and theft were 
punishable by mutilation. Elphinstone writes that highway robbery 
was punished with death. Women were never put to death. Brah¬ 
min offenders were starved or poisoned to death. Capital punish¬ 
ment was inflicted for various crimes during the regime of Nana 
Phadnis. Sometimes watans of murderers were confiscated. Politi¬ 
cal prisoners were imprisoned in the forts. In some cases their irons 
were not removed except at dinner time. Ordinary prisoners were 
well-treated. They were permitted to go home to perform religious 
ceremonies. Sometimes the relations of the prisoners were allowed 
to live with them and they were fed by the Government. 69 

Maratha Rule in Hindustan: 

After the grants of Swaraj, chantth and sardeshmukhi of the six 
subdhs of the Deccan were obtained in 1719, the process of conquest 
of Mughul provinces began. Arrangements were made for the col¬ 
lection, not by one agency, but by different parties, of various shares. 
Nothing was said in the arrangements about the good government of 
the country, nor any rules laid down about the civil administration. 
The districts which paid these claims had thus to maintain two sets 
of rulers—the local zamindars or Mughul officers who were not dis¬ 
placed and the Maratha overlords who claimed the chauth. The local 
zamindar would not pay unless pressed at the point of the sword. 
To force the zamindars and princes to pay the chttuth, annual expedi¬ 
tions were undertaken, which devastated the countryside through 
which the army marched, and rendered the country poorer. A great 
anarchy spread in the Mughul provinces of India which made the 
Marathas detested outside Maharashtra. While the government was 
mild at home and there was a semblance of regular administration, 
beyond there was anarchy and disorder. This perhaps explains the 


560 


ADMINISTRATIVE AND MILITARY SYSTEM OF THE MARATHAS 

divergence or dichotomy in the description of Maratha administra¬ 
tion as given by Maratha scholars drawing on Marathi sources or 
even by Elphinstone in his Report, and that drawn by foreign scho¬ 
lars. While the former dwell on the mild and orderly government 
in the home country, the latter describe the anarchy outside Maha¬ 
rashtra, In this connection Rawlinson remarks, “the chief objection 
to be urged against the Maratha system of government is that out¬ 
side its. own territory (Swaraj or Maharashtra) it was almost pre¬ 
datory. .. . Other Hindu states took a pride in improving the con¬ 
dition of the territory they conquered. They constructed temples, 
wells, canals, roads and other public works. The Marathas did 
nothing of the kind. Their mulkgiri raids by destroying the indus¬ 
tries and wealth of the countries overrun, merely killed the goose 
that laid the golden eggs’". 70 

• 

Raj wade and Sardesai say the same thing in a different way. 
“When Peshwd Baji Rao and his son Balaji Rao overran practically 
the whole of Hindustan, they were confronted with three tasks; 

(1) to persuade the conquered people to acquiesce in Maratha rule, 

(2) to exhort the military chiefs to work for the common good of 
the State, and (3) to remain loyal to the Maharaja of Satara. None 
of the three objects were properly achieved. The first in import¬ 
ance was acquiescence of the people in Maratha rule. No institu¬ 
tions were set up to explain to the conquered people Maratha ideals 
and Maratha objectives and rally their support to the Maratha cause. 
To the Kannadigas, the Andhras, the Gujaratis, the Bundelas, the 
Purbias, the Sikhs and the Rangdas, the Marathas, in their new con¬ 
quests, remained strangers like their former Muslim overlords and 
they could never count on local support when threatened by an out¬ 
side enemy. At the time of the battle of Panipat the Peshwd came 
to know how unstable was his power in Hindustan”. 71 

Sardesai has observed that Balaji Viswanath and his son Baji 
Rao won Rajput friendship to make progress in their northern en¬ 
terprise. This asset was lost by the third Peshwd’s inept handling 
of the succession disputes of the Rajput chiefs. 72 The Peshwd’s aim 
of squeezing huge sums <from the parties completely alienated the 
Rajputs. 

The Maratha chiefs bent on collecting their chauth did not care 
to see in what manner the territory was being administered. As 
Jadunath Sarkar points out, “the Maratha Government in Hindus¬ 
tan had no competent civil service, no stable government and no 
wise foreign policy. Their foreign generals like De Boigne and 

561 

M.S-30 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Perron gave their jaidod lands peace and security for producing 
crops and paying revenue. Not so the Maratha chiefs. With the 
exception of Ahalya Bai they were unwilling to undergo the drud¬ 
gery of daily calling their collectors to account. The revenues were, 
either farmed out to Banias or left to their Brahmin Diwans and 
Prabhu clerks; and these men were notorious for their love of pecu¬ 
lation and ignorance of the economic law that the revenue could not 
be increased simply by squeezing the peasantry. The rapacious and 
inefficient governments of the Maratha agents in Hindustan kept 
lawlessness always raging in their jacfirs and the desolate land could 
yield no produce for feeding the population or paying for the admi¬ 
nistration.” 73 x 

Vasudeo Shastri Khare is in agreement with Jadunath Sarkar 
when he regretfully remarks “that the Maratha State would have ob¬ 
tained stability had the Chhatrapati (the Raja) asked his chiefs to 
establish orderly government in their early conquests (in the 
Deccan) to repress disorders, give peace and prosperity to these 
territories. Instead they led expeditions to provinces as far distant 
as Lahore, neglecting the country nearer home. In peace times 
Maratha rule prevailed everywhere; in times of confusion it was no¬ 
where. The main reason for this state of things was that Maratha 
conquests were superficial and Maratha rule disappeared as soon as 
their troops marched away”. 74 The Marathas could not rise to the 
new opportunities presented to them by the weakness of the Mughul 
rule. They could make new conquests but could not consolidate 
them. As Palmer wrote to the Governor General in 1795 “the Mara¬ 
tha Government in Hindustan is but ill-qualified for permanent con¬ 
quest or civil administration, however formidable may be the means 
which it possesses of ravage and devastation”. 743 

Military organization — Shivaji’s period: 

Shivaji started his career as a jagirdar with a small militia. As 
a born strategist he knew what he needed to expand his Poona jdgir 
and utilised indigenous sources for his expanding kingdom. His 
country was studded with forts which either commanded fords, 
ghats, or the plain country, and afforded easy protection when pur¬ 
sued by a superior enemy. He would occupy these forts and from 
there sally forth to attack enemy detachments. In his wanderings 
in his jdgir he had visited the hilly mdval country—the western belt 
of the Poona district, about 100 miles in length and extremely 
rugged. The climate was dry and invigorating and heat less op¬ 
pressive than in the plains. The people living in the region were 


562 


ADMINISTRATIVE AND MILITARY SYSTEM OF THE MARATHAS 

stronger built, hardier, simpler and spoiled neither by luxury nor 
vice. He mixed freely with them, made friends with them and from 
amongst them formed his infantry which would attack the enemy 
and retire to their inaccessible haunts where cavalry could not pur¬ 
sue them. The foundation of ShivajI’s power was thus his in¬ 
fantry, which preponderated over the cavalry. It was formed of the 
mdwlas of the Ghat Mdtkd and hetharis of Konkan. Both of them 
were expert climbers and excelled in marksmanship. “Their arms 
consisted of swords, shields, daggers, poniards, straight rapiers, 
spears, bows and arrows, and when possible, matchlocks. The men 
brought their own arms and were only furnished with ammunition 
by government. They were dressed generally in a pair of short 
drawers coming half-way down the thigh, turban, a cotton frock and 
a band about the loins and a cloth round the waist. For desperate 
attack with swords in hands, the Mdwlas of ShivajI became cele¬ 
brated.” 75 

Every ten men had an officer called a naik and every fifty a 
Havdldar. The officer over a hundred was termed Jumladdr and th& 
commander of a thousand was styled Hazdri. Over the Hazards was 
Samobat who commanded 7,000 infantry. Yesaji Kahk was the first 
Samobat of the infantry. 

“The Mawlas sometimes enlisted on condition of getting only a 
subsistence in grain; but the regular pay of the infantry was from 
four to twelve rupees a month”. 76 The company commander Jumla- 
ddr received about one hundred rupees a month. The company had 
its accountant and commissariat offices. All received regular salaries 
from government. 

ShivajI did not require cavalry in the hilly country and in the 
inaccessible forests of the Sahyadri range. His numerous forts 
needed a large force of brave foot soldiers. So, for the first fifteen 
years of his career, ShivajI mainly -recruited, equipped and trained 
infantry divisions. His organizing capacity, personal bravery and 
military leadership endeared him to his men and he made heroes of 
the simple, uncouth but sturdy mdwlas. To the last, the infantry 
bore an equal proportion to the cavalry—100,000 infantry and 
100,000 cavalry. 768 

After his victory over Afzal Khan, the Raja devoted himself to 
the raising of cavalry. With the enormous wealth obtained in the 
Khan’s camp and loot captured in subsequent expeditions he in¬ 
creased his military strength. Cavalry was needed for far-ranging 


563 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


attacks and swift raids in the enemy country and its increase was 
made possible by the Raja’s victories over Bijapur armies. 

In the cavalry the unit was formed by 25 troopers ( bdrgirs ); 
over 25 men was placed one huvdlddr, over 5 havdlddrs one jumld- 
dar and over ten jumldddrs one haztiri. Still higher ranks were 
Panch Hazari and the supreme commander or Samobat of cavalry. 
NetajI Palkar, Pratap Rao Gujar, Hambir Rao Mohite were some of 
the famous commanders of the Raja. 

The Siladars, or troopers who supplied their own horses and 
arms, were organized on a different plan, but were under the orders 
of the same Samobat of cavalry and ranked lower than the paga 
horsemen. 77 “The pdgd jumldddr had a salary of 500 Hons a year 
and the right to use a pdlki. Attached to him was a inajumdar on 
100 to 125. hons. A hazdri drew 1,000 hons a year. Under him were 
majmudar, a Maratha Karbhari (steward) and a revenue-writer 
( Jama-navis ) for whom 500 hons were assigned. The accounts of 
military income and disbursement had to be made up with the signa¬ 
ture of all the four. Every unit of 25 had one farrier and a pakhalji. 
The Punch Hazarf drew a salary of 2,000 hons. To his corps were 

attached a number of clerks, reporters and spies.” 78 

■ ■ ./ 

“The troops went into cantonments in the home country dur¬ 
ing the rainy season. Grain, fodder and medicines were kept in 
stock for the horses, and the huts of troopers were kept thatched 
with grass. On the day of Dussard the army marched out from the 
camp to the country the Raja had decided to attack. At the time of 
their departure a list was made of all the property that every man, 
high or low, of the army carried with himself. The troops were to 
subsist in foreign parts for eight months and also levy contribution. 
No woman, female slave or dancing girl was to be allowed to accom¬ 
pany the army. A soldier keeping any of these was to be beheaded. 
No woman or child was to be taken captive, but only men. Bullocks 
(not cows) might be taken for transport only. Brahmins were not to 
be molested. No soldier was to misbehave. On their return after 
eight months’ campaigning, the whole army was to be searched, the 
property was to be compared with the old list, and the excess found 
was to be deducted from the salary. Anyone attempting to conceal 
his booty was liable for punishment on detection. 

“The generals on their return were to see the Raja, deliver their 
spoils in war in gold, silver, jewels and costly cloth to him, present 
their accounts and take their dues from the treasury. The officers 
and men were to be promoted or punished according to their con- 


564 


ADMINISTRATIVE AND MILITARY SYSTEM OF THE MARATHAS 

duct during the last campaign. Then they would again remain in 
camp for four months.” 79 

Without tents and equipage, without provisions and other com¬ 
missariat encumbrances, without heavy artillery, the Maratha light 
cavalry and infantry moved with the greatest celerity. The soldiers 
gathered their provisions as they went along. Their diet was of the 
simplest kind. These hardy peasants, subject to all kinds of incle¬ 
ment weather, performed deeds of extreme endurance and valour 
which astonished the world. Dr. Fryer comparing the Maratha and 
Muslim armies, remarks, ‘Sevaji’s men thereby being fitter for any 
martial exploit having been accustomed to fare hard, journey fast, 
and take little pleasure. But the other will not miss his dinner, 
must mount in state and have his arms carried before him, and his 
women not far behind him with masters of mirth and jollity; will 
rather expect than pursue a foe; but they stand it out better; for 
Sevaji’s men care not much for a pitched battle, though they are 
good at surprising and ransacking; yet agree in this, that they are 
both of stirring spirits”. 80 

Dr. Fryer also remarks on the Spartan simplicity of the Mara¬ 
tha army, of the men and the officers. “No intoxicant or drinks were 
permitted to the officers and no whore or dancing wenches were 
allowed in the camp”. 81 

Abbe Carre observes that “he greatly cherished the officers 
whom he called his brothers and friends, living familiarly with them* 
and attending to their needs. He conducted himself with such abi¬ 
lity, not affecting anything. Always being at the head of his troops, 
Shivaji knew not pleasure”. 82 

Shivaji’s cavalry at the end of his career numbered almost 
100,000, three-fourths of which consisted of Bargirs mounted and 
equipped by government and one fourth of silddars mounted at their 
own expense. 

The French envoy, Monsieur Germain who spent three days in 
Shivajl’s camp on the Coleroon (1677) gives a graphic account of the 
Maratha king’s spartan simplicity and efficient arrangements: “His 
camp is without any pomp and unembarrassed by baggage and wo¬ 
men. There are only two tents in it, but of a thick simple stuff and 
very small, one for himself and the other for his minister. The 
horsemen of Shivaji or-dinarily receive two pagodas per mqjith as pay. 
All the Jiorses belong to him and he entertains grooms for them. 
Ordinarily there are three horses for every two men, which contri¬ 
butes to the speed which he usually makes. This chief pays his spies 


565 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


liberally which has greatly helped his conquests by the correct in¬ 
formation they give”. 83 

Forts: 

Forts were the basis of Shivaji’s kingdom. His strength lay in 
the everlasting hills of Maharashtra which he used as places to shel¬ 
ter from the enemy or points to sally forth to attack. These he 
strengthened with masonry walls, parapets and bastions, water 
tanks and gateways. Ramachandra Amatya in the Ajnapatra says 
that the master created the kingdom with the help of forts. It was 
his forts from Ahiwant to the banks of the Kaveri that enabled him 
to wage a continuous struggle with his enemies. The Bakhars give 
the number of forts as 240. 

Every fort was in the possession of the government and defend¬ 
ed by a garrison the strength of which depended on the importance 
of the place. In every fort there were three officers of the same 
status and joint authority. The Havaldar was the head of the garri¬ 
son and was entrusted with the keys of the fort. It was his per¬ 
sonal duty to see that the gates were locked at nightfall and opened 
at daybreak. The Sabnis was in charge of accounts and the Kdr- 
khdnis of that of commissariat. All the three officers were to work 
jointly. The letters written for the Havaldar were drafted by the 
Sabnis. and entered in his ledger by the Kdrkhanis. The Raja laid 
down that the Havaldar should be a Maratha of good family, the 
Sabnis was to be a Brahmin known to his personal staff and the 
Kdrkhanis was to be a Prabhu. If a fort was a large one, the Havdl- 
dar was assisted by tat-sarnobdts who watched over the walls at 
night. The garrison was armed with swords, spears, matchlocks and 
muskets. Some of the forts had cannon, but the Marathas were slow 
in learning the science of fire-arms. Most of their cannon and gun¬ 
powder they brought from foreign companies. Stones were heaped 
and tumbled down when the enemy attacked. The use of fire-arms, 
especially mortars and long range artillery, reduced the import¬ 
ance of forts. But this was a phenomenon of the late 18th century. 

Marathd Navy: 

As the coastal districts came into his possession, ShivajI found 
the need of building a navy to protect his harbours and towns from 
enemy ravages. But his main eriemies were the Adil Shahi king¬ 
dom and the Mughuls, and to his navy he could devote little attention. 

The Maratha chronicles speak of Shivaji’s navy as consisting of 
seven hundred vessels of various sizles and classes, such as Ghurabs, 


566 


ADMINISTRATIVE AND MILITARY SYSTEM OF THE MARATHAS 


taramdis, tarambes, gallivats, shibars, pagars, machwas, etc. The 
English factory records put the strength of fighting vessels at 60 
only. They were formed into two squadrons (of 200 vessels accord¬ 
ing to Marathi sources) commanded by two Admirals who bore the 
title of Darya Sdrang and Mai Naik. 

Post-Shivdp period: 

The ^Maratha army underwent a radical change after Shivaji. 
It no longer represented the united military might of the national 
monarchy. The monarchy was eclipsed and the chief executive 
authority first passed to the Prafiinidhi and then to the Peshwd. A 
number of chiefs raised forces on their own and fought the Mughul 
officers wherever they encountered them. Grant Duff presents a 
graphic picture of the Marathia armies at the beginning of the 18th 
century: ‘‘Different from the organized bands of Shivaj! (they 
formed) an irregular assembly of several thousand horsemen united 
by prie-concerted agreement in some unfrequented part of the coun¬ 
try. They set off with little provision, no baggage except the blan¬ 
ket on their saddles, and no animals but led horses, with bags pre¬ 
pared for the reception of their plunder. If they halted during a 
part of the night, they slept with their bridles in their hands; if in 
the day, whilst the horses were fed and refreshed, the men reposed 
with little or no shelter from the scorching heat, excepting such as 
might be found occasionally under a bush or a tree; and during that 
time their swords were laid by their sides, and their spears were 
generally at their horses’ head stuck in the ground; when halted on 
a plain, groups of four or five might be seen stretched on the 
bare earth sound asleep, their bodies exposed to the noon-day sun, 
and their heads in a cluster under the precarious shade of a black 
blanket or tattered horse-cloth extended on the points of spears”. 84 
Their great object was to seek th|e enemy in a difficult position. The 
leaders, though they generally rendered a partial account to the head 
of the State, embezzled or dissipated the greater part of their col¬ 
lection. The revenues raised by the emperor from his Deccan pro¬ 
vinces, dwindled; treasure coming from the north was oftten attack¬ 
ed by Maratha force. 

Shahu found it difficult to sdbdue these irregular assemblies of 
troopers. His Peshwd BalajI Vishwanath came up with a clever 
plan of recognising the conquests made by the chiefs if they agreed 
to Raja 6hahu’s leadership and surrendered to him a small part of 
their recoveries, and also to take a supervisory staff from the centre. 
The feudalization of the Maratha state, thus begun under the force 


567 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


of circumstances, never stopped. As Raja §hahu showed little in¬ 
clination to govern, the chief executive authority passed on to the 
Peshwa. The first four Peshwas proved capable men. The Mara¬ 
tha State expanded under their authority and included almost three- 
fourths of the Mughul India. But the Maratha State was an inor¬ 
ganic mass loosely held together by the head. After 1773 when a 
minor came to govern as Peshwa, there was great rivalry among the 
feudatories to wield the supreme power and they fought it among 
themselves only to lose to the British. 

Orme in his Historical Fragments, analyses the strength of 
Maratha armies. “The strength of their armies consists in their 
numerous cavalry, which is more capable of resisting fatigue than 
any in India, large bodies of them having been known to march 
fifty miles a day. They avoid general engagements and seem to 
have no other idea in making war but that of doing as much mis¬ 
chief as possible to the enemy’s country. This they effect by driving 
off cattle, destroying the harvest and by such other means as make 
the people of the open country take flight on the first rumours of 
their approach. The rapidity of their motion leaves the prince with 
whom they wage war little chance of striking a decisive blow against 
them or even of attacking with effect any of their detachments. 
Hence the expense of maintaining an army in the field against the 
Marathas with very little probability of ever fighting such an enemy; 
and the greater detriment arising from devastations they commit, 
generally induces the governments they attack to purchase their re¬ 
treat with money.” 

Orme thus brings out two characteristics of the 18th century 
Maratha armies. The first was their extreme mobility. They con¬ 
sisted mainly of cavalry without any encumbrance in the form of 
baggage, tents, supplies or artillery. 

The second characteristic was that they always pursued enve¬ 
loping tactics, intended to harass their enemy and cut off his sup¬ 
plies. They avoided pitched battles as far as possible. Hence the 
Maratha army was called by the north Indian people Ghanimi Fauj. 
Vast hordes of horsemen marched long distances with extreme speed 
and secrecy, dispersed for foraging or bewildering the enemy and 
yet combined for striking a blow. This mobility also enabled them 
to break off an engagement at any time they chose and vanish to a 
safe distance. Sudden surprise of an unprepared enemy by vast 
bodies of light cavalry and complete envelopment of his position 
were the secret of success of the Maratha system of warfare. 85 


568 


ADMINISTRATIVE AND MILITARY SYSTEM OF THE MARATHAS 

The expeditions of BajI Rao I in Malwa and Bundelkhand show 
the Maratha system at its best. At Bhopal a vast horde of 80,000 
horsemen surrounded the Nizam, starved his army and forced him 
sign a convention, yielding the Peshwa’s demand. 

Malet, the British Resident at the Peshwa’s court, sent in a de¬ 
tailed report on the organization of the Maratha army in March, 
1795 after the battle of Kharda. On that occasion the Marathas had 
brought an army of 127,665 strong against the Nizam. Of this, 
70,665 cavalry belonged to the Peshwd, 25,000 horse and foot pro¬ 
vided by Daulat Rao Sindia, 15,000 by RaghujI Bhosle and 
10,000 by Tukoji Holkar and 7,000 by Parashuram Bhau. Malet 
remarks: 86 

“The foregoing bodies of troops are either under the command 
of feudatory chieftains whose authority over their own troops is 
absolute and without appeal, as the four last and many others, or 
under leaders of corps paid by Government either in money or land, 
under the denomination of Nukdee or Tunkaw (land assignments re- 
sumable at pleasure), and in the same manner as the mass of the 
force of the Mahratta Empire is thus composed, so the force of the 
various chieftains is in like manner composed in a smaller or greater 
degree of the same materials. Thus, for instance, the general 
Mahratta force is composed of Jagheerdars like Sindia, and Holcar, 
of Nugdee or ready money corps as Shah Meer Khan, Monsieur 
Noronha and Buchaba Sirolkur or of Tunkadars as Bugwunt Singh 
Weys, Paugeahs, etc. Now all these different descriptions are again 
detailed in the composition of the Sindean or other Jagheerdars ’ 
forces; that is to say, it contains every species of service, but the 
number is generally far short of the quota stipulated by the original 
feudal tenure. But though the Nagdee or ready money corps are 
not looked upon in so respectable a light as those paid in lands, the 
general term for which is saranjamee, yet are the commanders ab¬ 
solute in the management of them and in the disposal of the sums 
they receive for their payment, which generally runs to a certain 
rate per man and a fixed sum for the commander; and, as in the 
management of these corps the payment by Government is general¬ 
ly very tardy, the commanders have recourse to every trick by which 
they can possibly elude the checks by which Government attempts 
to insure faithful service, viz., by the appointment of Duan, Furna- 
vees, etc., government officers to^every corps through (sic) whom the 
most scandalous venality prevails, which is practised in collusion 
with the commahder by which means it happens (but this must be 
understood more particularly in the Peshwa’s service) that a corps 


569 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


of 100 men has seldom more than 50 effectives, while the allowance 
of Government is reduced to half before it reaches the sepoy. 

“The corps of the Paugheas*, that is, commanders of bodies of 
cavalry paid either in ready money or land assignments or Tunka , 
are smaller or greater according to the interest of the Paughea, as 
for instance, one has a Paugha of 50, another of 500, reckoning the 
whole at a certain sum per head, with a distinct allowance for the 
chief, who again distributes that allowance at his pleasure, giving 
to one 20, to another .200 rupees per month. Properly speaking, 
the Paughas should be composed of the horses of the Government 
or the chief, mounted by Bargheers, i.e., hired troopers, but this is 
not always the case, for Silladars (literally, bearers of arms), that 
is, horsemen with their own horses, often compose a large portion of 
a Paugha, and though every horseman throughout a Mahratta army 
looks upon himself as company for his chieftain and always sits 
down with him, yet is the Silladar looked upon in rather a superior 
light to the Bargheer. To the Paughas, as to the Nugdee corps, 
there is an establishment of civil officers to enforce justice between 
Government and its servants, but the multiplication of checks seems 
to have had no other end than the* increase of corruption, for not 
only is half the grain and forage allowed to the horses embezzled, 
but hordes are changed, reported dead and every species of the most 
flagitious peculation practised with impunity arising from the gene¬ 
ral interest and participation therein, insomuch that I have some¬ 
times been inclined to think that the Government must have some 
mode of reimbursing itself for these palpable dilapidations by with¬ 
holding the pay due to its troops, for the clamors arise therefrom; 
yet from the ample profits of peculation, the chief is generally wise 
enough to keep his complaints within bounds, since his illicit profits 
are secure, and his tardy receipt of payment from Government fur¬ 
nishes a specious pretext for not paying the poor sepoy who through 
poverty' is often forced to take another service with the loss of all 
his arrears, which his chief collects as he can, or to compound the 
whole for a part, which is generally anticipated by loans taken up 
of his Jummadar (chief) or the Karkuns (civil officers) of his corps 
at an exorbitant interest. 

“Besides Bargheers and Silladars, there is another description 
of horsemen known in Mahratta armies by the denomination Yekan - 
dia f which signifies single. These are generally men of family, who 
with a few attendants, go in quest of service, and are frequently 
entertained on the footing of companions by the great Chiefs on most 

♦Commander of a Paugha 


570 




ADMINISTRATIVE AND MILITARY SYSTEM OF THE MARATHAS 

ample allowances, for instance, from Rs. 100 to Rs. 1,000 per month 
with one or two horses from the Chiefs stable at their command. 

“The arms of the Mahratta cavalry are swords, spears (bhallas), 
matchlocks and a few bows and arrows. The sword is universal and 
indispensable; the matchlock frequent and almost universal in the 
Paugahs and seems to daily gaining ground of the long spear or 
bhalla, long a favourite weapon of the Mahrattas; but many cf the 
Silladars , Yekandias and those who claim or affect superiority of 
birth and rank, seldom encumber themselves with anything but a 
sword or two. It must, however, be understood that the arms, ac¬ 
coutrements and clothing of the horseman being his own property, 
there is not the smallest uniformity, every individual being equipped 
as his taste or circumstances suggest. 

“The Paugahs have (seldom) more than one large routy, the 
most common kind of tent, and perhaps a shameana j or canopy be¬ 
longing to the Paugah pitched at one end of a street formed by the 
horses of the troops picketed in two lines fronting each other. This 
routy serves to shelter the troopers and their furniture in bad wea¬ 
ther and as a place of assembly for the corps morning and evening 
At other times the trooper generally posts himself with his saddle, 
arms, etc., in front of his horse, where also he sleeps having nothing 
but what he can conveniently dispose of and convey to any distance 
on his horse. There are however generally a number of tuttoos 
(little horses) attached to each Paugah, that while the army is 
marching are dispatched with the syces (grooms) to forage, by 
which means they generally get to the ground as soon as the main 
body of the army reaches the camp laden with provender for the 
Paugah horses, or they sally forth in quest of it as soon as they have 
disposed of their burthen, though the failure ofLthis reliance would 
not distress the Mahrattas, who are. not yet sufficiently pampered by 
wealth to despise that necessary part of military dpty or to affect 
being above providing provender for the noble animal who admi¬ 
nisters so effectually to their ease and advantage. 

“Over and above the foregoing constituent parts of the Mahratta 
army, it is to be observed that they have nowdntroduced large trains 
of artillery and formidable bodies of regular infantry, the organisa¬ 
tion of which being copies of our own, needs no particular explana¬ 
tion. 

“The safety which Mahratta armies enjoy as to their communica¬ 
tions from the multiplicity of their cavalry, insures them such ample 
supplies from vast droves of Bunparries (grain merchants) con- 


571 



THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


stantly marching with and hovering round their armies, as to render 
them totally indifferent to every other circumstance of encampment 
but water, and as to magazines either of grain or forage or depen¬ 
dency on the protection or supply of fortified cities, they seem un¬ 
acquainted with those grand objects of consideration to an European 
army. This security gives a peculiar character to their camp and 
armies, for so little danger seems to attach to following their camp 
that shop-keepers, handicrafts and every species of profession carry 
on their callings seenyngly as much at their ease as in their cities, 
which gives a conveniency and facility to a military life not to be 
met with perhaps amongst any other people, and may (added to the 
simplicity and absence of wants of Mahratta manners) account for 
their spending their lives as happily in the field as other nations do 
in towns: a circumstance, which while done with so great ease to 
them, gives them a vast advantage over all other people, who, while 
they are in the field, are in a constant state of exertion and hostility 
v/ith their convenience. 

“The safety of the Mahratta camps is to be attributed to the vast 
numbers of their cavalry hovering round in every direction, rather 
than to any of the precautionary measures of trenches, posts, guards, 
etc., systematically used in our armies. They have indeed, at night, 
patrols of Horse ( Shabeena ) sent out in different directions. But 
the ampleness of their equipment, at least of the host with which I 
marched, and of which I now write, enabled them always to keep 
up a large army under the denomination of Vanguard ( Harole ) in 
advance, and when they approached the enemy, to divide that again 
by an advance under the denomination Chiny Fouge or Fouge 
Jereed, which signifies the unencumbered army, being literally so 
much so as scarce to have a tent in it, every thing but the immediate 
apparatus for service being left at a convenient distance and under 
a very slender guard in what they call the Baggage Camp ( Beheer 
or Boonga) so that at the time of the action with the Nizam on 
11 March, the Mahrat + a army consisted of 3 camps, the Peshwa’s or , 
Head Quarter Camp, being upward of 20 miles in the rear of the 
Chiny Fouge whose Beheer or Baggage Camp was between both; it 
will be easily understood that while this division of force both in 
marching and encamping opens'a field of great advantage to an 
active enemy provided with cavalry, yet little advantage can be 
taken of it by armies of infantry or much inferior in cavalry, whose 
camps must constantly be blockaded if they make a proper use of 
their advantage by their more numerous cavalry in so much as to 
prevent the smallest movement without discovery; for exclusive of 


572 


ADMINISTRATIVE AND MILITARY SYSTEM OF THE MARATHAS 


their hosts of cavalry serving on pay there are always great num¬ 
bers of Pindaras or Predatory Horse that march with Mahratta 
armies, who instead of receiving pay, actually purchase the chief pri¬ 
vilege of plunder at their own risk and charge, a predicament that 
gives a singular edge to their appetite for depredation and renders 
them infinitely more active and destructive than those who by re¬ 
ceiving pay have not an equal stimulus to rapacity. They reside 
principally in Malwa and generally attach themselves to the armies 
of Holkar and Sindia, and generally speaking they are poor (for 
those who are lucky enough to get wealth seldom expose themselves 
while it lasts). Their horses are small but hardy and their equip¬ 
ment mean, so that they are by no means a match for any cavalry 
tolerably appointed. The depredations of these troublesome people 
are so dreaded throughout all the countries that are in the habit of 
being exposed to them that all the villages in such countries are 
walled, generally have a little citadel or gurry in the center. 

Battle order of the Mardthds: 

“I have heard but of two instances in which the forces of this 
State may be said to have engaged in pitched battles; one at Panipat, 
where, previously reduced to straits by the superior activity of the 
Pathan and Mogul cavalry, which was numerous enough to beat 
them in their own style of cutting off their supplies, and failing, were 
subjected to one of the most bloody defeats that we read of; the 
other was the battle (of Moti Talao) in which Trimbuk Mamma de¬ 
feated Hyder, not far from Seringapatam. But I am unacquainted 
with the order of battle observed on those two occasions. It is rea¬ 
sonable to suppose that the introduction of infantry^ and artillery, 
forming so large a part as they now do in armies of this Empire, 
must cause a material alteration, if not a total change, in this part 
of their military service; while by giving to their armies a kind of 
base or center of union it alters their former predatory and desul¬ 
tory style of warfare. And while on one hand, this alteration makes 
their invasions infinitely more formidable to States unprovided with 
the means of opposing an increase of that description of strength, 1 
am not without an idea, that as such increase of strength is neces¬ 
sarily attended with increasing incumbrances hostile to rapidity, 
that increase of strength may be disserviceable to their operations 
against a State such as ours in the degree that the increase affects 
the former desultory velocity. The decision of this point in which 
I suppose, our infantry and artillery are as light and rapid as this 
State’s, whenever the contest happens, will form an epoch of the 


573 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


most critical interest to the welfare, I may say, existence of our 
Empire in the East. 

“I am, however, from a general observation of the manners of 
the people and extreme looseness of particular discipline or general 
arrangement amongst them, strongly of opinion that they would 
afford very easy conquest to any army of a more rigorous composi¬ 
tion that could bring a sufficient number of cavalry to prevent their 
making a sport of war and retreating, when they are no longer dis¬ 
posed to maintain the contest, in safety and leisure." 

Malet proved very much right in his prophecy. The new 
brigades proved the undoing of the Marathas when they were pitted 
against the English. About the middle of the 18th century the Mara¬ 
thas began to come in contact with the trained battalions of the 
English and the French. The fire-power of the trained infantry pro¬ 
ved its Superiority over the old type of Maratha system using simple 
weapons like the sword and the spear. The system had failed 
against walled cities and well-provisioned camps, guarded by artil¬ 
lery. The Marathas in a haphazard manner attempted to bolster 
their cavalry with the newly modelled infantry. Mahadjf Sindia 
carried out, on a large scale, the new system of raising disciplined 
battlions under European officers, supported by artillery. Sindia 
was fortunate in getting the help of a French soldier De Boigne in 
raising the brigades, defeating his Indian enemies and making him¬ 
self the king-maker. But as Lyall has pointed out 87 “. .. the regular 
troops and cannon hampered those rapid daring marches and man- 
ouevres of fight armed cavalry which had for a hundred years won 
for the Marathas their victories over the unwieldy Mughul armies, 
and had on various occasions perplexed and discomfited English 
commanders. The armaments and tactics of civilized nations imply 
high proficiency in the art of war, abundant supply of costly mate¬ 
rial and a strong reserve of well-trained officers. They cannot be 
adopted by an Asiatic people unaccustomed to such inventions," and 
ignorant of the physical and chemical sciences on which they are 
based. The Duke of Wellington expressed the same opinion. Writ¬ 
ing to Major Shawe in November 1803, he remarked, “I have no doubt 
whatever but that the military spirit of the nation has been destroy¬ 
ed by their establishment of infantry and artillery. The destruc¬ 
tion of these establishments contributed to the success of the con¬ 
test" 88 The Maratha soldier never enlisted in the Brigades, and the 
new army of Sindia enlisted men from Awadh, Doab and other parts 
of Hindustan. In this manner the foreign element grew rapidly and 


574 


ADMINISTRATIVE AND MILITARY SYSTEM OF THE MARATHAS 


the Maratha armies became denationalised, with their cavalry play¬ 
ing a secondary role. 

The mercenary brigades were no match for the East India Com¬ 
pany’s army. Between the days of Warren Hastings and the coming 
of Lord Wellesley as Governor General (1784-1798) the Company had 
taken care to raise regiments of cavalry to meet the Maratha threat. 
So when the British and the Marathas clashed in 1803, Great Britain 
had superiority in training, fire arms, officers and morale. By issu¬ 
ing a proclamation on the eve of the Second Anglo-Maratha war the 
British persauded most of Sindia’s foreign officers to leave his ser¬ 
vice. So the Campoos that fought at Assaye, Argaon, Aligarh and 
Laswari were sheep led to their slaughter. They fought with the 
courage of despair. In the battles, though they were sharply con¬ 
tested, British victories were decisive. The blows were delivered 
at close quarters upon compact bodies of troops which, once they 
were destroyed, could not be replaced. The defeat of Maratha chiefs 
was complete and placed them at the mercy of the conqueror. 


NOTES 

1. Vincent Smith, Oxford History of India (1958), pp. 494-95; P. Spear, India, A 
Modern History, p. 277. 

2 Irfan Habib, The Agrarian System of Mughal India, p. 351. 

3. Poona Residency Correspondence, Vol. XIII (Elphinstone’s Embassy), p. 410, 
also Elphinstone’s Report on the Territories conquered from the Peshwa. 
Kulkami, A. R., Maharashtra in the Age of Shivaji (1969). 

4. Ranade, M. G., Miscellaneous Writings (1915); Kelkar, N. C., Marathas and 
the English (1918); Sen, S. N., Administrative System of the Marathas (1925); 

5- Ajhapatra, (Moramkar, 1926 edn.). 

6. Carlyle, Thomas, On Heroes and Hero-worship, etc., (World’s Classics), p. 204. 

7. Shiva Bharat, 10 32. 

8 Ranade, R. D., Pathway to God in Marathi Literature, (Bharatiya Vidya Bha- 
van, 1961), p. 290. 

9- Ajnapatra, p. 4. 

10. Sarkar, Jadunath, Shivaji and His Times (1948), p. 28, 

11. Naik, J. V., Nature and Significance of the New Order Created by Shivaji, 
(Bombay University Seminar, 1975). 

12. Sarkar, op. cit., p. 29. 

13- Sarkar, ibid, p. 30. 

14. Sabhasad, Shiva Chhatrapatiehe Charitra (4th Edn. 1923), pp. 3-4. 

15. Joshi, S. N., Arvdchin Mahardshtretihds Kdldtil Rajya-Kdrbhdracha Itihas 
(1959), pp. 66-69. 

16- Patra Sdr Samgraha, 722; Sabhasad says TukojI Chor was the first Sarnobat. 

17. Jedhe Shakdvali in Shiva Charitra Pradip, p. 22; Sabhasad, op. cit., p. 7; Chitnis, 
op. cit., p. 43; Khare maintains that Mahadeo was the second Peshwa of Shivaji 
from 1662-72. It was only in 1672 that Moropant became th^ Peshwa. See 
Khare, G. H., Niva&ak Lekha, p. 248. 

18. Sabhasad, op. cit., p 87; 91 Qalmi Bakhar , pp. 76-77; Sarkar, op. cit., p. 57. 

19. Sabhasad, op. cit., pp 57-58- 

20. Sabhasad, op. cit., pp. 78-79; Sardesai, G. S., New History of the Mardth&s, 
Vol. I, pp. 202-03. 

21. Sabhasad, op. cit., p. 80. 

22. Sabhasad, op. cit., p. 38; Sarkar, Jadunath, op. cit., p. 120. 

575 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


23. Jedhe Shakdvali, p. 22 and Joshi, op. cit., p. 140. 

24. Sabhasad, op. cit., pp. 55-56. 

25 Sabhasad, op. cit., p. 4. 

26 Jedhe Shakdvali , p. 27. 

27. Sabhasad, op. cit., p. 84. 

28 Aitihasik Patren Yadi Vagaire (1930 ed.) No. 2; also Chitnis, Sapatprakarnatmak 
Charitra (Hervadkar, 1967), pp. 228-29. 

29 Joshi, S. N., op. cit., pp. 51-52. 

30 Aitihasik Patren Yddi Vagaire, No. 2. 

30a. Chitnis, op. cit., p. 170. 

31 Sabhasad, op. cit., pp. 77-78. 

32. ibid, pp. 83-84. 

33 For a discussion of this point, see Shejwalkar, Shiva Chhatrapati, pp. 538-42; 
also Kunte Maharashtra State Gazetteers , History, pt. II, pp. 381-84. 

34 Balkrishna, Shivdji the Great, pt. IV, pp. 57-58; Chitnis, op. cit., pp. 229-30. 

35 Chitnis, op. cit., p. 107. 

36 Sabhasad, op. cit. r p. 28. 

37 Chitnis, op. cit., pp. 206-13 and Ranade, Rise of the Mardthd Power, (1900 ed.), 
pp. 117-18. 

38. Balkrishna, op. cit., p: 43. 

39. Sabhasad, op. cit., pp. 28-9. 

40 ibid, p. 30. 

41. Chitnis, op. cit., pp. 113-14. 

42. Balkrishna, Shivdji, pt. IV, p. 108. 

43 Grant Dull, History of the Mahrattas (1921), I, pp. 182-83. 

44 ibid, p. 183. 

45. Balkrishna, op. cit., p. 119. 

46. English Records on Shivdji, I, pp. 44-48, 97, 132, 146; II, pp. 6 7. 

47. Ranade, M. G., Miscellaneous Writings, pp. 331-32. 

48. Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, XX, 109*45. 

49 Fryer, Vol. I, p. 206. 

50 Sabhasad (1923), op. cit., p. 96-97. 

51 Kulkami, A. R., Maharashtra} in the Age of Shivdji, p. 24. 

52. Sarkar, Shivdji , (1948), p. 69, 82, 213, et seq. 

53. ibid, p. 83, 176. 

54. Sabhasad, op. cit., p. 104. 

54a. Sabhasad, op. cit., p. 97, Ajhdpatra, p. 4. 

55 Sabhasad, op: cit., p. 21, A. R Kulkhrni, op. cit., p. 181 

56 Chitnis, op. cit., (Hervadkar ed.), p. 123. 

57 Kulkarni, op. cit., p. 185. 

58 Sarkar, Jadunath, Aurangzib, IV, p. 253. 

59 Parasnis, Itihds Samgraha, VII, Aitihasik Sphufa Lekha, pp. 4-5; also Shahu 
Charitra, pp. 134-35. 

60- Dhdktd Rdmrajdchi Bakhar and Itihds Samgraha, Peshwa Daftarantil Mdhiti, 
pp. 321-51. 

61. Ranade, M. G., Miscellaneous Writings, p. 349. 

62. Sabhasad, Shiva .Chhatrapati Charitra (1923), pp 96-97 

63. Chitnis, Thorle Shahu Mahdrdj Charitra, (1924), p. 46, Grant Duff, History, 
I, pp. 341^42. 

64. Grant Duff, op: cit., I, p. 390, f.n. 2. 

65- Rajwade, op. cit., VI, p. 160. 

66 Grant Duff, op. cit., I, p. 584. 

67. Elphinstone, Report , Selection of Papers from the Records of the East India 
House , IV (1826), p. 159. 

67a. Appendix to Elphinstone’s Report. 

68 Elphinstone, op. cit., pp. 158-67 & 175-83. 

69. Tone, Institutions of the Mardthd People, pp. 15-16. 

70. Cambridge History of India , Vol. IV, p. 414. 

71 Rajwade, MIS, I, Introduction, p. 96. 

72 Sardesai, Marathi Riydsat, V, pp. 135-36. 

73 • Sarkar, Jadunath, Fall of the Mughal Empire, IV, pp. 112-13. 

74. Khare, V. V., Foreword to Kelkar’s Mardthas and the English, p. 15. 

74a. PR. C., VIII, p. 34. 

75. Grant Duff, op. cit., pp. 175-76. 


576 


ADMINISTRATIVE 'AND MILITARY SYSTEM OF THE MARATHAS 


76- Grant Duff, ibid, p. 179. 

76a. Sabhasad, op. cit., pp. 98-99. 

77. Sabhasad, op. cit., p. 25. 

78. Sabhasad, op. cit., pp. 25:26. 

79. Sabhasad, op. cit., pp. 26-27. 

80. F^yer, A New Account of East India & Persia, p. 175. 

81. Dr. Fryer as cited by Balkrishna, Shivdj I, IV, pp. 70-71. 

82. Hist. Miscellany, pp. 48-55. 

83 Memoirs of Francois Martin, II, 113-19 cited by Jadunath Sarkar, Military 
History of Indiq, p. 154. 

84. Grant Duff, history of the Mahrattas (1921), Vol. I, p. 302. 

85- Sarkar, Jadunath, Military History of India, pp. 155-59. 

86 • P R C, IV, pp. 269-77; Malet’s report on the military organisation has been over¬ 
looked by scholars so far and therefore is quoted at length. Malet was 
British Resident at the Peshwa?s Court and was present with the Maratha army 
in 1795 and describes in vivid detail its organization, weapons, dress of the 
Maratha soldiers, etc. James Forbes, however, has included the despatch in 
the second volume of Oriental Memoirs (1813) at pp. 143-157. 

87- Lyall, Alfred, The Rise and Expansion of the British Dominion in India, (3rd 
ed., 1905), pp. 225-26. 

88- Owen, Sydney, Selection from Wellington Despatches, p. 356. 

[The Asst. Editor (Dr. Dighe) has drawn on many papers he read at seminars 
in Bombay, Poona and Delhi for the chapter.] 


M.s— 87 


577 


CHAPTER XVIII 


ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES 

IN INDIA: 1707-1818 

PART I 


Bengal: 

The history of the evolution of British administrative institu¬ 
tions in Bengal from 1707 to 1818 may be roughly divided into two 
periods. The first period in this history may be said to have come 
to an end in 1774 with the coming into force 1 of what is popularly 
known as Lord North’s Regulating Act of 1773. 2 The second period 
began in 1774 with the coming into operation of the Regulating Act, 
and continued for our present purposes, till 1818. 

First Period: 1707-1774: 

Before, however, we actually deal with the English political in¬ 
stitutions in Bengal during this period, we consider it necessary to 
say, by way of introduction, a few words in regard to two prelimi¬ 
nary matters, namely, (i) when Bengal first became a Presidency 
under the English, and (ii) what was the manner in which the 
affairs of the East India Company—or, to be more precise, of the 
United Company of Merchants of England Trading to the East Indies 
—were administered in England during this period. 

(i) Bengal: A Presidency : 3 

Roughly speaking, before 1682 Bengal had been subordinate to 
Fort St. George (Madras). In 1682, however, it became, although 
for a brief period, independent of the latter. One Mr. William 
Hedges was appointed to be the first independent Agent and Gov¬ 
ernor of the (first East India) Company’s “affairs and factories in 
the Bay of Bengal”. 4 His commission of appointment was dated 14 
November, 1681. He landed at Hoogly on 24 July, 1682, and held 
office as Agent and Governor of the Company’s “affairs in the Bay 
of Bengal”, from that date till 30 August, 1684, when he was super¬ 
seded 5 by one Mr. William Gyfford (Gifford) who had previously 

578 


ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)—I 

been appointed Agent and Governor of the Company’s affairs in the 
Bay of Bengal, in addition to his duties as Agent and Governor of 
Fort St. George, Madras. Thus, Bengal once more became sub¬ 
ordinate to Madras, and continued to be in this state of subordina¬ 
tion from September, 1684 to December, 1699, when one Sir Charles 
Eyre was appointed Governor of Fort William at Calcutta and Pre¬ 
sident of all the Company’s “Settlements and Affairs in the .... 
Kingdoms of Bengal and Behar in the East Indies”. 6 

Sir Charles Eyre actually assumed office as Governor of Bengal 
on 26 May, 1700. 7 Thus Bengal again became independent of 
Madras, with Sir Charles Eyre as its Governor. This, in brief, is 
the history of the origin of the Presidency of Bengal. 

(ii) Home Administration of Indian Affairs : 8 

Briefly speaking, the constitution, rights and privileges of the 
East India Company—or, to be very precise, of the United Company 
of Merchants of England Trading to the East Indies 9 —practically 
during the whole of the period with which we are now concerned, 10 
were in essence based upon, and derived from, the Charter which 
King William III had granted on 5 September, 1698, to the bulk of 
the subscribers to a loan of two millions sterling to the State, incor¬ 
porating them as a New East India Company under the denomina¬ 
tion of “The English Company Trading to the East Indies”. The 
King had granted this Charter under the authority conferred upon 
him by an Act of Parliament. 

Under this constitution, there were two bodies for the adminis- 

s 

tration of the affairs of the Company in England: a General Court 
of Proprietors and a Court of Directors. The supreme authority for 
the administration of those affairs was, however, vested in the Gene¬ 
ral Court of Proprietors. The Chairman of the Court of Directors 
of the Company was its “ex-officio Chairman”, and consequently 
presided over the meetings of its General Court. 

The Court of Directors consisted of twenty-four members who 
were annually elected by the General Court of Proprietors from 
among its own members by a majority of votes. The election was 
held “on some day or days, time or times, between the twenty- 
fifth day of March and the twenty-fifth day of April in each year”. 
After the constitution of a new Court of Directors at the end of a 
year, it would, at its first meeting, elect by ballot, from among its 
own members, its Chairman and Deputy Chairman for the next suc¬ 
ceeding year. Although the number of Directors was twenty-four, 


579 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

any thirteen of them would be sufficient to constitute a Court. This 
number, therefore, was the quorum for all purposes of the Court, 
and any action taken by any thirteen Directors would be an action 
of the Court. 

The Court of Directors was ‘the executive body’ of the Com¬ 
pany. It was empowered “to act according to such Bye-Laws, Con¬ 
stitutions, Orders, Rules, or Directions, as shall from time to time 
be made and given unto them by the General Court (of Proprie¬ 
tors) of the ...... Company”. In the absence of any such bye¬ 
laws, etc., it would, subject to the constitution of the Company as 
based upon the Act of Parliament and the Royal Charter previously 
referred to, “direct and manage all the affairs and business of 

the .Company”; choose and appoint its agents or servants 

from time to time; ‘allow and pay reasonable salaries and allow¬ 
ances’ to them, or ‘remove or displace them, if necessary; and gene¬ 
rally do such other business as it would judge necessary for the well 
ordering and managing of the.Company and the affairs there¬ 

of’. Lastly, it would, subject to the same restriction as noted above, 
“do, enjoy, perform, and execute all the powers, authorities, privi¬ 
leges, acts, and things in relation to the . Company as fully, 

to all intents and purposes, as if the same were done by the whole 
Company, or by a General Court (of Proprietors) of the same”. 

It may be noted here that only a holder of “five hundred 
pounds, or more, share or interest, in the stock” of the Company 
would have a vote in the General Court of Proprietors, but that no 
person could act as a Director till he had taken an oath that he pos¬ 
sessed £ 2,000 of the Company’s stock, or, if a Quaker, made a de¬ 
claration to that effect. Nor could a person be “chosen a Director 

of the.Company” who would not, “at the time of such choice, 

be a natural bom subject of England lor naturalised, and.have 

in his name or in his own right, and for his use two thousand pounds, 
or more”, of the Company’s stock. 

The Charter of King William III provided for the appbintment 
of sub-committees by the Court of Directors from among its own 
members, for the execution of the business of the Company. Ac¬ 
tually, however, the term used was “committee” and not “sub-Com- 
mitUe”. There were several such committees which would be 
formed by the Court of Directors at its first meeting after its recon¬ 
stitution at the end of a year, and amongst which its business would 
be divided: namely, the Committee of Accounts, the Committee of 
Buying, the Committee of Correspondence, the Committee of Law- 


580 








ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)—I 

suits, the Committee of Shipping, the Committee of Treasury, the 
Committee of Warehouses, and the Committee of Private Trade. In 
April, 1771, a new Committee for the management and application 
of the Military Fund instituted by Lord Clive, was added. The Chair¬ 
man and the Deputy Chairman of the Court (of Directors were ex- 
officio members of all the Committees. 11 

There was another Committee of the Court of Directors to 
which we find frequent reference in contemporary letters from the 
Court to the President and Council in Bengal. This Committee was 
styled the Secret Committee of the Court. Like its other Commit¬ 
tees, it used to be formed by the Court from among its own mem¬ 
bers, after its own reconstitution by the General Court of Proprie¬ 
tors at the end of a year. It consisted of the Chairman of the Court 
of Directors, its Deputy Chairman, and some other members there¬ 
of, not less than two, or more than seven in number. Any three mem¬ 
bers of the Committee would constitute a quorum. Any “instruc¬ 
tions, orders, and directions” which the Committee or any three 
members thereof might think fit to issue to any person or persons 
in the service of the Company in Bengal (or, for the matter of that, 
in the East Indies), had to be “duly observed and complied with’* 
by them. 12 

English Administrative Institutions in Bengul: 1707 to 1774: 

Broadly speaking, during the whole of this period the affairs of 
the Company in Bengal were ordinarily administered, subject to the 
control of its Court of Directors and, ultimately, of its Court of Pro¬ 
prietors in England, by a President and Council 13 consisting of its 
superior servants. The President was also known as Governor. 
Moreover, there would often be appointed, during the later part of 
this period, a Select Committee to help the President and Council in 
the administration of the affairs of the Company in Bengal. The 
principal settlement of the Company in Bengal was at Fort William 
in Calcutta. Under this principal settlement, there were several 
minor settlements 14 of the Company in this side of India. They were 
referred to either as ‘subordinates’ or as factories. This nomen¬ 
clature, however, was not always strictly adhered to, and a ‘subor¬ 
dinate’ would often be referred to as a factory. 15 A factory would 
ordinarily be under a ‘subordinate’. Subject to the control and 
direction of the President and Council at Fort William, the affairs 
of a ‘subordinate’ were originally managed by a Chief and Council, 
and those of a factory by a Resident. Later on, the heads of ‘sub¬ 
ordinates’ were also sometimes designated Residents. It may be 


581 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


mentioned here that there were two other principal settlements of 
the Company in India during the period with which we are now 
concerned: one at Bombay, and another at Fort St. George, Madras. 
All these three settlements were also called Presidencies, probably 
because at the head of each of them there was a President. Broadly 
speaking, the affairs of the Company in the Presidencies of Bombay 
and Fort St. George were administered in the same way, and sub¬ 
ject to similar control from England, as in the case of the Presidency 
of Fort William. It may also be noted here that, although the three 
Presidencies often acted, as a matter of fact, on the principle of 
mutual help and co-operation in relation to one another, they were, 
constitutionally speaking, absolutely independent of one another. 
The President (or Governor) and Council at each Presidency were 
responsible to the authorities of the Company in England for the 
proper execution of their duties in India. 

The principal settlements of the Company at Bombay and Fort 
St. George at Madras also had minor settlements under them, as in 
the case of Fort William at Calcutta. 

We shall now deal with the position and powers of the Presi¬ 
dent, Council and the Select Committee at Fort William. 

The Governor: 

The Governor 16 of Fort William in Bengal was appointed by 
the Court of Directors of the Company. This was also the case with 
the Governors of Fort St. George in Madras, of Bombay and of Fort 
Marlborough at Bencoolen, Sumatra. It was an invariable usage of 
the Company that the post of Governor and President in a Presi¬ 
dency should be filled by one of its civil servants. In the later part 
of the period now under consideration, the Governor was required 
to take an oath and to enter into a penalty bond that he might be 
“restricted in points of trade and private interest”. Moreover, he 
was required to give a security of £ 10,000 for the faithful perform¬ 
ance of his Covenant regarding the non-acceptance of any presents 
from, any person. 

Powers of the Governor: 

In his Memoirs of Warren Hastings} 1 Gleig has stated in con¬ 
nection with the office of President (i.e., the Governor) that he “may 
be regarded as bearing to his Council no other relation than that of 
primus inter pares”. This statement is substantially correct, as the 
President and Governor did not possess in those days the power of 
overriding the majority of his Council or Select Committee and act- 


582 


ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)—! 

ing on his own authority and responsibility in special eases. 1 ® As a 
matter of fact, the power to override the majority of their Council 
and to act on their own responsibility “in cases of high importance’** 
in the executive sphere was first conferred upon the Governor-Gene¬ 
ral of Bengal, and also upon the Governors of Madras and Bombay, 
by a Parliamentary enactment of 1786. 19 Technically, therefore, the 
President was the first among, usually, nine to sixteen ‘equals’ 20 and 
every question brought before a meeting of the President and Coun¬ 
cil was decided, if the whole Council had been duly summoned, by 
a majority of the Council. 21 And a mere change in its personnel 
would not affect the system of the Company’s Government at Port 
William. This will be evident from the following extract from a 
letter of the President and Council of Fort William 22 to the Nawab 
of Murshidabad: 23 

“That as the Nabob seems to conjecture there is a total 
suspension of our Government until Lord Clive’s arrival. It be¬ 
comes necessary to explain to him that the system of our Gov¬ 
ernment is always the same and can never lose its force by the 
change of individuals—and that whoever be President9* he does 
the duties of his office, until a succeeding President takes the 
Chair and jointly with the Council conducts all the Company’s 
business with the same authority.” 

The President and Governor had, however, certain special 
powers and privileges which contributed much to the dignity, pres¬ 
tige and the influence of his office. For instance, he alone was em¬ 
powered to carry on correspondence with ‘the Country Powers’ in 
India. Again, the Governor of Bengal was also, under the terms 
of his appointment, the Commander-in-Chief of all the Company’s 
forces in the Presidency of Bengal. And we find in a General Letter 
from the Court of Directors to the President and Council at Fort 
William, dated 30 June, 1769: 

“We are much surprised at the many questions which arose 
in the disputes 25 between our President Mr. Verelst and General 
Smith concerning their respective Military Authorities. As $ 
full answer to the whole, in a few words, you are to understand 
that our Governor is to all intents and purposes the Commander 
in Chief of our Forces and whatever orders he sends to <i ny 
officer , must be obeyed. 26 He is answerable to us for the use 
he makes of this power, and if he takes upon himself to give 
orders without the consent of the Council or Select Committee 
upon points belonging to their management he will suffer our 
severest resentment.” 


583 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


It is evident from all this that the President and Governor of 
Fort William occupied a very important position in the early govern¬ 
mental system of the Company in Bengal. Indeed, he was consider^ 
ed as' ‘the supreme Magistrate in Military as well as in Civil Affairs', 
and as ‘the head of both civil and military establishments', because 
of his ‘pre-eminence in all Departments'. His general position as the 
head of the Company’s affairs in Bengal and the duty of the Coun¬ 
cil at Fort William towards him, had been explained by the Court of 
Directors in one of its earlier letters of 31 January, 1755 to the Presi¬ 
dent and Council at Fort William, as follows: 

“All the rules and directions we can lay down will be of 
no effect nor can we ever expect to see our affairs properly 
conducted unless the President for the time being agreeable to 
his situation and the real intention of his post is a General 
Inspector and Supervisor oj the whole machine ; 27 in that light 
we look upon the President and we expect Mr. Drake 25 will 
exert himself accordingly. We shall then find that the seyeral 
important posts which have been hitherto conducted too inde¬ 
pendently will be properly checked and controlled and our ser¬ 
vants in general will likewise be in all respects kept to their 
duty. Whenever therefore the President shall lay before you 29 
any complaints or observations upon the conduct or manage¬ 
ment of our servants of any rank or degree or proposes any 
regulations for the better management of our affairs in general 
or any particular branches of them, you are seriously to attend 
to and consider them and apply such remedies as the nature of 
them requires." 

The Court also directed in the same letter that, in consequence 
of the authority vested in the President, he was ‘to call upon the 
several persons employed to see in what manner their business’ was 
executed, so that it itself might have fewer occasions for complaints 
against the way in which they performed their duties. 

We may also note in this connection what Lord Clive stated in 
the course of a parting message to Mr. Verelst who was to succeed 
him in the office of President and Governor of Bengal, and to the 
other members of the Select Committee at Fort William: 30 

“The people of this country have little, or no idea of a 
divided power: they imagine all authority is vested in one man. 
The Governor of Bengal should always be looked upon by them, 
in this light, as far as is consistent with the honour Of the Com¬ 
mittee and Council. In every vacant season therefore, I think 


584 


ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (17074818) —I 

it expedient that he take a tour up the country in the quality 
of Supervisor General. 31 Frauds and oppressions of every sort, 
being by this means laid open to his view, will in great measure 
be prevented, and the natives preserve a just opinion of the 
importance and dignity of your President, upon whose charac¬ 
ter and conduct much of the prosperity of the Company’s affairs 
in Bengal, must ever depend.” 

In the exercise of his powers, however, the President and Gov¬ 
ernor was subject to the control and direction of the Select Commit¬ 
tee and the Council at Fort William, and to that of the Court of 
Directors in England, and he was accountable to therti for the man¬ 
ner in which he executed the duties of his office. 

Such, in brief, were the position, powers and responsibilities of 
the Governor of Bengal as these had been, before what is known as 
the Regulating Act of 1773 came into force. We may observe, how¬ 
ever, that, apart from the specific powers vested in him, much de¬ 
pended upon personal factors. If the Governor happened to be a 
man of strong character and personality, and he himself was above 
temptations—and there were many in his way in those days—he 
would certainly be able to maintain the dignity of his office and ex¬ 
ercise a considerable influence over men and affairs. But things 
would be otherwise if the Governor happened to be a weak man or 
if he was not himself above temptations. 32 

The Council: 

The constitution of the Council differed from time to time, the 
number of Councillors including the President and Gdvemor, vary¬ 
ing, ordinarily, from nine to sixteen. 33 The views of the Court of 
Directors on the question whether the Commanding Officer of the 
army in the Presidency of Bengal should have a constant seat on 
the Council, also varied from time to time. Members of the Coun¬ 
cil also varied from time to time. Members of the Council were, 
like the President and Governor, ordinarily appointed by the Court 
of Directors. But vacancies would often occur in the membership 
of the Council either as a result of the death, going away, dismissal 
or the suspension of its members, or otherwise. If any such vacan¬ 
cies occurred, the President and Council were empowered to fill 
them provisionally, pending the approval of the Court, by appoint¬ 
ing some superior servants of the Company in Bengal. It should, 
however, be noted here that seniority alone was not to be a ground 
for such appointments. In its General Letter to Bengal, dated 24 
December, 1765, the Court of Directors directed the President and 


585 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Council “to be extremely careful .... not to admit any one into 
Council” unless they were fully satisfied that his “abilities, inte¬ 
grity,* circumstances and good character in general” rendered him 
fit for so important a station as the membership of the Council. 

We have stated before that the President and Council were em¬ 
powered provisionally to fill vacancies in the Council by appoint¬ 
ing some superior servants of the Company from within Bengal. 
But sometimes such vacancies would be filled by the appointment 
of civil servants from other Presidencies. For instance, in 1765-66 
four vacancies in the Council were filled by the appointment of four 
civil servants from the Presidency of Madras. 

Public and Secret Departments: 

The Council would sometimes form itself into two Departments, 
Public and Secret, for the transaction of its business. For example, 
it did so at a (Public) Consultation, held at Fort William on 3 Nov¬ 
ember, 1763. 

The Select Committee: 

The Select Committee at Fort William generally consisted of 
five persons including the President and Governor there. Some¬ 
times, however, it consisted of six persons and sometimes only of 
four (and even three) persons in certain circumstances. Although 
it was an almost invariable practice on the part of the Court of 
Directors to include a military officer—generally the Commanding 
Officer, for the time being, of the Company’s army in Bengal—in the 
Select Committee, yet it would often lay it down as a general prin¬ 
ciple that the Commanding Officer should not be allowed to have a 
constant seat on the Committee. 

Select Committees were ordinarily constituted from time to time 
by the Court of Directors, but casual vacancies therein were filled 
by their members themselves under the authority vested in them in 
this regard by the Court. Further, the President (at Fort William) 
would sometimes himself appoint senior servants of the Company 
available at Fort William, to be temporary members of the Select 
Committee. The usual quorum for the Select Committee was three, 
although “the Select Committee did not lay down any rules for 
themselves”. 

The Select Committee constituted by the order of the Court of 
Directors, dated 1 June, 1764, resolved at its first meeting held at 


586 


ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)—I 

Fort William on 7 May, 1765, that the following oath should be taken 
by its members:— 

“I, A.B., do swear that I will not reveal to any person what¬ 
ever, any of the proceedings of this Committee, until the same 
be laid before the Council or until this Committee be dissolved.” 

And we find from subsequent records of the Proceedings of the 
Select Committee that every person who became a member of the 
Committee later on, had to take this oath of secrecy before entering 
upon the duties of his office. 

Powers of the Council and the Select Committee: 

Briefly speaking, except during a short period in which the 
Select Committee was, as will be shortly noticed, endowed by the 
Court of Directors with extraordinary powers and was, therefore, to 
quote the words of Malcolm, 34 ‘the real engine of government’, and 
except during such an emergency as will be referred to hereinafter, 
the powers of the Council were really immense, since it was vested 
with ‘a general supervising power’ over the administration of the 
Company’s affairs in Bengal. Thus we find the Court of Directors 
laying down in a letter, dated 23 March, 1758, that the Council 
should have the power of “ordering, governing and managing all 
the Company’s affairs at Fort William in Bengal, and all its depend- 
dent places and settlements with as full power and authority as the 
Presidents and Councils in Bengal have been usually invested with”. 
And in a previous letter, dated 11 February, 1756, the Court had 
directed that the Council constituted thereby would have the power 
of presiding over and managing “all the Company’s affairs at Fort 
William in Bengal, and all the several dependencies thereunto be¬ 
longing”. In another letter, dated 8 February, 1764, the Court stated: 
“We have appointed the following gentlemen to be the Council for 
managing and conducting the Company’s affairs at our Presidency 
of Fort William to whom all obedience is to be paid,” etc. Again, 
shortly afterwards, in reconstituting the Council at Fort William by 
its letter of 1 June, 1764, the Court described its power as “managing 
and conducting all our affairs at the Presidency of Fort William in 
Bengal to whom all obedience is to be paid”. Lastly, we may men¬ 
tion that in the Court’s commissions appointing a President and 
Council at Fort William, dated, for instance, 11 February, 1758, and 
31 May, 1764, we find that the Council was vested with the power 

of “governing and managing all the .Company’s affairs in 

Bengal and the places and provinces thereunto belonging”. 


587 



THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Although the Court of Directors vested such extensive powers 
in the Council as shown above, yet it directed 35 in 1758 that, if ever 
Fort William were attacked by an enemy, the powers of its Gov¬ 
ernor and Council were, so far as its defence was concerned, to be 
suspended, and that the sole authority therefor was to be exercised 
by a Military Government consisting of the “President, the Major, 
the Engineer, the Master Attendant for the time being and the next 
most capable military officer to be appointed by the said persons . 
This direction of the Court regarding the setting up of a Military 
Government at Fort William in the event of its being attacked by 
an enemy, was in essence repeated by it in its General Letters to 
Bengal, dated 13 March, 1761, 1 June, 1764, and 23 March, 1770, 
although the Military Government itself was ordered to be consti¬ 
tuted differently on different occasions. 

It may also be noted here that the President and Council were 
empowered by a Royal Charter, dated 8 January, 1758, to make bye¬ 
laws for the good government and regulation of the Mayor's Court 
and other Courts erected under the same Charter “for the town of 
Calcutta at Fort William” and places subordinate thereto, and of the 
inhabitants thereof. These bye-laws, however, were not to have 
‘any force or effect’ until they were ‘approved and confirmed* by 
the Court of Directors. The President and Council were also vested 
by the same Charter with certain powers relating to the administra¬ 
tion of justice at Fort William and at places and factories subordinate 
to it. 

It will be clear from all this that the President and Council of 
Fort William were vested at the same time with executive, legisla¬ 
tive and judicial powers, and that the principle of separation of 
powers was not followed in framing the governmental system of the 
Company at Fort William. 

Powers of the Select Committee: 

The powers of the Select Committee varied from time to time; 
but except during emergencies when it would be invested by the 
Court of Directors with extraordinary powers, it was the Council, 
and not the Select Committee, whieh was vested with ‘a general 
supervising power’ over the administration of the affairs of the Com¬ 
pany in Bengal. During an emergency, however, the Select Com¬ 
mittee would be vested with special powers. Thus we find that in its 
General Letter to Bengal, dated 1 June, 1764, the Court stated that 
the intention of the General Court of Proprietors in desiring Lord 


588 


ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)—I 

Clive to go to Bengal, in view of the critical situation of the Com¬ 
pany’s affairs in the Province was: 

“That by His Lordship’s character and influence, peace 
and tranquillity might be the easier restored and established in 
that Subaship. 

“In order therefore to answer these purposes in a manner 
that we apprehend may prove most effectual, we have thought 
proper to appoint a Committee on this occasion consisting of his 
Lordship, Mr. Wm. Brightwell Sumner, Brigadier General 
Carnac, also Messrs. Harry Verelst and Francis Sykes to whom 
we do hereby give full powers to pursue whatever means they 
shall judge most proper to attain those desirable ends; but how¬ 
ever in all cases where it be done conveniently, the Council at 
large is to be consulted by the said Committee, though the 
power of determination is to be in that Committee alone.” 

As a consequence of the conferment of these special powers upon 
Lord Clive and his Select Committee, the Council at Fort William 
became, for the time being, a factor of secondary importance in the 
administrative system of the Company. This state of things con¬ 
tinued till the “general superintending power” which had been 
vested in the Select Committee by the Court of Directors by its 
General Letter to Bengal, of 1 June, 1764, and which had been con¬ 
firmed by its General Letter to Bengal, of 17 May, 1766, was with¬ 
drawn from the Committee by the Court by its General Letter to 
Bengal, of 12 January, 1768. 

Considerations of space do not permit herje any detailed refer¬ 
ence to the prolonged controversy which took place in 1770 between 
the Council and the Select Committee over the question of their res¬ 
pective jurisdictions. 36 The matter was referred, however, to the 
Court of Directors both by the Council and by the Select Commit¬ 
tee, for its decision thereon. In reply, the Court upheld the conten¬ 
tion of the Council as against that of the Select Committee. 37 With 
its powers thus defined by the Court, the Select Committee con¬ 
tinued to function till October, 1774, i.e., practically till the intro¬ 
duction of the new system of Government constituted under what 
is popularly known as Lord North’s Regulating Act of 1773. 

Judiciary before 1774: 

We shall now briefly 3 ® notice the system of judiciary which the 
Company set up in Bengal before 1774. In the first place, there were 
established in each district two “Courts of Judicature; one by the 


589 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


name of Mofussal Dewdnnee Audawlut , or provincial Court of 
Dewdnnee, for the cogniz(ance) of Civil Causes; the other by the 
name (of) Phoujdarree Audawlut, a Court of Phoujddrree, for the 
trial of all crimes and misdemeanours”. Over the first the Collector 
of the district presided ‘on the part of the Company in their quality 
of King’s Dewdn\ He was ‘attended by the provincial Dewdn ap¬ 
pointed by the President and Council’ and some other officers. No 
cause could'be ‘heard or determined but in the open Court regular¬ 
ly assembled’. In the second the Cauzee and Muftee of the district 
and two Maulcovis would ‘sit to expound the law and determine 
how far the delinquents shall be guilty of a breach thereof’. The 
Collector of the district, however, was required to ‘make it his busi¬ 
ness’ to attend to the proceedings of this Court “so far as to see that 
all necessary evidences are summoned and examined, that due 
weight is allowed to their testimony, and that the decision passed 
is fair and impartial according to the proofs exhibited in the course 
of the trial”. He was thus ‘to exercise a sort of general super¬ 
intendence’ over the procedure of this Court. Here also no causes 
could be ‘heard or determined but in the open Court regularly 
assembled.’ 

Secondly, two ‘Superior Courts of Justice’ were established at 
Calcutta: “one under the denomination of the Dewdnnee Sudder 
Audawlut and the other the Nizdmut Sudder Audawlut”. The 
President with two members of the Council at Fort William presid¬ 
ed over the Dewdnnee Sudder Audawlut, “attended by the Dewdn 
of the Khdlsa, the head Canongoe and other officers of the Cut- 
cherry”. In the absence of the President a third member of the 
Council might sit along with the other two members. That is to 
say, not less than three members of the Council were to ‘decide on 
an Appeal’. But the whole Council might sit if it so thought fit. 

A ‘Chief Officer of Justice appointed on the part of the Nazim’ 
presided over ‘the N'hamut Audawlut by the title of Darogo- 
Audaulut (Daroga-Audawlut). He was assisted by the Chief 
Cauzee, the Chief Muftee, and three capable Maulavis. Their duty 
was “to revise all the proceedings of the Phoujddrree Audawlut , and 
in capital cases by signifying their approbation or disapprobation 
thereof with their reasons at large, to prepare the sentence for the 
Warrant of the Nazim, which shall be returned into the moffussil 
and then carried into execution”. With respect to the proceedings 
of this Court a power of control was vested in the President and 
Council at Fort William similar to what was vested in the Collectors 
in the Districts over the Phoujddrree Audawluts, so that “the Corn- 


590 


ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)—I 

pany’s administration in the character of King’s Dewdn”, might be 
satisfied that the “decrees of justice on which both the welfare and 
safety of the country so materially depend, are not injured or per¬ 
verted by the effects of partiality or corruption”. 

Thirdly, with a view to preserving ‘the dignity and importance 
of the Two Superior Courts’ just referred to, there were established 
‘Two Courts of Audawlut’ at Calcutta, ‘exactly on the same plan as 
those of the Districts’. A member of the Council at Fort William 
presided over ‘the Dewannee* Court, and another member of the 
Council exercised the same kind of control over the Phoujddrree 
Court as was exercised by the Collector over the Phoujddrree 
Audawlut in a district. These duties were to be performed by the 
members of the Council in rotation. These two inferior courts of 
justice at Calcutta superseded in 1772 what had previously been 
known as the Zamindari Courts in Calcutta. As Zamindar of Suta- 
nati, Calcutta and Govindpur, the Company used to exercise crimi¬ 
nal, civil and religious jurisdiction in these places through these 
Zamindari Courts. 39 

Lastly, mention may be made here of the Courts of law exist¬ 
ing in Calcutta which owed their origin to a Charter of Justice 
granted to the Company by the King of England on 8 January, 1753 
—we mean the Courts known as the Mayor’s Court, the Court of 
Appeals, the Court of Requests as well as certain other Courts, such 
as the Court of Quarter Sessions, for the administration of justice 
in criminal cases. The Mayor’s Court consisted of a Mayor and nine 
Aldermen. An appeal could be made from the judgment of the 
Mayor’s Court to the President and Council of Fort William. And 
in certain circumstances a further appeal might be made to the King 
in Council from a judgment given on appeal by the President and 
Council. 

Such, in brief, was the system of judiciary which the Company 
had set up in Bengal before a Supreme Court of Judicature was esta¬ 
blished at Fort William under a Royal Charter, dated 26 March, 
1774. We shall have an occasion to refer to this Court of Judica¬ 
ture later on. 

English Administrative Institutions in Bengal: 1774-1818: 

The Regulaiting Act oj\ 1773: 

Many things contributed to the awakening of the conscience of 
the people of England to what had been happening in India, and to 
the consequential enactment by Parliament 40 of the Regulating Act 


591 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


of 1773 with a view to a better regulation and management of the 
affairs of the Company both in India and in England. Among these 
we may mention the heavy drain of the wealth of Bengal following 
the acquisition by the Company of the Devtiini of Bengal, Bihar and 
Orissa on 12 August, 1765; the impoverished and miserable condi¬ 
tion of the people of Bengal ‘since the accession of the Company to 
the Deiodnnee’; stories of various abuses and iniquities on the part 
of the Company's servants in this country and of ‘colossal fortunes' 
acquired by many of them, often by unscrupulous means; unhealthy 
influence exercised by many of these people on English public life 
on their return to England; war in south of India with Haidar ‘All 
and its financial implications; the terrible famine of 1770 in Bengal 
and its dreadful consequences; revelations made by the Select and 
the Secret Committee of the House of Commons, appointed in 1772, 
in regard to the affairs of the Company; payment of ever increasing 
dividends to the share-holders of the Company and also of a tribute 
to the British Exchequer of an annual sum of £ 400,000; and ulti¬ 
mately, financial embarrassments of the Company which practically 
brought it to the verge of bankruptcy and compelled it to apply to 
the British Government for a loan for enabling it to get out of its 
difficulties. 

It appears from the Report of a Parliamentary Committee that 
the authors of the Regulating Act had “five fundamental objects” 
in view. They were, briefly speaking, as follows: 41 

“Istly: The reformation of the Court of Proprietors of the East 
India Company. 

2ndly: A new model of the Court of Directors, and an enforce¬ 
ment of their authority over the servants abroad. 

3rdly: The establishment of a Court of Justice capable of pro¬ 
tecting the natives from the oppressions of British subjects. 

4thly: The establishment of a General Council to be seated in 
Bengal, whose authority should, in many particulars, ex¬ 
tend over all the British Settlements in India. 

5thly: To furnish the Ministers of the Crown with constant 
information concerning the whole of the Company's cor¬ 
respondence with India, in order that they might be en¬ 
abled to inspect the conduct of the Directors and servants, 
and to watch over the execution of all parts of the Act; 
that they might be furnished with matter to lay before 
Parliament from time to time, according as the state of 


592 


ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)—I 

things should render regulation or animadversion neces¬ 
sary” 

It need hardly be pointed out here that we are concerned in this 
chapter mainly with the last three objects of the Regulating Act.. 

Salient features of the Regulating Act: 

We shall now notice some of the salient features of the Regulat¬ 
ing Act. In a preamble the Act stated that, whereas the powers 
granted to the Company by Charters had been ‘found by experience 
not to have sufficient force and efficacy to prevent various abuses’ 
which had prevailed in the government and administration of the 
affairs of the Company, ‘as well at home as in India’, it had there¬ 
fore become highly expedient that certain further regulations, better 
adapted to its then circumstances and conditions, ‘should be provided 
and established’. Accordingly, the Act laid down, in the first place, 
that, ‘at the next ensuing general election’, instead of twenty-four 
Directors being all elected for one year only, six should be elected 
‘expressly’ for one year; six for two years; six for three years; the 
remaining six for four years; and that “at the expiration of every 
year, six new Directors, and no more, should be chosen”, “in the 
place of such Directors whose term shall have expired and who are 
hereby declared incapable of being then re-chosen” In effect, this 
meant that the members of the Court of Directors, should, instead of 
being annually elected as before, ordinarily hold office for four years, 
one-fourth of their number 42 being elected annually. The object of 
this provision was to strengthen ‘the authority of the Court of 
Directors’ and to prevent ‘instability in the Councils and measures’ 
of the Company. 

Secondly, the Act declared that no person employed in any civil 
or military office or capacity in the East Indies should be eligible for 
appointment as a Director until such person should ‘have returned 
to and been resident in England for the space of two years’. 

Thirdly, the Act forbade, on pain of severe penalties, any col¬ 
lusive transfer of any stock of the Company for the purpose of 
voting at any election. Moreover, it raised, with effect from 1 
October, 1774, the qualification for a vote at any General Court of 
Proprietors from £ 500 to £ 1,000 stock, and declared that no person 
would ordinarily be entitled to such a vote unless he (or she, etc.) 
had previously possessed the stock for ‘twelve calendar months’. 
The Act also provided for a plurality of votes in certain circum¬ 
stances upto a maximum of four votes for any proprietor. 43 

593 


M.S.—w 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Fourthly, the Act declared that, for the government of the 
Presidency of Fort William in Bengal, there should be ‘appointed a 
Governor-General, and four counsellors’; and that the whole civil 
and military government of this Presidency and also the manage¬ 
ment and government of all the territorial acquisitions and reve¬ 
nues in the kingdoms of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, should, during 
such time as the territorial acquisitions and revenues remained in 
the possession of the Company, be vested in the said Governor- 
General and Council of the Presidency of Fort William, ‘in like 

manner.as the same now are, or at any time heretofore might 

have been exercised by the President and Council, or Select Com¬ 
mittee in the said kingdoms’ In case of any difference of opinion 
on any question proposed at any consultation, the Governor-General 
and Council were, to be bound ‘by the opinion and decision of the 
major part of those present’. And in case of an equality of votes on 
any question, as a result of the death or removal or the absence of 
any member of the Council, the Governor-General, or, in his ab¬ 
sence, the eldest counsellor present at the consultation, was to 
‘have a casting voice’, and his opinion was to be ‘decisive and 
conclusive’. 

Warren Hastings was to be the first Governor-General under 
the Act, 44 and Lieutenant-General John Clavering, the Honourable 
George Monson, Mr. Richard Barwell and Mr. Philip Francis were 
to be ‘the four first counsellors’. They were, subject to what follows, 
to hold ‘their respective offices’ for five years ‘from the time of their 
arrival at Fort William in Bengal, and taking upon them the Gov¬ 
ernment’ of the Presidency. They could not be removed from office 
in the meantime, except by the Crown on a representation made by 
the Court of Directors. If a vacancy occurred in the office of the 
Governor-General during these five years as a consequence of his 
death, removal, or resignation, it was to be filled, ‘during the re¬ 
mainder of the term aforesaid’, by the member of the Council who 
stood next in rank to the Governor-General. And if a vacancy oc¬ 
curred, during the same time, in the office of a member of the Coun¬ 
cil, as a result of his death, removal, resignation, or promotion, it 
was to be filled, for the unexpired portion of the said term of five 
years, by the Court of Directors with the consent of the Crown. 
The Governor-General and Council were empowered to act in spite 
of any vacancy in the Council. At the expiration of the said term 
of five years ‘the power of nominating and removing the succeeding 
Governor-General and Council’ was to be vested in the Court of 
Directors of the Company. 


594 



ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (17074818)—I 


Fifthly, the Act took the first step towards the centralization 
of the governmental system of the Company in India. It laid down 
that the Governor-General and Council were to have ‘power of 
superintending and controlling the government and management of 
the Presidencies of Madras, Bombay, and Bencoolen’, 45 ‘so far and in 
so much as’ that it would not be lawful for any President and Coun¬ 
cil of Madras, Bombay, or Bencoolen, ‘to make any orders for com¬ 
mencing hostilities, or declaring or making war, against any Indian 
princes or powers, or for negotiating or concluding any treaty of 
peace, or other treaty, with any such Indian princes or powers’ with¬ 
out the previous consent of the Governor-General and Council, ex¬ 
cept in such cases of imminent necessity as would render it dangerous 
to postpone such hostilities or treaties till the arrival of such orders, 
and except in such cases where the said Presidents and Councils had 
received special orders from the Company. Any President and 
Council who would offend against these provisions of the Act would 
be liable to be suspended from office by the order of the Governor- 
General and Council. Moreover, every President and Council of 
Madras, Bombay and Bencoolen were required by the Act to pay due 
obedience to such orders as they might receive ‘touching the pre¬ 
mises’ from the Governor-General and Council, and ‘constantly and 
diligently to transmit’ to the Governor-General and Council ‘advice 
and intelligence of all transactions and matters whatsoever’ that 
would come to their knowledge, relating to the government, neve- 
nues, or interest of the Company. The Governor-General and Coun¬ 
cil in their turn were required by the Act to pay due obedience to 
all such orders as they might receive from the Court of Directors, 
and ‘constantly and diligently’ to communicate to the Court ‘an ex¬ 
act particular’ of all matters that would come to their knowledge, ‘re¬ 
lating to the government, commerce, revenues, or interest’ of the 
Company. The Court of Directors, too, was required by the Act to 
transmit, within fourteen days of its receipt of any ‘letters or ad¬ 
vices’ from the Governor-General and Council, (i) to the Treasury 
‘a true and exact copy of such parts of the said letters or advices’ 
as would relate to the management of the revenues of the Company, 
and (ii) to a Principal Secretary of State ‘a true and exact copy of 
all such parts’ thereof as would relate to the civil or military affairs 
and government of the Company. 

Thus a chain of connection was established by the Act between 
the administrative machinery set up by the Company in India and 
His Majesty’s Government in England. 


595 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Sixthly, the Act declared that, as the Royal Charter, dated 8 
January, 1753, which, amongst other things, constituted and esta¬ 
blished courts of justice at Fort William, did not sufficiently “pro¬ 
vide for the due administration of justice in such manner as the 
state and condition of the Company’s Presidency of Fort William in 
Bengal” required, it “shall and may be lawful” for the Crown to 
erect and establish by charter a Supreme Court of Judicature at 
Fort William. This Supreme Court was to consist of a Chief Justice 
and three other judges who were to be barristers in England or 
Ireland, of not less than five years’ standing, and were to be appoin¬ 
ted by the Crown from time to time. It was to have full power and 
authority to exercise all civil, criminal, admiralty, and ecclesiastical 
jurisdiction, and to appoint such clerks and other ministerial officers, 
with such reasonable salaries, as would be approved of by the Gov- 
ernor-General and Council. Further, it was empowered to ‘form 
and establish’ such rules of practice, etc., and to do all such other 
things as might be found necessary for the administration of justice, 
and for the due execution of powers to be vested in it by the Char¬ 
ter. It was to “be, at all times, a court of record, and .... a court 
cf Oyer and Terminer, and Gaol Delivery, in and for the said town 
of Calcutta, and factory of Fort William ...... and the limits there¬ 
of, and the factories subordinate thereto”. Moreover, the jurisdic¬ 
tion of the Supreme Court was to extend to “all British subjects” 
residing in the kingdoms or provinces of Bengal, Bihar, and Orissa, 
or any of them, under the protection of the Company. And it was 
to “have full power and authority to hear and determine all com¬ 
plaints against any of His Majesty’s subjects for any crimes, misde¬ 
meanours, or oppressions, committed, or to be committed; and also 
to entertain, hear, and determine, any suits or actions whatsoever, 
against any of His Majesty’s subjects in Bengal, Bihar, and Orissa, 
and any suit, action or complaint against any person.employ¬ 

ed by, or directly or indirectly in the service” of the Company or of 
any of His Majesty’s subjects. 

The Supreme Court was not, however, to be competent to hear, 
try or determine any indictment or information against the Gov¬ 
ernor-General or any member of his Council, for any offence, not 
being treason or felony, which they might be charged with having 
committed in Bengal, Bihar and Orissa. Nor could the Governor- 
General, any member of his Council, or the Chief Justice or any 
puisne judge be arrested or imprisoned upoh any action, suit or pro¬ 
ceeding in the Supreme Court. An appeal would lie to His Majesty 
in Council from a judgment of the Supreme Court, subject to such 


596 



ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)—I 


conditions as might be laid down in the royal charter establishing 
the Supreme Court. 

Seventhly, the Act directed the Company to pay, during such 
time as its territorial acquisitions remained in its possession, the 
following annual salaries to the Governor-General and others as 
shown below:— 


The Governor-General 

Each member of the Council at Fort William 
Chief Justice of the Supreme Court 
Each puisne judge 


£ 25,000 
£ 10,000 
£ 8,000 
£ 6,000 


In view of these salaries, the above-mentioned persons were for¬ 
bidden by the Act to accept any other fee, perquisite, emolument or 
advantage whatsoever. They were also forbidden to accept, from 
any person on any account whatsoever, any present or reward, 
pecuniary or otherwise, or any engagement for any present or re¬ 
ward; or to be concerned in any traffic or commerce, except the 
trade and commerce of the Company itself. A similar restriction 
was imposed by the Act upon every person holding any civil or mili¬ 
tary office under the Crown or the Company in the East Indies. 
Further, the Act laid down that it would not be lawful for any Col¬ 
lector, Supervisor, or any other of His Majesty’s subjects, employ¬ 
ed in the administration of justice, or their agents or servants, to be 
concerned in any trade in Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, except on ac¬ 
count of the Company. These provisions were inserted in the Act, 
obviously with a view to ensuring purity and efficiency in the admi¬ 
nistration of the Company. 


Eighthly, the Act empowered the Governor-General and Council 
“to make and issue such rules, ordinances, and regulations for the 
good order and civil government” of the Company’s settlement at 
Fort William and other factories and places subordinate thereto, as 
might be deemed just and reasonable and would not be repugnant 
to the laws of the realm, and “to set, impose, inflict, and levy, rea¬ 
sonable fines and forfeitures for the breach or non-observance” 
thereof. But these rules, ordinances, etc., were not to be valid until 
they were duly “registered and published” in the Supreme Court to 
be set up under the Act, with the consent and approbation of the 
Court. And it would be lawful for any person or persons in India 
“to appeal therefrom” to the King in Council, who was empowered 
by the Act to set aside any such rules, etc. Moreover, the Governor- 
General and Council were required by the Act to transmit copies 
of such rules, ordinances, and regulations to a Principal Secretary 


597 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

of State; and it would be lawful for the King to signify to the Com¬ 
pany his disapprobation and disallowance thereof. 

Ninthly, the Governor-General and Council and the Chief Jus¬ 
tice and other judges of the Supreme Court were empowered by 
the Act to act as Justices of the Peace for the Company’s settlement 
at Fort William and for several settlements and factories subordi¬ 
nate -thereto. 

Finally, the Act adequately provided for the trial in England, 
by His Majesty's Court of King’s Bench, of any Governor-General, 
or any other person employed in the service of the Company in any 
capacity, or of the Chief Justice or any Puisne Judge of the Supreme 
Court, or of any of His Majesty’s subjects residing in India, who 
might commit any offence against any of its provisions, or might 
be guilty of any crime, misdemeanour, or offence, committed against 
any of His Majesty’s subjects, or any inhabitant of India within their 
respective jurisdictions. 

We have given above a summary of what appear to have been 
the principal provisions of the Regulating Act of 1773. The three 
new Councillors, namely, John Clavering, George Monson and Philip 
Francis arrived at Fort William from Europe on 19 October, 1774. 
The first meeting of the new Council under the Regulating Act was 
held at Fort William on 20 October, 1774, under the Presidentship 
of Warren Hastings, (now) Governor-General. 46 The other mem¬ 
bers who attended this meeting were the three new Councillors 
from Europe, namely, Clavering, Monson and Francis. Richard 
Barwell could not attend this meeting, as he came to Calcutta two 
days later. At this first meeting, the Regulating Act was read, 
together with the Instructions which the Court of Directors had sent 
to the Governor-General and Council on 29 March, 1774, in con¬ 
nection with the Act. Besides, it was resolved at this meeting that 
a Proclamation should be made at the Court House by the Sheriff 
(of Calcutta) at 7 on the next morning. Among other things, this 
Proclamation was to announce that the powers vested by the Act 
in the Governor-General and Council were to “commence and take 
place from the date of the Proclamation” obviously from 21 Octo¬ 
ber, 1774. The new Council also executed some other business at 
its first meeting. 

As authorized by the Regulating Act, a royal Charter was issued 
by the Crown on 26 March, 1774, providing for the establishment 
of a Supreme Court of Judicature at Fort William in Bengal. It 
was to consist of, as stated before, a Chief Justice and three Puisne 


598 


ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)—I 

Judges. Sir Elijah- Impey was appointed to be the first Chief 
Justice, and Messrs. Robert Chambers, Stephen Caesar LeMaistre, 
and John Hyde, the first three Puisne Judges. The Charter also 
ordered the abolition of the Mayor’s Court at Calcutta, with¬ 
out prejudice, however, to the judgments already pronounced by 
the Court. 

Some serious difficulties were experienced in the actual work^ 
ing of the Regulating Act. This was largely due to what were con¬ 
sidered to have been defects in its provisions. The first difficulty 
occurred owing to the absence of any power in the Governor-Gene¬ 
ral to override his Council. As we have seen before, under the 
Regulating Act, if there arose any difference of opinion on any ques¬ 
tion brought before a meeting of the Governor-General and Council 
of Bengal, they were to be bound “by the opinion and decision of 
the major part of those present at the meeting”. Only in case of an 
equality of votes, the Governor-General, or, in his absence, “the 
eldest counsellor present” at the meeting, was to have a casting 
vote, and his opinion was to “be decisive and conclusive”. As a con¬ 
sequence of this provision in the Act, Warren Hastings who had been 
appointed to be the first Governor-General of Bengal by the Act, 
was often powerless and helpless before his Council, as three of his 
four councillors, namely, Clavering, Monson, and Francis generally 
acted together in opposition to him. His difficulties disappeared, 
however, with the rather ‘timely’ death of Monson in September, 
1776, as he could now have his own way by means of his casting 
vote; but the lesson taught by them was there. And it may be noted 
here that when Lord Cornwallis was appointed to the office of Gov¬ 
ernor-General of Bengal in 1786, he made it a condition of his ac¬ 
ceptance of the office that he “should be given the constitutional 
power to overrule his Council”, if necessary. Accordingly an Act 47 
was passed by Parliament in 1786 which in effect empowered the 
Governor-General to overrule, “in cases of high importance, and 
^specially affecting the public interest and welfare”, the majority 
of his Council and to act on his own authority and responsibility. 4 ® 
Ever since 1786 this overruling power had been retained, in one 
shape or another, ever down to the last days of British rule, as a 
feature of the Indian Constitution. 

A second difficulty experienced during the working of the Re¬ 
gulating Act arose from the inadequacy of the power of control and 
superintendence vested by it in the Governor-General and Council 
of Bengal over the subordinate Presidencies of Madras and Bombay. 
And we particularly notice this in the following observations of 


599 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Warren Hastings, made in the course of a letter to Lawrence Sulivan, 
dated at Fort William 22 March, 1776: 49 

“You long ago knew my wish to see a control given to this 
government over the other Presidencies, but I never meant such 
a control as is now exercised; nor did the Parliament mean it. 
The Act gives us a mere negative power, and no more. It says 
the other Presidencies shall not make war nor treaties without 
the sanction of this government, but carefully guards against 
every expression which can imply a power to dictate what the 
other Presidencies shall do . ..... Instead of uniting all the 
powers of India, all the use we have hitherto made of this Act 
of Parliament has been to tease and embarrass.” 

The third great difficulty experienced during the actual opera¬ 
tion of the Regulating Act, arose from the absence of a precise de¬ 
finition by it of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court to be esta¬ 
blished thereunder, and also of the relationship to subsist between 
the Supreme Court and the Governor-General and Council. This 
difficulty took the form of serious conflicts between the Governor- 
General and Council on the one side and the Supreme Court on the 
other. 50 And it was perhaps inevitable. As James Mill has rightly 
observed by way of a comment on this aspect of the Regulating Act: 

“They (i.e., the British Parliament) saw not, that they 
were establishing two independent and rival powers in India, 
that of the Supreme Council, and that of the Supreme Court; 
they drew no line to mark the boundary between them: and 
they foresaw not the consequences which followed, a series of 
encroachments and disputes which unnerved the powers of 
government and threatened their destruction.” 51 

However, an amending Act was passed by Parliament in the 
year 1781, which removed some of the difficulties arising from the 
Regulating Act. Among other things, the Act of 1781 laid down, 
in the first place, that the Governor-General and Council of Bengal 
were not to be subject, jointly or severally, to the jurisdiction of the 
Supreme Court “for or by reason of any Act or Order, or any other 
matter or thing whatsoever, counselled, ordered, (or) done by them 
in their public capacity only, and acting as Governor-General and 
Council.” 

Secondly, no action for wrong or injury was to lie in the Sup¬ 
reme Court against any person whatsoever exercising a judicial 
office in the country courts, for any judgment, decree, or order of the 


600 



ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)—I 


said Court, or against any person for any act done by or in virtue 
of the order of the said Court. 

Thirdly, the Supreme Court “was not to have or exercise any 
jurisdiction in matters concerning the revenue, or concerning any 
act done in the collection thereof, according to the usage and prac¬ 
tice of the country”, or the regulations framed by the Governor- 
General and Council. 52 

Fourthly, the Act of 1781 declared: 

“And whereas the Governor-General and Council, or some 
Committee thereof or appointed thereby, do determine on ap¬ 
peals and references from the Country or Provincial Courts in 
Civil Causes; be it further enacted that the said Court shall and 
lawfully may hold all such pleas and appeals, in the manner 
and with such powers as it hitherto hath held the same, and 
shall be deemed in Law a Court of Record; and the judgments 
therein given shall be final and conclusive, except upon appeal 
to His Majesty, in civil suits only, the value of which shall be 
five thousand pounds and upwards.” 

The said Court 53 was also declared to be “a Court to hear and 
determine on all offences, abuses, and extortions, committed in the 
collection of revenue, or on severities used beyond what shall ap¬ 
pear to the said Court customary or necessary to the case, and to 
punish the same according to sound discretion, provided the said 
punishment does not extend to death, or maiming, or perpetual 
imprisonment”. 

Judicial and discretionary powers vested in the Governor-Gene¬ 
ral and Council by these provisions are worthy of note. 

Fifthly, the Act of 1781 indemnified the Governor-General and 
Council and the Advocate-General at Fort William as well as all per¬ 
sons acting under their orders, from any action, suit or prosecution 
whatsoever, for or on account of any disobedience to, or resistance 
to the execution of, any process or order of the Supreme Court. 

Finally, this Act empowered the Governor-General and Council 
to frame, from time to time, regulations “for the Provincial Courts 
and Councils”, and directed them to transmit, within six months 
after the making of these regulations, copies thereof to the Court of 
Directors and to a Secretary of State. These regulations ijiight be 
disallowed or amended by His Majesty in Council, and would come 
into “force and authority”, if not disallowed within two years, sub¬ 
ject to such amendments as might be made therein. 

601 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


As Ilbert has observed, the decision of Parliament, as embodied 
in the Act of 1781, was substantially in favour of the Governor- 
General and Council and against the Supreme Court on all points. 54 

Pitt's India Act: 

We shall now pass on to what is popularly known as Pitt’s India 
Act; 1784. This Act introduced some important changes into the 
system of Indian administration. Its object was to provide “for the 
better regulation and management of the affairs of the East India 
Company, and of the British possessions in India; and for establish¬ 
ing a Court of Judicature for the more speedy and effectual trial of 
persons accused of offences committed in the East Indies”. Space 
does not permit us to deal here with the Parliamentary history of 
this measure. 55 It may, however, be noted here that its enactment 
had been preceded by elaborate inquiries by two Parliamentary 
Committees into the affairs of the Company in India, and that the 
reports submitted by these Committees were largely responsible 
for it. 

We may now notice some of the principal provisions of the Act 
of 1784. In the first place, this Act empowered the Crown to ap¬ 
point, for the better government and security of the British terri¬ 
torial possessions in the East Indies, a Board of Commissioners for 
the Affairs of India, not exceeding six in number, as it might think 
fit, who were all to be members of the Privy Council, and of whom 
one of the Principal Secretaries of State and the Chancellor of the 
Exchequer for the time being, were to be two. Any three members 
of the Board would form a quorum “for executing the several 

powers” to be vested in the Commissioners. The Secretary of State, 

* 

or, in his absence, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, or, in the ab¬ 
sence of both of them, the senior of the other Commissioners, “ac¬ 
cording to his rank in seniority of appointment”, was to “preside at, 
and be President” of the Board. In case of an equality of votes at 
any meeting of the Board, the President was to have a second or 
casting vote. The Commissioners were invested by the Act “with 
the superintendence and control over all the British territorial pos¬ 
sessions in the East Indies, and over the affairs of the Company”, as 
shown hereinafter. 

This Board of Commissioners for the Affairs of India was gene¬ 
rally known as the Board of Control, and will be so referred to by 
us hereinafter. 

Secondly, the Act fully empowered the Board “to superintend, 
direct, and control, all acts, operations, and concerns, which in any 


602 


ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1518)—I 


wise relate to the civil or military government or revenues of the 
British territorial possessions in the East Indies”. And, in view of 
this, all the members of the Board were, at all convenient times, to 
“have access to all papers and muniments” of the Company, and to 
be furnished with such extracts or copies thereof as they might re¬ 
quire from time to time. The Court of Directors of the Company 
were “required and directed” by the Act to deliver to the Board of 
Control, “within eight days after the holding of such respective 
courts”, copies of all minutes, orders, resolutions, and other pro¬ 
ceedings of all general and special Courts of Proprietors of the Com¬ 
pany as well as of the Court of Directors itself, so far as they related 
to the civil or military government or revenues of the British terri¬ 
torial possessions in the East Indies. Further, the Court of Directors 
was required to deliver to the Board copies of all dispatches which 
it itself, or any of its Committees, might receive from any of its ser¬ 
vants in the East Indies, immediately after the arrival thereof; and 
also copies of all letters, orders and instructions whatsoever which 
it itself, or any of its Committees, might think of dispatching to any 
of its servants in the East Indies. Moreover, the Court of Directors 
was required by the Act to pay due obedience to, and be “governed 
and bound” by, such orders and directions as it might, from time to 
time, receive from the Board of Control, touching the civil or mili¬ 
tary government and revenues of the British territorial possessions 
in the East Indies. 

Within fourteen days after the receipt of such copies as men¬ 
tioned above, the Board of Control was to return the same to the 
Court of Directors with its approbation thereof, or its reasons at 
large for disapproving the same, together with its instructions in 
respect thereto. And the Court of Directors, thereupon, was to dis¬ 
patch the letters, orders, and instructions so approved or amended, 
to its servants in India without any further delay, unless, on any 
representation made by it, the Board directed any alterations to be 
made therein. But no letters, orders, or instructions were at any 
time to be sent by the Court of Directors to the East Indies, on any 
account or pretence whatsoever, until after such previous communi¬ 
cation thereof to the Board of Control as shown above. 

If, however, the Court of Directors ever neglected to transmit 
to the Board of Control its intended dispatches on any subject with¬ 
in fourteen days after requisition made, then it would be lawful for 
the Board to prepare and send to the Directors any orders or in¬ 
structions concerning the civil or military Government of the Bri¬ 
tish territories and possessions in the East Indies. And the Court 


603 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


of Directors was required to transmit in effect the said orders and 
instructions to the Governments and Presidencies in India concerned, 
unless on any representation made by the Directors to the Board, 
the latter directed any alteration to be made therein. It would be 
permissible, however, for the Court of Directors to apply by peti¬ 
tion, in certain circumstances, to His Majesty in Council, touching 
such orders and instructions. The decision of His Majesty in Coun¬ 
cil on the application would be final and conclusive. 

Thirdly, the Court of Directors was required by the Act to 
appoint, from amongst its own members, a Secret Committee, con¬ 
sisting of not more than three persons. And if, in the opinion of 
the Board of Control, any matter required secrecy, then it would be 
lawful for it to send secret orders and instructions to the Secret Com¬ 
mittee of the Court, which was thereupon required, without dis¬ 
closing the same to any other Director, to transmit the said orders 
and instructions to the Governments and Presidencies in India. 
And these Governments and Presidencies were directed to pay a 
faithful obedience to such orders and instructions, and return their 
answers to the same, to the Secret Committee, which was to com¬ 
municate forthwith such answers to the Board of Control. 

Fourthly, the Board of Control was not to have any power of 
nominating or appointing any of the servants of the Company. The 
power of filling a vacancy in the office of Governor-General, Gov¬ 
ernor, any member of Council, or any Commander-in-Chief was 
vested by the Act in the Court of Directors. It would, however, be 
lawful for the Crown as well as for the Court of Directors to “re¬ 
move or recall” from office any Governor-General, or Governor, or 
Member of Council, or any other person holding any office, civil or 
military, under the Company in India. 

Fifthly, the Government of the Presidency of Fort William in 
Bengal, also referred to in the Act as the Supreme Government, was 
to “consist of a Governor-General and three Supreme Counsellors 
only”, of whom the Commander-in-Chief of the Company’s forces 
in India for the time being, was to be one and to have “voice and 
precedence in Council next after the Governor-General.” 56 And the 
Government of each of the Presidencies of Fort St. George, and 
Bombay was to consist of a Governor or President and three Coun¬ 
sellors only, of whom the Commander-in-Chief of the Presidency 
was to be one, “having the like precedence in Council as in the Pre¬ 
sidency of Fort William in Bengal”, unless the Commander-in- 
Chief of the Company’s forces in India happened to be present in 


604 


ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)—I 

the Presidency; and in that case the latter was to be one of the 
Counsellors, instead of the local Commander-in-Chief who would, 
however, have during such time only a seat, but no voice in the local 
Council. No resignation of the office of Governor-General, Gover¬ 
nor, Commander-in-Chief, or Member of Council in any Presidency 
was to be deemed “legal or valid” unless it was “made by an in¬ 
strument in writing under the hand of the officer or person resigning 
the same”. 

Sixthly, the Governor-General and Council of Fort William 
were empowered “to superintend, control, and direct, the several 
presidencies and governments now or hereafter to be erected or 
established in the East Indies” by the Company, “in all such points 
as relate to any transactions with the country powers, or to war or 
peace, or to the application of the revenues or forces of such presi¬ 
dencies and settlements in time of war, or any such points as shall, 
from time to time, be specially referred by the Court of Directors 
of the said Company to their superintendence and control”. And 
the said presidencies and settlements were bound to obey the “orders 
and directions” of the Governor-General in Council “in all cases 
whatever, except only where” they had received positive instruc¬ 
tions from the Court of Directors, or from the Secret Committee of 
the Court, “repugnant to the orders and instructions” of the Gov¬ 
ernor-General and Council, and not known to the latter at the time 
of dispatching their orders and instructions. Thus the controlling 
authority of the Supreme Government at Fort William over the sub¬ 
ordinate governments of Madras and Bombay was increased and the 
process of centralization of power commenced by the Regulating 
Act of 1773 was carried a step further by the Act of 1784. 

Seventhly, if “any act, order, resolution, matter, or proceeding” 
of the Court of Directors had once received the approval of the 
Board of Control, it could not be revoked or rescinded by the Gene¬ 
ral Court of Proprietors. 

/ 

Eighthly, the Act of 1784 declared that, “whereas to pursue 
schemes of conquest and extension of dominion in India are mea¬ 
sures repugnant to the wish, the honour, and policy of this nation”, 
it would not be lawful for the Governor-General and Council of 
Fort William, “without the express command and authority” of the 
Court of Directors or of Its Secret Committee, “to declare war or 
commence hostilities, or enter into any treaty for making war, 
against any of the country princes or States in India, or any treaty 
for guaranteeing the possessions of any country princes or states”, 


605 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


except where hostilities had actually been commenced, or prepara¬ 
tions actually made for the commencement of hostilities, against the 
British nation in India, or against some of the princes or States de¬ 
pendent thereon, or whose territories the Company had agreed to 
defend or guarantee in accordance with any existing treaty. Simi¬ 
larly, it would not be lawful for th6 Governor and Council of Madras 
ot* Bombay or of any other subordinate settlement to issue any order 
for commencing hostilities or levying war, or to negotiate any treaty 
with any Indian prince or State (except in cases of sudden emer¬ 
gency or imminent danger, when it might appear dangerous to post¬ 
pone such hostilities or treaty), unless in pursuance of express 
orders from the Governor-General and Council, or from the Court 
of Directors, or from its Secret Committee. And every such treaty 
was, if possible, to “contain a clause for subjecting the same to the 
ratification or rejection of the Governor-General and Council”. 
Further, every such Governor and Council were required to pay due 
obedience to all such orders as they blight from time to time receive 
from the Governor-General and Council concerning the above. Any 
Governor and Council who would wilfully refuse to pay due obedi¬ 
ence to such orders and instructions as they might receive from the 
Governor-General and Council were liable to be suspended from 
office by order of the latter. Moreover, Governors and Councils of 
subordinate presidencies were required constantly and diligently to 
transmit to the Governor-General and Council at Fort William ex¬ 
act copies of all their “orders, resolutions, and acts”, and “also 
advice and intelligence of all transactions and matters” which would 
come to their knowledge, or which the Governor-General and Coun¬ 
cil might from time to time require. 

Finally, the Act of 1784 made “elaborate provisions for the pre¬ 
vention ana punishment of corruption, misgovernment or disobedi¬ 
ence’ on the part of the Company’s servants in India. For instance, 
the demanding or receiving of any sum of money, or other valuable 
thing, as a gift or present by any British subject holding any office 
under His Majesty or the Company in the East Indies, was to be 
deemed to be extortion, and to be proceeded against and punished 
as such. The offender was also to forfeit to His Majesty the whole 
gift or present so received, cr the full value thereof. It wds pro¬ 
vided, however, that the Court of Justice before which every such 
offence would be tried, would have full power and authority to 
direct the said present or gift, or the value thereof, to be restored 
to the party who had given the same, or “to order the whole, or any 
part thereof, or of any fine” which the Court might impose on the 


606 


ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)-^1 

offender, to be paid or given to the prosecutor or informer, as the 
Court might think fit. 

The Act was to come into force in Great Britain immediately 
after it had received the royal assent, and in India with effect from 
1 January, 1785. 

We have given above a summary of what appear to us to have 
been the principal provisions of the Act of 1784. It will be evident 
from what we have stated that, except in respect of the power of 
appointment to offices in India and the management of the Com- 
pany’s trade, the Act virtually made the Board of Control the sup¬ 
reme authority in regard to the affairs of the Company in India and 
placed the Company, to quote the words of Ilbert, “in direct and 
permanent subordination to a body representing-the British Gov¬ 
ernment”. 57 This Board of Control which was really to form a part 
of the Ministry in England, was to be the machinery which would 
“enable the Ministry to control the proceedings of the Company”. 58 
As a matter of fact, subject to the superintendence of the Board of 
Control, the Court of Directors “conducted the correspondence with 
the Company’s officers in India”. 59 The Court of Directors exer¬ 
cised, however, the rights of patronage in regard to appointments in 
India. The Board of Control was, as Pitt had intended it to be, 
strictly a Board of Control; 60 it had no power of appointment, nor 
any patronage. The functions of the Board were in practice exer¬ 
cised by its President, 61 who “occupied in the Government (of the 
day) a position corresponding to some extent to that of a modern 
Secretary of State for India”, 62 and would thus always be a member 
of the British Cabinet. 63 So far as the home administration of Indian 
affairs was concerned, this state of things practically continued 
down to 1858. 

Another noticeable feature of the Act of 1784 was its attempt 
to produce, to quote the words of Pitt, “a unity of system” in the 
Indian part of the Company’s administration, “by investing the 
supreme government to be seated in Bengal, with an effectual con¬ 
trol over every other presidency, and by investing the supreme gov¬ 
ernment with executive power”. 64 Particularly, the power of sus¬ 
pension vested in the Bengal Government in relation to other Presi¬ 
dencies gave it a considerable controlling authority over them. It 
is quite true that this controlling authority could not always be 
effectively exercised in actual practice, owing to the difficulties of 
“communication between different capital towns” in those days. 
Nevertheless, its very existence went a long way towards producing 
a unified and a centralized system of Government in this country. 


607 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

We have already referred to an Act of 1786, and also to the 
particular provision thereof, which empowered the Governor-Gene¬ 
ral of Fort William in certain circumstances to override his Coun¬ 
cil and act on his own responsibilityThis “discretionary power 
of acting without the concurrence” of his Council, or of forbearing 
from any action according to its opinion, “in cases of high import¬ 
ance, and specially affecting the public interest and welfare”, was 
conferred upon the Governor-General, with a view to giving 
“energy, vigour and dispatch to the measures and proceedings of the 
Executive Government”. But the practical result of this discre¬ 
tionary authority was, as Chesney has observed, “to render the 
power of the Governor-General supreme”. 66 This Act of 1786 also 
enabled the offices of Governor-General and Commander-in-Chief 
to be united in the same person if this was considered necessary. 67 

Before we conclude this chapter we should like to refer to one 
or two more Acts of Parliament relating to India. None of these 
Acts, however, introduced any institutional change of a really con¬ 
stitutional importance into the administrative system of the Com 
pany in Bengal. Let us take, for instance, what is popularly known 
as the Charter Act of 1793. It was practically a consolidating mea¬ 
sure. Among other things, it provided that the Board of Control to 
which we have referred before, was to consist of “such members of 
the Privy Council (of whom the two Principal Secretaries of State, 
and the Chancellor of the Exchequer were always to be there) and 
such other two persons as the v Crown might think fit to appoint.” 
The first-named Commissioner in the letters patent appointing the 
Board, was to be its President. As before, three members of the 
Board were to form a quorum. And for the first time, provision was 
made for the payment of salaries to the members of the Board. 

This Act also declared that when the office of Governor-General 
and the office of Commander-in-Chief of all the forces in India were 
not combined in the same person, such Commander-in-Chief might 
be a member of the Council at Fort William if he was “specially 
authorized for that purpose” by the Court of Directors, but not 
otherwise. 

An Act of 1797 reduced the number of judges of the Supreme 
Court at Calcutta to three—a Chief Justice and two Puisne Judges. 

What is known as the Charter Act of 1813, the enactment of 
which had as usual been preceded by elaborate Parliamentary in¬ 
quiries into the affairs of the Company in India, provided, among 
other things, for the continuance of the Company, for a further 


608 



ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)—I 

period of twenty years, the enjoyment of its territorial acquisitions 
and revenues, “without prejudice to the undoubted sovereignty of 
the Crown of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland in 
and over the same”. Further, it retained to the Company its mono¬ 
poly of trade with China and also its trade in tea, but threw open 
to all British subjects the rest of the trade with India, subject to 
some conditions. 68 Thirdly, this Act provided for the separation of 
the commercial accounts of the Company from its territorial ac¬ 
counts. 69 Fourthly, it laid down that the appointments to offices of 
Governor-General, Governors, and Commanders-in-Chief were to be 
made by the Company, subject to the approval of the Crown. 
Finally, the Act empowered the Governor-General in Council to 
direct “a sum of not less than one lac of rupees in each year” to 
be “set apart and applied to the revival and improvement of litera¬ 
ture, and the encouragement of the learned natives of India, and 
for the introduction and promotion of a knowledge of the sciences 
among the inhabitants of the British territories in India”. 70 This 
provision of the Act of 1813 is interesting as it represents the first 
attempt on the part of the British Government at imposing an obli¬ 
gation on the Company of fostering education in this country. 


NOTES 

1. The first meeting of the Governor-General and Council under the Regulating 
Act of 1773 (13 Geo. Ill, c. 63) was held at Fort William on 20 October, 1774. 
It may, therefore, be held that the Act came into force on this date. See the 
General Letter to the Court of Directors, dated at Fort William 21 November, 
1774, Para, 2. 

2 The East India Company Act, 1773 (13 Geo. Ill, c. 63). 

3. For a detailed history of the origin of the Presidency of Bengal, see, D. N. 
Banerjee, Early Administrative System of the East India Company in Bengal, 
Vol. I, 17'65-1774, Appendix 4. For further references in this connexion also 
see the same, p. 629n. 

4. It may be noted here that, according to C. R. Wilson ( The Early Annals of 
the English in Bengal, p. 83), the “Commission which made Hedges Governor, 
associated six others with him in the Council of the Bay, Job Chamock, John 
Beard, John Richards, Francis Ellis, Joseph Dodd, and William Johnson”. 

5. Mr. William Hedges appears to have been dismissed from the service of the 
Company. 

g. For the relevant documentary evidence, see D. N. Banerjee, op. cit., pp. 631-32. 

7. With, according to C. R. Wilson (op. cit., p. 157), the following four gentlemen 
as the members of his Council at Calcutta: 

“John Beard, second, and accountant; Nathaniel Halsey, third, and ware¬ 
house-keeper; Jonathan White, fourth and purser marine; (and) Ralph Sheldon, 
fifth, and receiver of revenues”. 

Thus, altogether the Calcutta Council consisted of five members including 
the President and Governor. 

8. For details in this connection, see D. N. Banerjee, op. cit., pp. 104-116 and note. 

9. The history of this name is as follows: There were two English East India 
Companies at the beginning of the eighteenth century: one, incorporated by 
Queen Elizabeth by a Charter, dated 31 December, 1600, was designated “The 
Governor and Company of Merchants of London Trading into the East Indies”; 

609 


M.S.— 89 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


and the other, incorporated on 5 September, 1698, by a Charter of King William 
III, was styled ‘‘The English Company Trading to the East Indies”. They were 
also referred to as the first and the second East India Company; the Old and 
the New Company; and as the London and the English East India Company, 
respectively. These two Companies had become serious rivals to each other 
in their East Indian trade, and this rivalry had naturally been proving disas¬ 
trous to the interests of both. Their rivalry, however, was brought to an end 
in 1702 by an Indenture Tripartite, dated 22 July, 1702, “between Queen Anne 
of the first part; the Old Company of the second part; and the New Company 
of the third part”. This indenture was the first substantial step towards the 
ultimate amalgamation in 1709 of the two Companies into a United Company. 
One of the terms of this indenture was that “in two months after the expira¬ 
tion of seven years from its date, the Old Company would surrender their 
Charters.... intp the Queen’s hand”, and that the Queen would “accept of 
such surrender”. Further, “from thenceforth the New Company” was “to be 
called The United Company of Merchants of England trading to the East Indies 
whose affairs” were to be conducted by its “own sole” Directors, agreeably to 
the provisions of its Charter granted by King William III on 5 September, 1698. 
The indenture also provided for some transitional arrangements for the carry¬ 
ing on of their East Indian trade by the two Companies during the said seven 
years from its date. This is how the name of the United Company of Mer¬ 
chants, etc., originated. 

We may add that by a deed, dated 22 March, 1709, the Old Company sur¬ 
rendered its “Charters, and Corporate Capacity” to Queen Anne, and the Queen 
accepted the surrender on 7 May, 1709, “by patent under her great seal of this 
date;” and that, previously to this, the Old Company had, by a deed, dated 22 
July, 1702, conveyed to the New Company the island of St. Helena as well as 
all its forts, lands, factories and other territorial and other possessions in the 
East Indies (i.e., lying between the Cape of Good Hope and the Straits of 
Magellan), and the Earl of Godolphin, the Lord High Treasurer, had “in pur¬ 
suance of an Act of the sixth year of Queen Anne” (6 Anne, Chap. XVII) 
given, on 29 September, 1708, an award on certain points of dispute still sub¬ 
sisting between the two Companies. Thus the union of the two rival Com¬ 
panies was actually effected in 1709 in accordance with the terms of the Inden¬ 
ture Tripartite previously referred to, and the provisions of the award of the 
Earl of Godolphin. For further details in this connection, see D. N. Banerjee, 
op. cit., pp. 104-06 and note as well as the authorities referred to therein. 

10. Technically speaking, between 1709 and 1774. As shown in the preceding foot¬ 
note, the union of the Old and the New East India Companies was actually 
effected in 1709. During the short period between 1707 and 1709—or rather, 
Between 1702 and 1709, there were some transitional arrangements for the carry¬ 
ing on of their East Indian trade by the two companies. For the purpose of 
this Chapter, we can ignore those arrangements between 1707 and 1709. 

11. See Peter Auber, Analysis of the Constitution of East India Company, 1826, 
p. 182. For further details and references, see D. N. Banerjee, op. cit., pp. 113- 
16 and note. 

12. For further details, see D. N. Banerjee, op. cit.; pp 114-16 and note. 

13. It may be interesting to note here that during the period from 1 February, 

1704, to 20 July, 1710—presumably, pending the arrival at Calcutta of the 
information of the actual union of the Old and-the New East India Companies 
and consequential arrangements thereafter—there were “no less than three 
Councils” functioning at Calcutta. “In the first place”, writes C. R. Wilson, 
“there was the Council for the management of the separate affairs of the Old* 
London Company, at the head of which was John Beard. Then there was the 
Council for the separate affairs of the new English Company, which left Hoogly 
for Calcutta in May, and at the head of which was Sir Edward Littleton. And 
lastly, there was the Establishment Council for the management of all the 
United Company’s affairs in Bengal”. This last body consisted of eight per¬ 
sons, including Mr. Robert Hedges and Mr. Ralph Sheldon: “four members of 
the Old and four members of the New Company’s Service”. “It was presided 
over in alternate weeks by Hedges and Sheldon_ The ‘rotation govern¬ 

ment*, as it was called, came into power on 1 February, 1704. This state 
of affairs came to an end with the assumption, on 20 July, 1710, of the office 
of Governor and President of Fort William by the Hon’ble Antony Weltden, 

610 


ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)—I 


with Mr. Robert Hedges and seven others as members of his Council. Ob¬ 
viously, the new Government had been ordered to be so formed by the United 
Company after the actual union of the Old and the New East India Companies 
in 1709. See C. R. Wilson, op. cit., pp. 161-63, 186-87, 227-28 and 337-38. 

It may also be interesting to note here that in 1757-58 another attempt was 
made by the Court of Directors of the United Company to establish a Rotation 
Government in Bengal. Actually, however, it was not established. See for 
details in this connection, D. N. Banerjee, op. cit., pp. 136-39n. 

14. Such as Cossimbazar, Dacca, Patna, Maldah, Luckeypore, etc. 

15. It appears that a factory of considerable importance would be designated a 
‘subordinate’. 

16 - For a detailed treatment of the position, remuneration and the powers of the 
Governor, see D. N. Banerjee, op. cit., Chapter II. 

17. Vol. I, p. 23 (Ed. 1841). 

18- Thus we find Henry Vansittart, President and Governor of Fort William, writ¬ 
ing to the Court of Directors in 1763: 

The powers of the President, the Select Committee and the Council re¬ 
quire to be settled and better distinguished. I think they might be so-re¬ 
gulated as to check and balance, each other, and render the administration of 
your affairs more steady than it can be at present. In the last disputes I found 
myself, without the least authority beyond and other Members of the Council, 
nor could I prevent or put a negative upon the most unjust and unproper 
Resolution of the majority. I was obliged to be myself the channel for 
conveying those Resolutions to the Nabob (Cossim ‘All Khan), otherwise 
instead of threatening him with a rupture they would immediately have de¬ 
clared a rupture and ordered the Army to march against him so that upon 
the present footing it is in the power of any majority of the Council to engage 
the Company in new wars, whenever a Party shall be inclined to make new 

demands_ Most of the members of the Board (i.e., the Council) have been 

taught by those who were at the head of the party against the late govern¬ 
ment that everyone had a right to equal authority with the President in the 
management of all affairs with the Country Powers, consequently they have 
all formed plans of their own.... and if your Honors do not take effectual 
care to prevent it, you may very soon hear that the present system is voted 
injurious to the Company’s interests or insufficient for the management of the 
Court. 

From Henry Vansittart’s letter to the Court of Directors, dated (pre¬ 
sumably) 8 October, 1763. (For a discussion about the date of this letter, see 
D. N. Banerjee, op. cit., p. 149n.) 

We also find in a letter from Warren Hastings to the Court of Directors, 
dated at Fort William 11 November, 1773: 

The powers of the Governor, although supposed to be great, are, in rea¬ 
lity, little more than those of any individual in his Council. Their compli¬ 
ance, his own abilities, or a superior share of attention and the opinion that 
he possesses extraordinary powers, may give him the effect of them, and an 
ascendant over his Associates in the Administration; but a moment’s considera¬ 
tion is sufficient to discover the nakedness of his authority, and to level him 
with the rest. 

The Fifth Report from the Committee of Secrecy , appointed (by the House 
of Commons) to enquire into the causes of the war in the Carnatic, and of 
the condition of the British Possessions in those parts, printed in the year 
1782, Appendix 5; also Gleig, Memoirs of Warren Hastings, Vol. I, p. 370. 

19. 26 George III, Chap. XVI, Sections VI & XI. 

This special power was “not to be exercised by any Governor-General oi 
Governor or President who would casually succeed to such office as a result 
of death or resignation of any Governor-General, Governor or President, unless 
he was provisionally appointed to succeed to the office by the Court of Directors 
or unless he was confirmed in the office by the said Court . ibid., Section X. 

20. In certain circumstances, even seventeen. See D. N. Banerjee, op. cit, pp. 192 
and note. 

21 And apparently, not by the majority of those present at any meetmg. See 
ibid., p. 149, f.n. 1, and pp. 243-44 and note. 

22. Presumably, dated at Fort William, 10 November, 1764, as the letter occurs m 

611 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


the Proceedings of the Consultation, Secret Department, held at Fort William 
on 10 November, 1764. 

23- (At that time) Jaffer ‘All Khan, i e., Mir Jaffar. 

24. The italics are ours. 

25- For details in regard to these disputes, see D. N. Banerjee, op. cit., pp. 154-69 
and notes. 

26 . The italics are ours. 

27. The italics are ours. 

28. Mr. Roger Drake Junior, the then President of Fort William. 

29. That is, the Council at Fort William. 

30- See Lord Clive’s letter, dated at Calcutta, 23 January, 1767, addressed to Harry 
Verelst Esqr., and Members of the Select Committee, entered in the Proceed- 
ings of the Select Committee, Fort William, of 11 February, 1767. 

31. The italics are ours. 

32. See in this connection D. N. Banerjee, op. cit., pp. 185-91 and note. 

33. For details in this connection see Ibid ., Chapters IH & IV. 

Under an order of the Court of Directors, dated 1 June, 1764, the maximum 
number might even be seventeen for certain purposes. See ibid., pp. 192-93 
and note. 

34. Sir John Malcolm, The Life of Robert, Lord Clive, Vol. Ill, p. 152. 

35- See the Company’s General Letter to the President and Council of Fort William 
in Bengal, dated 12 May, 1758, para 20. 

36. For details, see Banerjee, op. cit., pp. 293-313. 

37 • See the Court’s General Letter to Bengal, dated 10 April, 1771, and its additional 
General Letter to Bengal, dated 25 April, 1771. 

38- For details, see Banerjee, op. cit., Chaps. VII & VIII. 

39- Known as the Phoujdarree Court ‘for the trial of crimes’; the ‘Court of Cut- 
cherry for civil causes’; the ‘Collector’s Court for matters of revenue’; and 
according to some writers, a Caste cutcherry for taking, ‘cognizance of all 
matters relative to the several caste (sic) tribes of the Hindoo religion*. 

40. The East India Company Act, 1773 (13 George, III, C. 63). See Keith, Speeches 
and Documents on Indian Policy (The World’s Classics) Vol. I, pp. 45-60. 

41. Ninth Report from the Select Committee, House of Commons, appointed to 
take into consideration the state of the Administration of Justice, etc., printed 
in the year 1783. 

42. The total number of members of the Court of Directors was twenty-four. 

43- Thus the possession of £ 3,000 stock would entitle a proprietor to two votes; 
that of £ 6,000 stock to three votes; and that of £ 10,000 stock or more to four 
votes. 

44 He had previously been appointed Governor of Bengal with effect from 13 
April, 1772. 

45 That is, Fort Marlborough in Sumatra. 

46. See the General Letter to the Court of Directors, dated at Fort William 21 
November, 1774; also Appendix 44 to the Fifth Report from the Committee of 
Secrecy, appointed to enquire into the causes of the war in the Carnatic, etc., 
printed in the year 1782. 

47 26 George HI, Chap. XVI. 

48 This “discretionary power” of the Governor-General to overrule his Council 
was not however to be exercised in regard to judicial or legislative matters. 

It was only to operate in the executive sphere. See ibid. 

49 See Gleig, Memoirs of Warren Hastings, Vol. II, (1841), pp. 41-42. 

50- For details, see in this connection, among other works, James Mill, History oj 
British India, Vol. IV, Wilson’s Edition, Book V, Chap. VI; also Firminger, 
Historical Introduction to the Fifth Report (1812), Chap. XIII. 

51 See James Mill, op. cit., p. 309. 

52. See Ilbert, The Government of India, 3rd Ed., p. 55; also Peter Auber, Rise 
and Progress of the British Power in India (1837), pp. 588-89; also the Act of 
1781 itself. 

53 That is, The Governor-General in Council. 

54. Ilbert, op. cit., p. 58. 

55. See in this connection James Mill, op. cit., Chap. IX; also Peter Auber, Vol. I 
Chap. XII, and Vol. H, Chap. I. 

56- It may be noted here that the Act of 1786 (26 George III, Chap. XVI), “enabled 


ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)—I 


the offices of Governor-General and Commander-in-Chief to be united in the 
same person.” See Ilbert, op. cit., p. 67. 

57. Ilbert, op. cit., p. 62; also Report of the Committee on the Home Administration 
of Indian Affairs , London (1919), James Mill, op., cit., pp. 559-60 says: 

“Of two bodies, when one has the right of unlimited command, and the 
other is constrained to unlimited obedience, the latter has no power whatso¬ 
ever, but just as much, or as little, as the former is pleased to allow. This is 
the relative position of the Board of Control and the East India Company. 
The powers of the Board of Control convert the Company’s Courts into agents* 
of its will. The real, the sole governing power of India is the Board of Con¬ 
trol, and it only makes use of the Court of Directors as an instrument, as a 
subordinate office, for the management of details, and the preparation of busi¬ 
ness for the cognizance of the superior power”. 

58 See Chesney, Indian Polity, pp. 41-42. 

59 See The Report of the Committee on the Home Administration of Indian Affairs, 
1919. 

60 See Pitt’s speech on the India Bill on July 6, 1784; Mukherji, Indian Consti¬ 
tutional Documents , 1600-1918, Vol. I, p. 53. 

61. The Report of the Committee on the Home Administration of Indian Affairs, 
1919. 

62 See ihid.; also Ilbert, op. cit., p. 66. 

“In point of fact”, writes James Mill, “the whole business of the Board 
of Control rested with the senior member of the Board other than the Secre¬ 
tary of State and the Chancellor of the Exchequer; the other Commissioners 
being seldom called to deliberate, or even for form’s sake to assemble. The 
senior is known by the name of the President of the Board of Control, and is 
essentially a new Secretary of State; a Secretary for the Indian department” 
James Mill, op. cit., p. 558. 

63- Chesney, op. cit., p. 360. 

64. Pitt’s speech on the India Bill on July 6, 1784, P Mukherji, op. cit., p 53. 

65. A similar power was also conferred by the Act of 1786 (26 George III, Chap. 
XVI) upon the Governors of Fort St. George (Madras) and Bombay to over¬ 
ride their respective Councils in certain circumstances. 

66. See Chesney, op. cit., p. 45. 

67. Ilbert, op. cit., p. 67; also Peter Auber, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 13. 

68- Ilbert, op. cit., pp. 75-77; also Auber, op. cit., Vol. II, pp. 488-91. 

69- Ilbert, op. cit., pp. 78-79; also Auber, op. cit., Vol II, pp 488-91 

70 • Ramsay Muir, The Making of British India, pp 296-97 



CHAPTER XVIII 


PART II 

I. The Madras Presidency down to 1818: 

(a) The 17th Century: 

For long, the system of administration in the Company’s Indian 
settlements was a haphazard growth. 1 

The Company’s factors were subject of course to the orders of 
their own immediate chiefs. The factors’ relations with Indians, and 
their disputes with them were adjusted by the tribunals of the Indian 
powers. As among themselves, justice was administered in criminal 
cases by virtue of a King’s Commission under the Great Seal which 
empowered the Commissioners to punish and execute offenders by 
martial law. In civil cases the President or the Chief of the Factory 
had absolute powers. 

All the establishments on the Coromandel Coast, including 
Madras, also for some years, were subject to the factory at Bantam. 
Each Presidency came to be under a President and Council; and in 
course of time the control of the naval authorities was shaken off. 
The authority of the President became supreme; the Council came 
to possess definite functions, and by the close of the 17th century, 
there had grown up the nucleus of the body, that was known under 
British rule as the Indian Civil Service, with the gradations of 
Writers, Factors, Merchants, and Senior Merchants. 2 

In 1641, shortly after its foundation, the seat of the Agency was 
transferred from Masulipatam to Madras. Andrew Cogan, the first 
Agent, was succeeded by Francis Day, the real founder of the settle¬ 
ment; and both took a good share in the erection of the Fort and the 
colonization of the place. 

The civil establishments slowly increased in importance; and the 
Agency began to exercise real control over the other coast factories 
and the small Bengal establishments then recently started. The first 
direct communication between Madras and the Company at home 
was despatched in 1642-43, “in which the Agent and the Council ac- 


614 


ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)—II 


quainted the Court of Directors with the absolute necessity of giving 
a due equipment to the Fort”. In 1658 all the factories on the 
Coromandel Coast and in Bengal were made subordinate to Fort St. 
George. 

The Governor or Agent was the First Member of the Council, 
the Book-Keeper was the second, and the Ware-house Keeper and 
the Customer were the other two members. The duties of the Cus¬ 
tomer were to receive customs, rents and other taxes; he also ex¬ 
ercised magisterial functions. “His office has been continued un¬ 
interruptedly to the present day, remaining now under the designa¬ 
tion of the Collectorate of Madras and the Sea Customs.” The 
Council, consisting of four members, passed orders on all matters 
concerning the factories and,the servants of the Company. The 
Secretary kept a diary of the proceedings and consultations; and a 
copy of it was sent to the Company each year, “together with a gene¬ 
ral letter reviewing the proceedings; while in reply a general letter 
was received each year from the Court of Directors”. The Collector 
of Customs, as Magistrate in the Black Town, sat alone. Europeans 
were tried by the Governor and Council in the Fort with a jury of 
12 Europeans. In the White Town, the public peace was maintain¬ 
ed by the Agent (Governor) as Commander of the garrison. In the 
Black Town it was kept by an Indian public officer known as pedda 
Naik. 

In 1661 Sir Edward Winter, a member of the then triumphant 
Cavalier Party, was appointed Governor. He quarrelled with his 
Council and alienated the Indian powers. In 1665 he was super¬ 
seded and made second in Council, while one Mr. George Foxcroft, 
a London merchant, was made Governor. Winter resolved on the 
bold expedient of usurping the Governorship. He alleged that the 
language of the new Governor was treasonable to the English Crown, 
and with the aid of the Commander of the garrison and other friends, 
he arrested and imprisoned Foxcroft, and himself assumed the Gov¬ 
ernorship. However, Foxcroft was soon restored to the governor¬ 
ship and Sir Edward Winter retired. 

The Directors were long, unaware of the revolution at Madras. 
They even sent Foxcroft in 1666 a fresh commission constituting him 
Governor (with the King’s special authority) with power to try 
persons charged with capital offences. 3 Foxcroft was the first Agent 
to be created Governor of Fort St. George, a title which was trans¬ 
mitted to a long line of distinguished successors. 


615 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Governor Streynsham Master (1678-81) framed regulations for 
the proper administration of justice. He reorganised the Choultry 
Court, which had been long held at the Choultry , or Town House, 
where justice was administered to the Indian inhabitants by persons, 
either Indian or European, appointed by the Governor, who were to 
try causes and register bills of sale of land and other property. 

Master also established a Superior Court for the trial, by jury, 
of civil and criminal offences by virtue of the powers granted by the 
Charter of 1661. According to his scheme, the Governor and Coun¬ 
cil were to sit for the trial of causes according to English laws. This 
court was not intended to supersede the Justices of the Choultry, 
who were to continue to decide all small misdemeanours, breaches 
of peace and civil actions for debt not exceeding 50 pagodas. This 
court was superseded in 1684 by an Admiralty Court presided over 
by a Judge-Advocate from England. 

By the Charter of 1683 the Company were given full power to 
declare and make war and peace with native powers, to raise and 
keep military forces and to exercise martial law in their jurisdic¬ 
tion. The same Charter established a court of judicature to hear 
and determine all maritime cases, including injuries and wrongs 
done on the high seas, “according to the rules of equity and good 
conscience, and according to the laws and customs of merchants .” 4 
The Court of Admiralty was established in 1686, its judge and his 
two assistants being Members of Council and civil servants of the 
company. Later a Judge-Advocate was appointed from England, 
made Third in Council and was to preside at the Quarter Sessions. 
Courts-martial were also proclaimed under the authority of the char¬ 
ter. The Governor usually presided at the trial of pirates; but occa¬ 
sionally the Judge-Advocate sat for such trials. 

James II delegated to the East India Company the power of 
establishing, by charter, a Municipality at Madras, and this charter 
was issued by the Company under their own seal, under the autho¬ 
rity of the charters of 1661 and 1683 of Charles II and that of 1686 of 
James II. According to this charter, a Municipality and Mayor’s 
Court were established at Madras. 

The Municipality was to consist of a Mayor, 12 Aldermen and 
60 or more Burgesses. The Mayor was to hold office for a year, the 
Aldermen for their lives or during their residence in Madras. The 
charter further nominated 29 free merchants as Burgesses. The new 


616 


ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)—II 

Mayor was to be elected from the Aldermen annually; vacancies 
among the Aldermen were to be filled up by election from among 
the burgesses; and three of them were always to be covenanted ser¬ 
vants. The Mayor and Aldermen were empowered to levy taxes 
for the building of a town-hall, a public gaol and a convenient school 
house, where native children might be taught to speak, read, and 
write the English tongue, as well as arithmetic and accounting. 
They were also empowered to build sewers and to regulate the pav¬ 
ing of streets and lanes. After the establishment of the Corporation, 
directions were given to increase the quit-rents and to impose a duty 
on licenses of public houses. 

The Mayor’s Court was to have a Recorder, being an English- 
born covenanted servant of the Company. According to the charter, 
there was a right of appeal from the Mayor’s Court to the Court of 
Admiralty. On account of quarrels with the Mayor’s Court, the 
Government resolved to erect a new court of judicature. The Choul¬ 
try Justices continued all this time; they were magistrates, and the 
senior among them was called the Chief Justice. The Aldermen of the 
Corporation sat as Justices at the Choultry. However* Government 
soon resolved to erect a new court of judicature consisting of a Judge- 
Advocate and four Judges. The Governor was to act as Judge-Advo¬ 
cate pending an appointment from England. The Judges were to 
include among others an Armenian merchant and the Company’s 
Chief Merchant. 

In 1692, the Supreme Court of Judicature was revived and the 
Company sent out a new Judge-Advocate from England. It inflicted 
sentences of death, whipping, pillory, etc. After some time the 
Judge-Advocate was removed from office and his place was ordered 
to be filled by the Members of Council in succession. In 1698 Gov¬ 
ernor Thomas Pitt was directed to frame a table of fees to prevent 
extortion by the law courts; and the Governor and his Council 
superseded the Court of Admiralty as a Court of Appeal. The sale 
and purchase of slaves for domestic purposes were recognised but had 
to be registered at the Choultry Court. The stealing of children 
was strongly condemned and the export of slaves was absolutely 
prohibited in 1683, though it was allowed later under certain condi¬ 
tions. 

(b) The 18th Century: 

In the time of Governor Macrae (1725-30) the Mayor’s Court 
was reorganized by virtue of a royal charter, granted in 1726, for 


617 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


establishing or reconstituting municipalities at Madras, Bombay, and 
Calcutta and setting up or remodelling Mayor’s and other Courts 
in each of these Presidencies. The Mayor and the Aldermen were 
to constitute a Mayor’s Court with civil jurisdiction, subject to an 
appeal to the Governor, or President in Council and a further appeal 
in more important cases to the King in Council. The Mayor’s Court 
now also gave probate and exercised testamentary jurisdiction. The 
Governor, or President and the five senior members of the Council 
were to be Justices of the Peace and were to hold quarter-sessions 
four times in the year with jurisdiction over all offences except high 
treason. At the same time, the Company were authorised, as in pre¬ 
vious charters, to ‘appoint generals and other military officers with 
power to exercise the inhabitants in arms, to repel force by force 
and to exercise martial law in times of war.’ The President and 
Council were also to be a Court of Appeal from the jurisdiction of 
the Mayor’s Court; while a Court by Requests or a Court of Con¬ 
science was instituted for the decision by summary procedure of 
pecuniary questions of inconsiderable amount. 

In 1727, soon after the reorganisation of the Mayor’s Court, the 
President and five Senior Councillors constituted themselves into a 

j 

Court of Appeal and a Court of Oyer and Terminer and Gaol Deli¬ 
very; while the five Justices of the Peace appointed by the royal 
charter were also appointed Justices/of the Choultry to decide small 
debts not exceeding twenty pagodas. It was found inconvenient 
that the Justices of the Choultry who were also members of the 
Superior Court should appeal to the Mayor’s Court; and so the 
Sheriff constituted a court (Consultation of November 27, 1727) to 
decide all petty cases without appeal as far as five pagodas and fur¬ 
ther up to a limit of twenty pagodas, allowing the parties the liberty 
of appealing to the Mayor’s Court. The register of slaves was to be 
kept by the Sheriff in the place of the Justices of the Choultry , as 
well as the register of sales and mortgages of houses. The Justices 
of the Peace were to take cognizance of all petty breaches of the 
peace, larceny, etc; for lesser faults they were to inflict corporal 
punishments, and for the others they were to bind over the accused 
to the sessions or to the Choultry , The Register’s fees at the Mayor’s 
Court were also published. 

Owing to the French capture and occupation of Madras (1746- 
49) the continuity of the Municipal Corporation and the Mayor’s 
Court was destroyed and the charter of 1726 was surrendered. A 
fresh charter was issued in 1753 which exempted from the jurisdic¬ 
tion of the Mayor’s Court all suits and actions between ‘Indian 


618 


ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)—II 


Natives only’ and directed that all these suits were to be determin¬ 
ed among themselves only, unless both parties agreed to submit 
them to the Mayor’s Court. This new charter (issued in January 
1753) provided for the revival of the Mayor and the Aldermen; 
seven out of the nine Aldermen were to be natural born subjects of 
the King and only two could be foreign Protestants. The Aldermen 
were to continue in office for life; and from among them two were 
to be elected annually by the Corporation one of whom was to be 
chosen as the Mayor by the Governor-in-Council. The Mayor and 
Aldermen were to form a Court of Record for civil suits, not being 
between natives, and arising in Madras and its subordinate factories. 
Appeals up to 1,000 pagodas were to lie to the President and Coun¬ 
cil and in judgments for larger sums an appeal might be made to the 
King-in-Council. There was to be a Court of Requests for the deci¬ 
sion of petty civil suits summarily by Commissioners appointed by 
Government. The President and Members of Council were to be the 
Justices of the Peace for Madras and the subordinate factories, to 
hold quarter-sessions and Oyer and Terminer and General Gaol Deli¬ 
very and to be a court of record dealing with all offences excepting 
high treason. The mode of trial was to follow the English practice 
and the Sheriff was to summon persons to serve as grand and petty 
juries. 

Thus the earliest Madras courts worked under the authority of 
the charters of Charles II and the earlier charters which might be 
construed as giving judicial powers. Up till 1678 the arrangements 
in Madras for the administration of justice can be gleaned from the 
rules and regulations framed by Governor Master and his Council 
in January 1678. The first Supreme Court was established in 1678 
(March) in the person of the Governor and Council, sitting to hear 
causes, but not superseding the Justices of the Choultry who still 
decided on small misdemeanours and actions for debt. An Admi¬ 
ralty Court with a Judge-Advocate from England was established by 
virtue of the charter of 1683 and by the Directors’ despatch of 
January 7, 1687. This is the forerunner of the present High Court. 
The first Mayor’s Court was established in the same year with an 
appeal to the Court of Admiralty. A Recorder was also appointed 
to be an assistant to the Mayor. The Admiralty Court was soon 
afterwards superseded, on account of some reasons, by the Gover¬ 
nor and Council functioning as a court of appeal from the Mayor’s 
Court. The new Mayor’s Court created by the charter of 1726 was 
a court of record from which an appeal lay to the Governor and 
Council who were constituted Justices of the Peace and a Court of 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Oyer, Terminer, and Gaol Delivery. The Court of Directors sent 
out, with the charter of 1726, a book of instructions with respect to 
the method of proceeding in all actions and suits, civil and criminal, 
and also the forms of the oaths to be taken. It is noteworthy that 
this book of instructions laid down probably the rule that by the 
charter of 1726 all Common and Statute Law at that time extant in 
England was introduced into the Indian Presidencies and that all 
the Parliamentary enactments passed since that period were exclud¬ 
ed unless their Extension to India was specially declared. The char¬ 
ter of 1753 recreated the Mayor’s Court, with some not very mate¬ 
rial alterations, but excluding suits between Indians, unless enter¬ 
tained with their consent. The jurisdiction of the Government 
courts in criminal matters was also limited to offences committed 
within the Presidency and the factories subordinate thereto. Later 
the arrangements made by Warren Hastings and known as the 
Addlat Scheme were applied to the Madras territories, viz., the 
Jagtr District round Madras acquired in 1765, in the Northern Sar- 
kars acquired in 1766 and in the Guntur Sarkar acquired in 1778. 
The Mayor’s Court retained all its jurisdiction, till it was supersed¬ 
ed by the Recorder’s Court established in 1797, consisting of the 
Mayor, three Aldermen and a Recorder and having jurisdiction in 
civil, criminal, ecclesiastical and admiralty cases. Their jurisdiction 
was transferred to the Supreme Court established in 1801 by Letters 
Patent. Both the Recorder’s Court and the Supreme Court could 
establish rules or practice and hold Oyer, Terminer and Gaol Deli¬ 
veries; and their jurisdiction was subjected to the same restrictions 
as the Supreme Court of Bengal. An appeal lay from their decisions 
to the King-in-Council. 5 

Municipal functioning proper was given to Madras only by an 
Act of Parliament of 1792 which empowered the Justice of the Peace 
in the Presidency Towns, assembled in their quarter-sessions to 
arrange for the care of the streets and to assess the owners or occu¬ 
piers of houses at 5 per cent of their gross annual value. The Act 
also provided for the collection of the assessment and the licensing 
of the sale of spirituous liquors. “This is the commencement of the 
Madras Municipality as such” 

In the Government itself power was long vested in the majo¬ 
rity of the Council. From the time of Foxcroft, the Council, which 
was nebulous till then, came to be definite in shape; and met with 
considerable regularity. The Governor had, as the commander of 
the garrison, certain ill-defined separate powers. The Council usual¬ 
ly consisted of five or six members at first. The Governor was Trea- 


620 


ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)—II 

surer; the second was Accountant and the other members managed 
the import and export warehouses, the customs and the mint. The 
youngest member of the Council was the Scavenger who collected 
rates and not dirt. The Council, till the establishment of the Re¬ 
corder’s Court in 1797, functioned as an appellate tribunal for both 
civil and criminal justice. French wars and political complications 
which increased from about 1775, led to the increase of the number 
of the Councillors to ten which was the limit in the second Gover¬ 
norship of Pigot. A Select Committee was created within the Coun¬ 
cil to deal with military and political matters and to ensure secrecy. 
The first Select Committee was formed in 1752. A second was ap¬ 
pointed by the Directors in 1754, with greater powers; and it lasted 
till 1758. There was a third Select Committee to deal with the First 
Mysore War and the Nawab’s debts, which lasted till 1775. A fourth 
Committee was created in 1778 to deal with all military, political, 
naval, and secret affairs. 

It was only in 1785 that the situation was really understood and 
Government was reduced to the President and three Members of 
Council. In 1786 boards were formed under Government, like the 
Board of Revenue, the Military Board, the Board of Trade, the Hos¬ 
pital Board and the Marine Board, which managed the various de¬ 
partments and were the channels of communication for the orders of 
Government; and the Members of Council ceased to be direct ad¬ 
ministrative officers. 

From December 1750 matters of a secret nature, whether mili¬ 
tary or political, were separated from the rest, under the title of 
“Extraordinary Occurrences and Consultations”. From September 
1754 the transactions with the country powers were carried on by 
a Committee 6 composed of the Governor and four Members of his 
Council. There were occasional consultations of the whole Council 
on matters of special importance. 

In 1778 they appointed a fresh Select Committee consisting of 
the Governor, Commander-in-Chief and two members. This con¬ 
tinued till 12 February 1785, when the new form of government 
prescribed by the Act of 1784 came into force. 

In 1786 the Directors ordered a Military Board, a Board of Re¬ 
venue, and a Board of Trade to be established, and in 1800 a Marine 
Board was started. As early as 1774 we find the revenue consulta¬ 
tions being separated from the others, and there was a Committee 
of Assigned Revenue for the collection of all the Nawab’s revenues. 
This continued till 1790, when the Board of Revenue was directed 
also to act as the Board of Assigned Revenue. 


621 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 
II. The Districts: 

In the eighteenth century complete anarchy prevailed in the 
land and the condition of the people was miserable, marked by in¬ 
security of property, obstructions to trade, heavy taxation, uncer¬ 
tainty in the value of the currency and by distressing poverty among 
the agricultural classes. The wars of the Mughul captains in the 
earlier decades of the eighteenth century, the struggles that ensued 
consequent on the frequent inroads of the Marathas, the disputed 
successions to the thrones of Hyderabad and Arcot, the bitter wars 
between the English and the French, and the subsequent English 
operations in Tamil Nadu and elsewhere, had so devastated the land 
and demoralised the people, that in the words of the Fifth Report , 
“the system of internal management had become completely disorga¬ 
nised, and not only the forms, but even the remembrance of civil 
authority, seem to have been wholly lost.” 7 

The jdgir or Chingleput district was twice ravaged by Haidar 
‘All* once in 1768 and again in 1780. The English had obtained it 
from the Nawab by grants of the years 1750 and 1763 and rented 
to him largely on annual leases till about 1780 when the Presidency 
took over its management. 

During the time that the district was rented by the Nawab, a 
survey was made of it by Mr. Barnard in 1776 based on the state¬ 
ment of the kamams (village accountants) and the principal in¬ 
habitants. When it was assumed by the Company’s Government, 
the district was placed under the Committee of Assigned Revenue, 
which Jet out the land in 1783 in fourteen large farms on leases of 
nine years at progressive rents. A Resident Officer was appointed 
in the next year to see to the several stipulations of the kawls 
being carried out. In 1788, shortly after the district was placed 
under the sole charge of a Superintendent, it was formed into two 
divisions, each under a Collector. In the next year, an Additional 
Collector was appointed; and the office of the Superintendent was 
abolished. 

r 

The settlements made in 1789 yielded a considerable increase 
in the revenue for the years 1791-92. In 1793 assistants were ap¬ 
pointed to the Collectors; and in the succeeding year the country 
was put under the management of the famous Mr. Lionel Place. 8 

The cultivators were thrown a great deal into contact with the 
dubashes or Indian agents of the European officers and merchants 
who bought up the lands for almost nothing, leaving the former 


622 


ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)—II 

owners as cultivators. They found means to introduce their own 
amildars into the management of the country and fomented quarrels 
between the cultivators and the Company’s renters. 

Mr. Place introduced a settlement on the basis of village rents 
and of the produce. The parties who entered into the engagements 
were the principal holders of land in the village jointly. 9 

The District of Nellore was acquired from the Nawab of the 
Karnatak by the Treaty of July 1801. It did not seem to have suf¬ 
fered much in comparison with the rest of the region in the wars 
of the eighteenth century. 

The great mass of the people were small cultivators, who were 
oppressively fleeced by the renters of the Nawab; many of the head 
inhabitants of the villages were themselves sub-renters and addi¬ 
tional extortioners. The chief outlet for trade was by the sea from 
which grain, tobacco and some cloth were exported while cattle 
were sent out in some quantity, chiefly to Hyderabad. The cloth 
trade was insignificant and declined perceptibly after 1800. The 
grain trade was principally with the southern districts, and was 
carried on by sea in small country craft. Land transport was main¬ 
ly by means of pack-animals, chiefly bullocks. In addition to the 
heavy charges of transport, there were oppressive customs and tolls. 

The incidence of land-rent in the early years of British rule 
pressed heavily on the cultivators and was positively oppressive in 
lean years. About one-half of the estimated produce was demand¬ 
ed by the state as its revenue under the new system. 

The Northern Sarkars comprehended Ganjam, Vizagapatam, 
Godavari and Guntur (acquired from the Nizam in 1766, as Chica- 
cole, Rajahmundry, Ellore and Mustafanagar and Murtizanagar Sar¬ 
kars); Krishna had been acquired in 1793 (as Masulipatam Sarkar ); 
and Palnad from the Nawab of the Karnatak in 1801. 

At first the Nizam’s officials who were in charge of these Sar¬ 
kars were continued; but in 1769 they were placed under the charge 
of Provincial Chiefs and Councils into which the Company’s com¬ 
mercial factories were then converted. 

This system of administration continued until 1794. In 1775 
a Committee of Circuit composed of five members of the Madras 
Council was appointed to inquire into the condition of the Sarkars 
and was revived after a first abolition. This Committee issued re¬ 
ports from time to time. Mr. James Grant, a Senior Merchant of 

623 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Bengal, while residing at Hyderabad, had access to valuable public 
records and issued his famous Survey 10 which threw much light on 
the revenue economy of the land and was published as an appendix 
to the Fifth Report . 

The English Government first imposed on the zaminddrs the 
character of tributary chiefs, the fallacy of which soon became ob¬ 
vious. Their practice was at first to allow the zemindars to appro¬ 
priate the revenues of their charges for their own use on condition 
of their paying the stipulated jumma. They collected the revenue 
either in kind or money, and generally by farming it out to persons 
on annual or longer leases. 

The village communities retained their old organization of the 
pdtel, the karnam who kept the registers and accounts of cultiva¬ 
tion, the boundary man who preserved the limits of the village and 
gave evidence in cases of dispute, the taliar and the totee and the 
superintendent of tanks and water-courses. In many cases the 
zaminddrs had usurped the judicial powers that were formerly 
exercised by the amalddrs and faujddrs. The duties of the police 
were generally performed by the revenue servants and the military 
peons of the zaminddrs and the renters’ peons and servants. The 
towns had a distinct establishment of kotwals and peons; but these 
were merely local and not connected with the general police of the 
country. 

The Ceded Districts: 

This region comprised all the territories acquired by the British 
Government in 1800 by treaty with the Nizam and situated south 
of the Krishna and the Tungabhadra rivers. The districts are so call¬ 
ed because they were ceded to the Company by the Nizam in 1800. 
Sir Thomas (then Major) Munro was their first and their most 
famous Principal Collector. He held immediate charge of the taluks 
which now constitute the Anantapur district and of the Rayadurg 
taluk of Bellary district and the rest of the territory was divided into 
the two Collectorates of Bellary and Cuddapah. 

It was computed by Munro that, in 1800, there were scattered 
throughout the area, exclusively of the Nizam’s troops, about 30,000 
armed peons all of whom were under the command of about eighty 
palegars, subsisting normally by rapine and committing everywhere 
great excesses. 

The palegars with whom the country abounded, had greatly 
intensified the effects of war, famine and bad management. The 


624 


ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)—II 

indolence and corruption of the.Nizam’s officers had led them to 
abandon the collection of revenue to the pdlegars and the village 
patels. Almost every village was a garrison, the inhabitants of 
which turned out and fought a pitched battle with their neighbours 
as well as with the peons of the pdlegars. 11 

The Bellary district gave less trouble than Cuddapah though it 
was disturbed during the Pindari campaign of 1818. The district of 
Anantapur gave less trouble than the rest of the Ceded Districts. 

Munro made for the year 1800-01 a settlement, mozawar, for 
each village as a whole and held the headmen severally responsible 
for the assessment of their own villages and jointly for the whole 
of the district. In the next year 1801-02 (jjasli 1211) he introduced 
the kulwdri or ryotwari settlement which was in theory regulated 
by the quality of the land and the value ( according to the prices 
prevailing over a series of years) of the supposed net produce, of 
which last it purported to take 45 per cent. 

Munro’s survey and settlement of the whole of the Ceded Dis¬ 
tricts were finished in the years 1802-05. In 1804 a desire was ex¬ 
pressed by Government to revert from the ryotwari to a permanent 
settlement, in which each village was to be rented out as a whole 
for three years for a fixed sum to zaminddrs and proprietors or, fail¬ 
ing them, to the headmen; and the renter was alone to be respon¬ 
sible for the payment of fixed rent. Munro condemned the proposal, 
and declared that a direct settlement with the cultivators was more 
suited to them, more likely to reclaim the people from their wander¬ 
ing habits and fix them to their fields and would also afford greater 
security to the revenue and raise more produce than the system of 
great estates would do. In 1807, he reiterated his conviction in 
favour of the ryotwari settlement; and he fully set out his views as 
to the modifications in his own system that he deemed necessary. 12 

Malabar: 

In Malabar which was acquired by treaty in 1792, even under 
Haidar the quarrels between the different rajas and the turbulent 
spirit of the Nair chiefs, greatly obstructed for long the introduction 
of order and settled government. 

The district was formally ceded to the British by the Treaty of 
Seringapatam and was first administered by a Commission on be¬ 
half of the Bombay Government. In 1800 the Commission was abo¬ 
lished, and the territory was transferred to the Madras Presidency. 
The situation in 1792 was very depressing. South Malabar was in 

625 


M.S.—40 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

a condition bordering on anarchy. The Joint Commissioners work¬ 
ed with untiring industry, proclaimed freedom of trade in all articles 
of merchandise except pepper, established courts of inquiry and 
justice presided over by themselves in rotation and declared a gene¬ 
ral amnesty. But their mistaken revenue policy, adopted under the 
orders of the Governments of India and Bombay, retarded for years 
the pacification of the district and culminated ultimately in the fierce 
blaze of the Pychy rebellion. 

The two Pychy rebellions (of 1797 and of 1800-05) were render¬ 
ed worse by the attempt of Major Macleod to disarm the district in 
1802 and to enhance the land assessments. 

Early English authorities like Mr. Farmer, one of the first Com¬ 
missioners, and Dr. F. Buchanan, stressed upon the jenamkars (free¬ 
holders) who held their lands either by purchase or by hereditary 
descent and the komamkars or mortgagees, “to whom the land had 
been pledged in security for the interest of money advanced to the 
jenamkar, which advance is the kanam that is ever incumbent on 
land until it be redeemed.” 

The peculiarity of the kanam of Malabar mortgage is that it is 
never foreclosed; the quantum of money lent characterised the diffe¬ 
rent gradations of the kanam tenure. Dr. F. Buchanan mentions 
another tenure, the Virpattam, in which the tenant deducted from 
the gross produce the quantity of seed sown and an equal quantity 
which was the whole granted them for their stock and trouble. 

Tanjore and the Karnatak: 

Tanjore was annexed in 1799 and the Karnatak was absorbed 
in 1801. In many parts of these regions the ryotwdri system /Was 
found applicable, while in Tanjore the village organisation was simi¬ 
lar in many respects to that prevailing in Chingleput. The village 
system allowed and even encouraged oppression of the people by the 
superior landholders. The Board of Revenue, therefore, preferred 
the ryotwdri system and prepared surveys for most of these districts. 
Collectors, many of whom were trained in the school of A. Read 
and Munro, who were the real parents of the ryotwdri system, were 
clever in adapting the system to the requirements of their several 
districts. Annual settlements had everywhere to be resorted to. 
Abuses were generally guarded against, because the collectors were 
in touch with the villages and their reports to the Board of Re¬ 
venue were useful reservoirs of experience, precedents and varie¬ 
gated data. 


626 


ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)—II 

In the Baramahal acquired in 1792 the ties binding the villagers 
were thin and joint action was not developed. Here Captain A. 
Read, the father of the ryotwdri system, dispensed with all middle¬ 
men and renters, and dealt directly with the individual cultivators; 
and he made a detailed fieldwise survey and promised the indivi¬ 
dual cultivators a fixed, unchanging assessment; but the level of his 
assessment proved too high for effective improvement and impos¬ 
sible of collection in bad seasons. His assessment, moreover, did not 
give the cultivator freedom to relinquish the land he did not want. 
The defects of the system were perceived by Munro, then one of 
Read’s assistants, who made his mark as a revenue administrator 
under Read, and came to be convinced, during his Collectorship of 
Kanara (1799-1800), that the ryotwdri system was indigenous to 
South India and best suited to the needs of the people. Munro ap¬ 
plied the principles of ryotwdri more thoroughly in the Ceded Dis¬ 
tricts, to the charge of which he was transferred in 1800, soon after 
their acquisition. The seven years of his stay in those districts for 
whose improvement and security he laboured very hard, made him 
completely a champion of ryotwdri. He came to think that not only 
yearly settlements were the best but the ryots must be further free 
to choose for themselves and must not be bound to hold for a second 
year what they did not want and found it better not to keep. 

But by Regulation XXV of 1802 the Madras Government 
declared for a zaminddri settlement and attempted to create a class 
of zaminddrs in Salem, for whom a permanent peshkush was to 
be fixed. 

But the result was not commensurate with the expectation, as by 
1821 the revenue fell to less than half of what it was in 1806. Many 
of the estates were attached by Government for arrears. The failure 
of this mitta (estate) system was due to the high original assessment 
of Read, of which Munro had all along been complaining, to the un¬ 
willingness of the new landlords to invest capital in the improvement 
of their estates, to the difficulty of dealing with the ryot, to the power 
of dividing the estates possessed by their holders which acted both 
ways—‘accelerating the return of some of the country to the ryot- 
yydri system and elsewhere establishing more firmly the new land¬ 
lords’—and to the harsh rules of collection which were introduced 
by Regulation XXVIII of 1802 and which placed all the machinery 
of the courts at the disposal of the zaminddr. In Kanara, as noted 
above, of which Munro was Collector for some time, the indigenous 
land revenue system was even more ryotwdri and under his reforms 
it gave good results. 


627 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Under the pressure of the Bengal Government a special Com¬ 
mission was appointed in 1802 which in the course of the years 1802- 
04, effected or tried to effect a permanent settlement in the Northern 
Sarkars, in the Jdgir District, in Baramahal and in Dindigul. 13 

The Pdlayams: 

A list of the Palayams in the Karnatak with the amounts of 
their tribute or peshkush is given as they stood in the Fifth Article 
of the treaty of 12 July, 1792 concluded by the British with the 
Nawab. Colonel Fullarton has given an account of the palegars of 
Tinnevelly in Letter 2 of his book A View of the English Interests 
in India, which is a compte rendue, to the Select Committee of Fort 
St. George and contains an accurate, though harrowing, picture of 
the land. The pdlegar chiefs could, at that time, bring 30,000 men 
into the field. 

After the Company took up the management of the Karnatak, 
the Directors elaborated, in a Despatch of 1795, the rights acquired 
by the Madras Government to reform the administration of the pdle¬ 
gar territories. This was further supplemented by a Report of the 
Board of Revenue made in 1797 and by a Minute of Lord Hobart— 
(Governor 1794-98). Again, the Directors in their Despatch of 5 
June, 1799, insisted on “the absolute suppression of the military 
power of the palegars and on the substitution of a pecuniary tribute, 
more in proportion than the ordinary peshkush to the revenues of 
their pdlayams, and more adequate to the public demands for defray¬ 
ing the expenses of general protection and government.” 

The so-called Palegar War of 1799-1801 was marked by a re¬ 
crudescence of anarchy and followed by their final suppression. 
Government, by a proclamation of 1 December, 1801, suppressed the 
use of all weapons of defence and promised a general amnesty and 
a permanent assessment on the principles of zamiiiddri tenure. This 
proclamation followed soon after the assumption of the Karnatak by 
the British* and insisted on the surrender by all the inhabitants of 
the districts of Dindigul, Tinnevelly, Ramnad, Sivaganga and 
Madura of all arms into the hands of the British military officers, 
and it also gave amnesty to all except a few most guilty persons. 
It was like the emergence of light after the darkest hour of pre¬ 
dawn. 

In all the ryotwdri areas, the functions of criminal and civil 
justice were performed by the Collector and his assistants. But 
in all those regions under the sway of the palegars, especially in the 


628 


ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)—II 

Madura and Tinnevelly regions, the peons of these chiefs exercised 
police duties, not only in their own villages but also presumed to 
protect the property of the inhabitants and travellers in the neigh¬ 
bouring Sarkar villages and roads. The village fees known as stalam 
or kudi kdval were of a much older creation than the pdlegars them¬ 
selves, and being coeval with the villages themselves. The Desha- 
kaval (or Disaikaval ) or district watching fees originated either 
from a grant of the ruler or from the voluntary action of 'the vil¬ 
lagers who were unable to protect themselves and submitted to such 
contributions. It was through claiming kdval fees that the pdlegars 
rapidly extended their power and jurisdiction. Mr. Lushington re¬ 
ported that he found in the districts of Tinnevelly in 1799, the kdval 
of 1,635 villages out of 2,113 villages were in the hands of the pdle¬ 
gars and their men. When the latter found that they could not ap¬ 
point their own followers to the kdval of a village, they enforced an 
annual contribution on the villagers as the price of their forbearing 
to plunder them. These fees were violently and arbitrarily increas¬ 
ed, particularly in the years 1740-46 and by 1799 they had risen to 
ten-fold their original level. 14 

It has been conceded that the zaminddrs and pdlegars easily 
acquiesced in the loss of their military power and were benefited by 
the permanent zaminddri settlement. But the scheme for creating 
new estates ( mittas ) as in Salem, failed miserably. Meanwhile opi¬ 
nion veered round from the zaminddri} to an appreciation of the in¬ 
digenous rydtwdri system. The Directors and Lord William Ben- 
tinck, Governor of Madras (1803-07) supported the new doctrine. 
But while further progress with the zaminddri settlement was stay¬ 
ed, the Board of Revenue sought permission from Sir George Barlow, 
Bentinck’s successor in the governorship, to experiment with the 
village settlement. J. Hodgson, who now dominated the Board of 
Revenue and had come to appreciate the corporate life of the Tanjore 
villages held that the village system might be applied throughout 
the whole presidency and that the revenue due to Government might 
be leased to the principal inhabitants of the villages, on the basis of 
the average collection of the previous years and might be substitut¬ 
ed later for a term and in perpetuity. 15 

In 1808-09 the District Collectors were required to lease out the 
villages on the new basis. But this attempt also failed; in many 
places the villagers refused to bind themselves with the leases; in 
others there was deceit and oppression, and in still others the re¬ 
venue could not be collected at all from the cultivators, mainly be¬ 
cause, as in the case of the early settlements of Read and Munro, 


629 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


the assessments had been fixed too high. In spite of unfavourable 
reports from the Collectors, Government decided in 1813 to try new 
village leases for a period of ten years and even proposed that they 
should be made perpetual. But now the authors of the Fifth Report , 
wherein they reviewed the affairs of/ the Madras Presidency, did not 
believe in the wisdom of creating artificial zaminddris, nor in the ad¬ 
vantages claimed in the villages lease system and held, believing in 
Munro’s experienced views, that ryotwdri was the most suited to the 
people and that if the judicial machinery then in force did not suit 
it, it was the judicial system that had to be modified. 

So in 1812, the Madras Government received orders to revert 
to the ryotwdri system. In 1814, the Directors recommended certain 
administrative changes to meet Munro’s views as to the necessity of 
lowering the assessment and giving the ryot more freedom to change 
the area of his cultivation from year to year. Munro was sent out 
as Special Commissioner in 1814 for drawing up the new judicial 
regulations; and in 1816 the Madras Government passed a series of 
Regulations giving effect to the changes. 

By the Regulations of 1793 all powers had been withdrawn from 
the hands of Indians. The village bodies and the jurisdictions of the 
zaminddrs had been abolished. One or two European functionaries 
were in entire charge of a district. The Collector was confined mere¬ 
ly to the collection of revenue, while the Judge was in entire charge 
of hearing and determining all causes, taking cognisance of all 
offences and regulating all matters of police. He was assisted by a 
single European Registrar and a specified number of Indian assis¬ 
tants, while all the police affairs were managed by a score or so of 
Indian darogahs; but in reality, his powers were very much limited. 
He had no summary mode of proceeding, except in cases of small 
breaches of the peace. In other cases the offenders were to be kept 
in jail till the arrival of the judges of the Circuit Court, before whom 
they were arraigned after the manner of English General Gaol Deli¬ 
veries. The Collector was not even competent to decide any dispute 
between his servants and the ryots, while the Judge was not allowed 
very much of discretionary power. 16 

Court fees were made costly, the processes became more com¬ 
plicated and the collection of revenue more oppressive, while the 
zaminddr could not collect the rents from the tenants, by a tedious 
process of legal action. After Munro was appointed to the new Com¬ 
mission for Judicial Regulations, the Directors elicited the opinions 
cf eminent retired servants of the Company on the operation of the 

630 


ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)—II 

judicial system. Their despatches were so worded as to presage an 
entire renovation of the judicial system. Munro had to assure the 
people that only a reform, and not a repeal, of the existing regula¬ 
tions was intended. He took charge of the office of Head Commis¬ 
sioner towards the end of 1814; and as a result of his labours, the 
Madras Government passed a series of Regulations in 1816 by which 
the office of District Magistrate and the control of police were trans¬ 
ferred from the Judge to the Collector, the Darogahs and the Thana- 
dars were abolished, and the police work was to be done by village 
watchmen and the collector’s revenue servants. Indian District 
Munsifs were appointed in some number to try all petty civil causes 
of value up to Rs. 200; and village headmen were empowered to try 
petty civil suits; they could also summon village panchayats, which 
were competent to determine all suits without limit of any value if 
the parties should agree to their arbitration. 17 

The Board of Control and the Court of Directors, had by now 
openly condemned the creation of artificial zamindaris and the latter 
body now issued instructions to all the Collectors for the re-intro¬ 
duction of the ryotwdri system, revised with some changes on the 
basis of the ideas adumbrated by Read and Munro. Munro advised 
that these ryotw&ri instructions should be so issued that Govern¬ 
ment should control the Collector’s discretion and limit opportuni¬ 
ties for the interference of the court. 

Thus the subjugation of the pdlegars, the establishment of a 
' proper judiciary, and the improvement of the revenue system ab¬ 
sorbed all the energies of the Madras Government till 1818, and 
through all these decades no attention was devoted to the protection 
of industry and the welfare of the people. No action was taken 
either about the promotion of education or about the abolition of 
slavery, the existence of which both on the Coromandel and West 
Coast had compelled Government to gather information. Famines 
were dealt with by ad hoc measures as and when they occurred; 
there was evolved no settled policy. Munro was the only one among 
the Europeans who felt the error of excluding Indians from all 
higher services under the Government; he wrote: 18 ‘‘Among all the 
disorders of the native states, the field is open for every man to raise 
himself; and hence among them there is a spirit of emulation, of 
restless enterprise and independence, far preferable to the servility 
of our Indian subjects.” Except in a few places irrigation works 
were not cared for, and even existing works were not properly re¬ 
paired. 


631 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


“Their exclusion from offices of trust and emolument has be¬ 
come a part of our system of government, and has been produc¬ 
tive of no good. Whenever from this cause, the public business 
falls into arrears, it is said to be owing to the want of a suffi¬ 
cient number of Europeans; and more European agency is too 
expensive; and, even if it was not, it ought to be abridged rather 
than enlarged, because it is, in many cases, much less efficient 
than that of the natives ” (Gleig: Life of Sir Thomas Munro , 
Vol. I, p. 518). 

III. The Bombay Presidency to the end of the 18th Century: 

The Factory at Surat was the earliest and the most typical of 
the British Factories in India. It attained, through the efforts of 
Best and Downton, Aldworth and Sir Thomas Roe, a high degree 
of reputation. “Caravans came and went to all the inland capitals 
of India, Golconda, Agra, Delhi, Lahore; and the products of Asia 
from the Straits of Malacca to the Persian Gulf were piled up on the 
wharves of the Tapti. Merchants flocked in such numbers to Surat 
that during the busy winter months lodgings could scarcely be had.” 
The Surat Factory was controlled by its Council of Factors; but often 
the general or commander of the fleet had a controlling authority. 
The Factors complained that he regulated even their promotion and 
precedence, that consultations were often held on board the ships, 
in the roads and that the Chief of the Factory often signed his name 
after that of the chief naval officer and that captains of the ships 
sat often in their Councils and interfered in their affairs (e.g., the 
complaint of Joseph Salbank, one of the senior Surat Factors made 
to the Directors in 1617 against Captain Keeling, who subordinated 
him to raw and junior men). 

In disputes between the English merchants and Indians, the de¬ 
cision rested with the tribunals of the country powers. Captain 
Best’s treaty with the Mughul viceroy of Gujarat declared that “in 
all questions,' wrongs and injuries that shall be offered to us and to 
our nation we^do receive from the judges and those that be in autho¬ 
rity, speedy justice according to the quality of our complaints and 
wrongs done us and that by delays we be not put off or wearied by 
time change.” In civil cases the Chief of the Factory had absolute 
powers. Justice among the English residents was administered in 
criminal cases by virtue of a King’s Commission under the Great 
Seal which empowered the Commissioners to punish and execute 
offenders by martial law, as illustrated in a Surat record of 1616 


632 


ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)—II 

describing the criminal proceedings which condemned a murderer tc 
death. 19 

The internal economy of the Surat Factory set the norm for 
other factories and Presidencies. In 1657, it was constituted the sole 
Presidency of the English in India, though subsequently Madras was 
restored to the Presidency rank. When Bombay was acquired by 
Charles II, it came to be ruled by Governors under the Crown, first 
by Sir Abraham Shipman, who perished in a few months, vainly try¬ 
ing to get possession of the Island from the Portuguese, and then by 
Humphrey Cooke, who only too readily accepted the mere cession 
of the port and harbour of Bombay, when offered by the Portuguese. 
Sir Gervase Lucas, a staunch Royalist, succeeded Cooke, but died 
within a few months after his landing, and his lieutenant and suc¬ 
cessor, Captain Henry Garey, was equally unsuccessful. When Bom¬ 
bay was ceded by Charles II to fhe Company, the latter’s Governor 
of Surat, Sir George Oxinden took possession of the place (Septem¬ 
ber 1668). He saw, with considerable precision, how Bombay was 
destined from its geographical position to become the key to India. 
His regulations for the civil and military administration of the settle¬ 
ment were adopted as the model for all the military establishments 
of the Company. Gerald Aungier, his successor, was President of 
Surat and Governor of Bombay from 1669 to 1677. He was the true 
founder of Bombay’s greatness; and besides fortifying the city and 
constructing a dock, he laid out a town and established a court of 
justice for all litigants; created a police force and a militia and 
started a mint. He revived the old Panchdyat system for the diffe¬ 
rent castes to whom justice was thereby brought to their very door 
in minor causes. 20 

It was he that suggested, as early as 1671, that the seat of the 
Presidency should be removed to Bombay, whose population rose 
under him to 60,000 and its revenue increased three-fold. Aungier 
had schemes for organising the Indian merchants into guilds and for 
draining the tidal swamps that rendered Bombay so unhealthy. He 
was the first English Governor to realise the importance of a policy 
of religious toleration. Under Rolte, the settlement suffered a set¬ 
back. Under Sir John Child, President of Surat and Governor of 
Bombay (1682-90), there occurred three serious difficulties which 
contributed to the utter failure of his administration. The first was 
the rebellion of Captain Keigwin, the Commandant of the Bombay 
garrison, who broke out in revolt, managed to get himself proclaim¬ 
ed as the Governor of the Island, annulled the authority of Child 
and of the Company and declared Bombay to be under the immediate 


633 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


control of the King (December 1683). He issued a proclamation to 
the inhabitants of Bombay in the name of King Charles, dwelling on 
‘the intolerable extortions, oppressions and unjust impositions’ of 
the Company; and he also wrote letters both to King Charles and 
his brother the Duke of York (afterwards King James II), explain¬ 
ing that the selfish and unscrupulous schemes of Sir Josia Child in 
England and of Sir John Child in India were at the bottom of the 
whole trouble, and that he would keep Bombay in faithful allegiance 
to the Crown. 

Keigwin governed Bombay with remarkable success till Novem¬ 
ber 1684 in the name of the King and submitted only on the appear¬ 
ance of a naval force sent with the sanction of Charles himself. 

Sir John Child was the namesake and the willing agent and 
tool of the very masterful Sir Josia Child, who was the Governor of 
the Company in 1681 and continued to be the all-dominant force in 
its affairs until his death in 1690. Sir Josia was a great admirer of 
Dutch colonial policy and wanted to build up a similar power for the 
English in India. According to him Bombay was to be strongly for¬ 
tified and protected and the charges incurred were to be met from 
increased rents, customs duties and municipal taxes. President Sir 
John Child was appointed Captain-General of the Company’s forces 
on the Bombay coast, as well as Director-General of all mercantile 
affairs; and he was also authorised to regulate the affairs of the 
factories in Bengal and on the Coromandel Coast. Ordinarily he 
was to reside in Bombay, and was given the imposing title of Cap¬ 
tain-General, usually shortened as the General. Bombay in conse¬ 
quence superseded Surat as the seat of the Western Presidency. It 
was thus given extended powers and made supreme over all the 
Company’s establishments in India. 

To check the interlopers who were giving increased trouble, a 
Court of Admiralty was set up in Bombay in 1684 under Letters 
Patent obtained from the King in 1683. In the disastrous war with 
the Mughuls that ensued as the result of Child’s policy, to fight out 
and establish their privileges by arms, Bombay was besieged by 
Mughul forces and was to submit to a humiliating peace, one of the 
conditions of which was the dismissal of Child, who, fortunately for 
himself did not long survive this disgrace. General Sir John Child 
was thus the first Governor-General of India. 21 

The internal administration of Bombay in the first half of the 
eighteenth century was marked by the establishment of a bank in 
1720 and by the formation of a large dockyard some time later under 


634 


ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)—II 

a Parsi ship-builder of Surat. A Mayor’s Court similar to that which 
was functioning at Madras under the Charter of 1726 was establish¬ 
ed in 1728. 22 By 1744 the population had risen to 70,000 and the 
revenues amounted to 160,000. According to the evidence of J. H. 
Grose who visited the island in 1750, the chief characteristic of the 
administration of Bombay was “the mildness of the government and 
its toleration of all religions”, which contributed, to his popularity. 23 

It is a matter of common historical knowledge that when the 
Regulating Act was passed, there arose a quarrel between the Bom¬ 
bay Council and the Supreme Council of Calcutta over the negotia¬ 
tions with Raghunath Rao. The Council were uncertain in view of 
the provisions of the Act, whether they had powers to make a treaty 
independently without sanction from Bengal. But they decided to 
act as they had not been notified of the arrival of Bengal Councillors. 
Their conclusion of the treaty of Surat (March 1775) was declared 
by the Supreme Government as being not merely impolitic but 
directly contrary to the provisions of the Regulating Act. Warren 
Hastings who was not in favour of the majority decision in the 
matter, but was out-voted, expressed his opinion that the distance 
between Bombay and Calcutta might render fatal the insistence that 
the Government of Bombay should await confirmatory orders from 
Calcutta. 24 


NOTES 

1 John Kaye remarks: “We traded, we conquered, we governed. It was long 
before this matter of government came palpably before us. At first all that 
we had to do was to govern ourselves, and' this we did in a very loose manner 
—rather according to laws of power and impulses of passion than to principles 
of justice and reason.” 

2. The names of the Company’s servants had to be enrolled in a regular senio¬ 
rity list; they could be transferred from one Presidency to another; and on 
occasions of emergency or when there was strife in any agency (as the sub¬ 
ordinate factory was called) the Directors sent out one of their own number 
to improve the affairs. It was- also their custom to cut down the pay of their 
servants when trade was slack. The Directors kept a paternal eye on their 
Servants in India and sent out to them chaplains and books on theology. The 
chaplains often proved as keen traders as the factors themselves. Usually the 
factors got lodgings and free board at the common table. The diet and sump¬ 
tuary allowances to the President often far exceeded his salary; the three 
Senior Merchants next to the Governor who constituted the Council, might 
live outside the factory, and got house and table allowances of their own. 
The servants of the Company followed, from the beginning, the Portuguese 
practice of private trade. The Company allowed its servants to supplement 
their wages by granting them an interest in the trade, and, in certain cases, 
a share in the profits; and it always protested “not against private trading, 
but against excessive private trading.” 

3. The Charters obtained from Queen Elizabeth and King James in 1600 and 1609, 
1611 and 1622, conferred no privileges except the exclusive trade to the East 
Indies, which was an exceptional privilege in the light of the political economy 
of the times. The next important charter after the famous one (of 1657) of 
Cromwell was granted by Charles II in April 1661; and according to this, the 


635 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Company were given power and command over their fortresses and were 
authorised to appoint Governors and others for their government. The Com¬ 
pany were also empowered to send ships of war for their factories, to choose 
officers by commission under their common seal, to erect fortifications and to 
seize unlicensed persons and punish persons in their employment, to govern 
their factories by martial law and to make peace or war with any non-Christian 
power. 

Prior to the issue of this Charter, the Agent and Council very probably 
possessed no judicial authority over the inhabitants “but such as was derived 
from the native suzerain.” Justice towards natives and towards European sub¬ 
jects of foreign powers was administered in that way. Offences by British sub¬ 
jects were dealt with by the Agent in Council. 

4. It was provided that the President should be Judge-Advocate till one should 
arrive from England (July, 1684). 

5. The Admiralty Court, by fusion with the Recorder’s Court created in 1797 be¬ 
came in 1801 the first Supreme Court appointed by the Crown and the latter, 
by fusion with the East India Company’s Sadr Courts became in 1862 the pre¬ 
sent High, Court. 

6 This committee continued until 1758 under the altered title of “Select Com¬ 
mittee for transacting Country Affairs.” During Daily’s siege of Madras 
(December 1758-February 1759) the Government was committed to Governor 
Pigot and Major Stringer Lawrence. As soon as normal government was res¬ 
tored, secret matters began to be dealt with by the whole Board in their Secret 
Department. In 1761 the Directors ordered the reappointment of a Select Com¬ 
mittee for affairs requiring special secrecy, but presumably the Council re¬ 
verted at once to the practice of dealing with all secret matters in the Military 
and Secret Department. In 1769 the Directors ordered the formation of a 
Select Committee to deal with political questions and military operations. 

7 • Governor Sir Archibald Campbell (1786-90) in whose time the administration 

came to be divided into departments, each under a board of officers, formed a 
Committee of Police for the regulation of wages and prices, which was ulti¬ 
mately superseded by a Board of Police in 1797. 

8 Mr. Place’s vigorous administration, which continued till 1798, busied itself 
with investigation of the land revenues, the discovery of abuses in connection 
with their collection and management, and the acquisition of information res¬ 
pecting the situation, the rights and the privileges of the ryots. He abolished 
altogether the office of kanungo which had been already discontinued by the 
Nawab and instituted a department of record and accounts consisting of a 
sheristadar and gumastas to assist him in the various divisions of his charge; 
he strove to restore the office of karnam to its original efficiency. He did away 
with the office of d^shmukh, but he revived the natwdurs who were the head¬ 
men of larger subdivisions each including a circle of villages. 

9- Dr. Francis Buchanan who toured in the district in 1800 found that the con¬ 
dition of the people was better than that of the people of Bengal; while the 
town of Kanjivaram was regularly built with wide and clean streets. 

10. From the Survey we learn that the sarhars were properly regarded as the 
‘granary of the Carnatic during the north-east monsoon, in like manner as 
Tanjore is reckoned on for the other season of periodical winds from the oppo¬ 
site point of the compass.’ 

11. The palegars never paid their peshkush with any regularity. Munro, therefore, 
assessed the palegars at the highest peshkush which they had paid either to 
the Nizam or to Haidar, and in case of their refusal or neglect they were coer¬ 
ced by his military peons. The Directors of the Company wanted that the p ale¬ 
gars should be reconciled to British rule by more gentle measures and charac¬ 
terized Munro’s actions as disingenuous; and the latter retorted by showing 
that “neither on the ground of their ancient rights, nor of their later conduct, 
were the palegars entitled to ‘gentle measures’, and their ‘feudal habits and 
principles’ consisted of crimes, oppressions and contumacies, which, if permit¬ 
ted to continue would have rendered good government impossible.” 

12. He held that to give land any saleable value at all, the assessment should not 
exceeed one-third of the gross produce; and as his own rates took about 45 
per cent. He recommended that all his rates should be reduced by about 25 
per cent. And an additional 8 per cent, (or 33 per cent in all) should be 
knocked off the rates on all land under wells and small tanks, on condition 


636 


ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)—II 


that the ryots agreed to keep these in workable repair. He also proposed that 
the ryots should be given complete ownership of the land for which they paid 
assessment and that they should be at liberty at the end of every year to throw 
up their holdings or to occupy more land provided there was a proper pro¬ 
portion of good or bad land taken up or relinquished and that unoccupied land 
should remain in the hands of Government. It was only long afterwards that 
his views were given very partial effect to. 

13. The zamindars were forbidden to keep a military establishment, and were de¬ 
prived of their police authority and their control over the miscellaneous 
sources of revenue. They were declared to be proprietors of their estates, with 
the cultivators for their tenants. They were given the power of distraint and 
were authorised to collect rent at the rates which prevailed in the year pre¬ 
ceding the Permanent Settlement. In return they were required to pay yearly 
a peshkush fixed in perpetuity; if the peshkush fell into arrears their estate 
could be attached and sold. The peshkush was usually calculated to be the 
equivalent of one-third of the gross produce, or two-thirds of the gross rental, 
of the estate; but deviations from the standard were allowed in special cases. 

14. Besides, the palegars also levied in all possible cases taxes on ploughs, looms, 
shops and labourers. They confused by their encroachments the distinction 
between palayam lands and sarkar lands. They had usurped, in a large num¬ 
ber of the sarkar villages, the power of appointing and controlling the sthala- 
kavalkars and receiving from them russums or fees. They also levied hunting 
batta, contributions to marriage parties and a number of other payments, either 
fixed in a lump on the whole village, or levied on ploughs, looms, shops and 
labourers. They also received allotments of lands in the sarkar villages on 
which they received the government share or assessment and claimed the right 
of madisum (madhyastham ) on behalf of the sarkar ryots as against the latter’s 
revenue collectors; and thus discontented sarkar ryots would be settled in 
palayam villages. Their right of arbitration was recognised, the sarkar renters’ 
power was diminished and the deshakaval of the palegars fortified. 

15. Hodgson was influenced by the belief that it would keep alive and stimulate 
the habit of village self-government, a habit which the ryotwari system tefided 
to destroy. He also realised that it was not only principal inhabitants who 
could be oppressive. All collectors were not Munros. Some were corrupt and 
many were lazy. The Indian agency at their command was by tradition high¬ 
handed, extortionate, and venal. Under a corrupt or slack collector the ryot- 
wdri system gave these men ample opportunities and thus Government would 
share the discredit of their misdeeds. The Board also hoped for some saving 
in expenditure under the village lease system, since the task of assessing and 
collecting the dues of each cultivator would be left to the villagers. 

16. A variety of forms were invented, without paying strict attention to which no 
business could be done; a legal language was introduced entirely unknown to 
the mass of the people; depositions were required in all cases, to be taken 
down in writing; oaths were fabricated, repulsive to the religious prejudices 
of the community; nay, a distinct class of vakeels or advocates was created, 
without the intervention of one or more of whom, no suit could be tried, nor 
any cause determined. As a matter of course, the business of every court fell, 
under such circumstances, rapidly into arrears, till at last the evil became so 
glaring as to demand the application of some immediate remedy. ( Life of 
General Sir Thomas Munro, Vol. II, p. 410). 

17- Munro, as the head of the judicial commission did not agree cordially with 
the Governor, the Right Hon’ble Mr. Hugh Elliot. Munro complained that the 
Governor and Council, the Board of Revenue and the Sadr Adalat were all 
hostile to his favourite scheme of ryotwari assessment. As a result of the Re¬ 
gulations of 1816 the police came to perform many of the duties for which 
sepoys were formerly employed. 

Another reform effected was the substitution of the rupee for the star 
pagoda as the standard coin for the Presidency, the rupee being calculated at 
the rate of for one pagoda. 

There was also started in 1812 the college of Fort St. George, in imitation 
of Lord Wellesley’s college of Fort William which trained civil servants in 
the vernaculars of the province, supervised the instruction of munshis and of 
persons who were to be appointed as law-officers and pleaders in the provin¬ 
cial courts. This college had a very useful career. 


637 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


18- “With what grace can one talk of paternal government if we exclude the 
native from every important office, and say, as we did till very lately, that in 
a country containing fifteen millions of inhabitants, no man but a European 
shall be entrusted with as much authority as to order the punishment of a 
single stroke of a rattan. Let Britain be subjugated by a foreign power to¬ 
morrow, let the people be excluded from all share in the government, from 
public honours, from every office of high trust and emolument, and let them 
in every situation be considered as unworthy of trust, and all their knowledge, 
and all their literature, sacred and profane, would not save them from becom¬ 
ing, in another generation or two, a low-minded, deceitful and dishonest race.” 
(Munro) 

19- Pietro Della Valle visited Surat in 1623, and gave a good picture of life in the 
factory; while Mandelslo, coming fifteen years later, described in praiseful 
terms the life of the factory community “the strict order observed, the defer¬ 
ence to the President, the collegiate life of the Factory, the common table with 
the Chaplain to say grace, above all, the divine service held daily and on 
Sundays three times.” 

20. Even foreigners of other nations residing in English Factories were subject to 
English law. Indians were nominally independent of English authority and 
outside the limits of the English factories they could claim the protection of 
their own ports even where a European was concerned in the disputes. For 
transactions outside his factory the Englishman himself would be subject to 
the judiciary of the country. The Charter of Charles II of 1661 empowered 
the Governors and Councils of the several factories in India to “judge all per¬ 
sons belonging to the Governor and Company of the East Indies or that should 
live under them, in all causes whether civil or criminal, according to the laws 
of the kingdom, and to execute judgement accordingly. English Statute Law 
was here expressly recognized; and the expression, ‘those that should live under 
them’ was held to include all classes. Only for Bombay which was more than 
a trading station and was ceded by a formal treaty, did the Company obtain, 
by a special grant, power to pass laws and constitutions for the good Govern¬ 
ment of the settlement and to inflict the necessary punishments. But the ques¬ 
tion of jurisdiction, apart from that legislation and judicial action, remained 
rather anomalous as under the terms of James I’s charter of 1624. 

21. The subsequent history of the title is interesting. After the death of Sir John 

Child, Sir John Goldsborough was sent out (1691) as commissary and super¬ 
visor; and two years later he was made Captain-General and Commander-in 
Chief, with Madras as his headquarters, while Sir John Gayer was to act as 
the Lieutenant-General and Governor of Bombay. On the death of Goldsborough, 
Gayer succeeded to the post of ‘General’ (1694), remaining at Bombay; while 
Hingginson, the Madras President, became Lieutenant-General. Ten years later 
(Gayer being kept in prison at Surat by the Mughul authorities) Sir Nicholas 
Waite, the new Governor of-Bombay, assumed the title of “General” and upon 
his dismissal in 1708, his successor, Aislabie, laid claim to the same designation. 
The title was abolished in 1715 when the new post of President and Governor 
of Bombay was created, with,Boone as its first occupant. The title of Lieu¬ 
tenant-General had lapsed in 1698, when Thomas Pitt was appointed Governor 
of Madras. % 

22. In the instructions for the procedure of the Mayor’s Court in all actions 
and suits both civil and criminal, in the proving of wills and the grant¬ 
ing of letters of administration of the estates of intestates, together with the 
forms of the oaths, directed by the Charter to be taken, was embodied as there 
is reason to belieye that the originals were lost, though duplicates were sent 
out on 24 January 1753. The doctrine was first laid down that by the Charter 
of 1726 all the common and Statute Laws at that time extant in England were 
introduced into the Indian Presidencies and all Parliamentary enactments pass¬ 
ed since then excluded, unless expressly extended to India by special provision. 
This doctrine had been long established beyond dispute, but in the celebrated 
trial of Nand Kumar in 1775 all the Judges of the Supreme Court at Calcutta 
appear to have considered it clear that the dividing line was drawn by the 
Charter of 1753. The latter charter expressly exempted from the jurisdiction 
of the Mayor’s Court all suits and actions between the natives only which 
should be determined among themselves unless both parties submitted to the 
determination of that court. But the registers show that Indians continued to 

638 


ADMINISTRATION IN BRITISH TERRITORIES IN INDIA (1707-1818)—II 


resort to the English courts as much as before. There was the usual machi¬ 
nery of Sheriffs and Courts of Quarter Sessions presided over by the Governor 
and Councillors. 

23. Some details as to the condition of Bombay are available in the series of letters, 
ascribed to Commodore John Burnell; the first letter is dated May 1710. (Orme 
MSS; VIII 17), (India Office Record). 

24. One of the members of the Bombay Council, by name William Taylor, who 
made a report on the negotiations, contended that the Regulating Act supported 
the position of his government inasmuch as it exempted them from referring to 
Calcutta matters on which orders had been received direct from the Directors. 
He also pleaded that such a control from Calcutta would degrade the Bombay 
Government in the eyes of the Indians. 

The Governor had a Council of two civil members and of the Commander- 
in-Chief; but often the Governor himself was the Commander-in-Chief. Under 
the Council, there were three boards, viz., the Board of Trade, the Board of 
Revenue and the Military Board which carried on the details of the administra¬ 
tion and were normally presided over by the members of the Council. In Bom¬ 
bay the administration of mofussil districts came only with the wars of 1817-18 
resulting in the annexation of the Peshwd’s territories and, therefore, dis¬ 
trict administration came only later. There was in Bombay the same judicial 
administration as had been established in Madras. 


639 


CHAPTER XIX 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE 
EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 

I. BENGALI 

In a sense, Bengali literature of the eighteenth century was a 
continuation of that of the seventeenth. The Vaishnava songs and 
biographies continued to be written, though they were much in¬ 
ferior to their predecessors. But the Mangala-kavya, the origin and 
nature of which have been described in the preceding volume 
(pp. 558-60), formed the best poetical literature of the period. The 
earliest work of this type during the period under review was the 
Shiva-samlcirtarM or Shivdyana of Rameshvar Bhattacharya, com¬ 
posed about 1712 A.D. The theme is that of the Chandi-mangala of 
Mukundaram, but the distinctive characteristic is its refined taste 
as contrasted with the amorous contents of the books of this class. 
Rameshvar may justly claim to be one of the best poets of the cen¬ 
tury. Another poet, Ghanaram Chakravarti was a contemporary of 
Rameshvar and wrote a Dharriia-rnakgala Kavycn. Another Kavya 
of this class was written by Manikram Ganguli about half, a century 
later (1752-53 A.D.). 1 

' • << ' . . I 

The greatest poet of the period was Bharatchahdra Ray Gunakar, 
born some time about 1710 A.D. 2 in a Brahmin family of Bhursut 
area in the southern part of West Bengal (Radha). He learnt San¬ 
skrit and Persian and made his debut in 1737 with two very short 
poems on the popular deity Satyanarayana. After passing through 
many vicissitudes in his life, which are reflected in his poems, he 
found a good patron in Maharaja Krishnachandra of Nadia. Here he 
wrote his magnum opus “Annada-mamgala’’. It was completed in 
1752-53 A.D. and enjoyed reputation as a masterpiece for more than 
a century. Bharatchahdra was regarded as the best Bengali poet until 
the middle of the 19th century A.D. when revolutionary changes 
took place in Bengali literature. 

The Annada-mangala really comprises three independent parts. 
The first part is the Mangala-k&vya proper, dealing with the episodes 
of Shiva, Parvatl (Annada) and other minor deities. It, however, 
contains some new episodes such as Parvatl’s offering cooked food to 
Shiva, her description of her own life in verses of double entendre 


640 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 

conveying two diametrically opposite ideas. Besides, the gods and 
goddesses and Narada are endowed with human sentiments and the 
author shows great skill in describing them as such. 

The second, the best of the three parts, is the romantic story of 
the secret love of Vidya and Sundara, carried on through Hira 
MalinI (florist of princess Vidya). Sundara visited Vidya every 
night through an underground passage from Hira’s house to the bed¬ 
chamber of Vidya. The love intrigue was discovered and the royal 
father of Vidya ordered Sundara to be put to death. Of course, 
Suhdara’s prayer to the Goddess Kali saved him from imminent 
death; he married Vidya and everything ended happily. The secret 
amours of Vidya and Sundara are described in beautiful verses, very 
skilful and highly charming, but artificial and occasionally obscene. 
The character of the florist Hira is superbly drawn and almost un¬ 
paralleled in Bengali literature. 

The third part of Annadd-mangala deals with a historical theme 
centering round the victory of the Mughul General Man Singh over 
Pratapaditya, the ruler of a petty principality in South Bengal. The 
heroic stand of Pratapaditya, as described by the poet, is without any 
historical foundation, but has enchanted the Bengali readers for 
more than a century, and is still regarded as historical truth by many. 
Apart from the principal characters, the author has shown great skill 
in drawing some minor characters like Dasu, Basu, etc. The des¬ 
cription of the battle is also very lively. 

Although the main episode is unhistorical (except, of course, 
the defeat and capture of Pratapaditya), the Annada-rnangala has 
got some passages of great historical importance. It gives a vivid 
picture of the great dissatisfaction, amounting to hatred, towards the 
Muslim ruler in Bengal, ‘All VardI Khan, a contemporary of Bharat- 
chahdra. It is said in the introductory part that when ‘All VardI 
destroyed the Hindu temples in Bhubaneshwar (Orissa), Nahdl got 
furious and took up his javelin to destroy the Yavanas, but Shiva 
prevented him, saying, “My devotee, the ruler of the Bargis (i.e., the 
Marathas) will subdue the Yavanas”. So he appeared before the 
Maratha ruler in a dream and he sent Bhaskar Pandit to Bengal to 
whom reference will be made later. 

In the third part also reference is made to the oppressions of 
the Muslims, such as destruction of temples and the insult of Brah¬ 
mins (p. 196). Far more interesting is, however, a speech put in 
the mouth of the Mughul emperor Jahangir, which is a violent de¬ 
nunciation of Hindu religion and society, ending with Jahangir's ex- 

641 

MS — 41 



THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

clamation: “The very sight of a Brahmin is loathsome to me (lit. 
burns my body) and the desire often seizes me to convert all the 
Hindus to Islam.” All this should be a corrective to those who fond¬ 
ly believe that the Hindu-Muslim differences were artificially created 
by the British. 

Bharatchandra wrote an erotico-rhetorical work, Rasamanja*fi, 
based on a Sanskrit work by Bhanudatta of Mithila, describing the 
signs and feelings of lovers. It was composed before 1749. Bharat¬ 
chandra could also write good Sanskrit verses as shown by the 
Ndgdshtaka, a poem in eight stanzas, written in double entendre , 
which in one sense describes the Puranic story of the suppression of 
the Nag (serpent) Kaliya by Krishna, and in another sense refers 
to the oppressions of Ramdev Nag, an agent of his landlord, Raja of 
Burdwan, and an appeal for remedy to Krishnachandra, the patron 
of Bharatchandra. 

Bharatchandra’s Vidyasundara contains a number of beautiful 
songs “which resemble Vaishnava lyrics in spirit and content but 
differ from them in structure and fineness”. 

Ramprasad Sen: 

Another great figure in the Bengali literature during the period 
under review was Ramprasad Sen, a junior contemporary of Bharat¬ 
chandra. He was born in Halishahar-Kumarhatta on the Ganga, 
about 25 miles from Calcutta. He is far better known as a great de¬ 
votee of the Goddess Kali and a sadhak (saint). His devotional 
songs, quite large in number, are still highly popular in Bengal and 
are sung as a regular feature on the Calcutta Radio. He, too, wrote 
a poem depicting the amours of Vidya and Sundara which bears clear 
signs of the influence of Bharatchandra. He also wrote two other 
poems in the form of Panchalis, namely Kdli-lcirtan and Krishna - 
kdrtan. Ramprasad was bom in 1720-21 A.D. and died sometime 
between 1759 and 1795 A.D. 3 

Secular poems: 

The stream of religious poetry which had been flowing through¬ 
out the medieval age continued till the middle of the eighteenth cen¬ 
tury when its force was considerably weakened. This is exempli¬ 
fied by the growth of new types of literature such as “short poems on 
romantic love or on historical and topical subjects and short secular 
love-songs.” A sort of compromise between the old and the new 
ideals gave rise to the Kabi poetry and Panchdli which flourished 


642 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 

about the middle of the eighteenth century and continued almost 
throughout the period under review. 

The earliest writers associated with the Kabi poetry were Lal- 
chandra and Nandalal, but by far the best was Ramnidhi Gupta, 
better known as Nidhu Babu (1742-1839 A.D.), He is one of the 
leading sponsors of the style of music known as Akhadai and intro¬ 
duced the now famous Tappd style. Among other composers of 
songs may be mentioned Ram Basu. 

As regards Pdnchali, a Muslim writer Shaikh Faizullah was the 
author of Satyapirer Pdnchali, a popular semi-religious legend on 
which various PdnchaU poems were written. Faizullah flourished 
early in the 18th century A.D. and composed two other poems, 
Goraksha-vijaya and Ghdzi-vijaya. 

Special reference should be made to a collection of songs and 
ballads, known as Mymenshhha-Gitikd, so called from the fact that 
these were current mostly in the Mymensingh district, now in 
Bangladesh. These were collected together early in this century and 
published by the Calcutta University. Two special features of these 
are: first, they anticipate romantic sentiments expressed in the West¬ 
ern literature which was a dominant feature in Bengali fiction, poetry 
and drama since the middle of the nineteenth century, and secondly, 
they are altogether free from reference to gods and goddesses and 
show no religious sentiments. The stories of these ballads are based 
on love and sentiments of ordinary men and women, narrated in 
simple but charming verses which make a profound appeal to human 
heart. These poems attained great popularity within restricted 
areas in East Bengal, but were practically unknown outside East 
Bengal. The date of composition of these verses is a matter of dis¬ 
pute. According to some, they belong to the medieval age, while 
others regard them as belonging to a period not earlier than the late 
eighteenth centry. There seems, however, to be little doubt that in 
their present form they cannot be much earlier than the 19th century, 
and if they were composed earlier, their language must have subse¬ 
quently undergone considerable modification. There is, however, 
general agreement on one point, namely that they show no influence 
of Western literature and reflect the feelings and sentiments of the 
unsophisticated rural folk. 

Historical Literature: 

Reference has been made in the preceding volume (p. 562) to 
the Rdjamdld— Chronicle of kings’ (of Tripura or Tippera). It was 


643 



THE MARA1HA SUPREMACY 


begun in the 15th century and dealt with the history of Tripura from 
the very beginning up to the rule of Dharma-manikya in the 15th 
century. In each of the next three centuries addition was made to 
bring the Chronicle up-to-date. The fourth and last part was 
written during the reign of Krishna-manikya (1760-83 A.D.). 
Though dates, events and even genealogies of kings in the Rdjamdld 
have in many cases proved to be wrong, it undoubtedly possesses 
great importance, being the only general history of a region or king¬ 
dom, written in Bengali before the middle of the 19th century. Men¬ 
tion may be made of two other historical works of Tripura, namely 
Champakavijaya and Krishnamdld dealing respectively with some 
specific events during the reign of Ratna-manikya II (1685-1710 
A.D.) and the life of Krishna-manikya, two kings of Tripura. The 
latter was written during the reign of Rajadhara-manikya (1783-1802 
A.D.) nephew of Krishna-manikya. To this class belongs another 
Bengali book, also written in verse, known as Maharashtra Purdna . 4 
It was written by one Gangaram of whom nothing is known. The 
date given in the only available manuscript, namely 14th Paush, Sala 
1158, Shaka 1672, shows that it was written in 1751-52 A.D. and 
this is probably also the date of composition, which, in any case can¬ 
not be much earlier. The manuscript, containing 716 lines, ends 
with the words: “Thus ends the first part of the Maharashtra 
Purdna (called) Bhdskara-pardbhava’\ This indicates that either 
there were other parts, now lost, or the author intended to, but could 
not, write the other parts. The book gives an account of the Mara¬ 
tha raids in Bengal during the reign of ‘All Vardi Khan, from 1742 
to the treacherous murder of Bhaskar Pandit, the Maratha General, 
by ‘Ali Vardi Khan in 1744. 

The Chronicle is of great historical importance as it contains a 
contemporary account of the military raids of the Bargis (the nick¬ 
name given to the Maratha soldiers by the Bengalis) the memory of 
whose oppressions and cruelties has been still preserved in the lul¬ 
laby songs in Bengal. The author gives a vivid picture of the atro¬ 
cities perpetrated by the Marathas and the miseries and sufferings 
of the people caused thereby, such as is not available from any other 
source. It is not unlikely that the author himself was a witness of, 
if not a sufferer from, these raids. The importance of the poem 
from this point of view will be evident from some passages quoted 
below. 

The following passage describes the state of things which follow¬ 
ed the defeat and flight of Nawab ‘All Vardi Khan: 


644 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 

“Then the Bargis began to plunder the villages, and all the 
people fled in terror. Brahmin Pandits fled, taking with them loads 
of manuscripts. (Similar statements follow in respect of goldsmiths, 
coppersmiths, blacksmiths, potters, fishermen, conch-merchants and 
petty traders). The people fled in all directions; who could count 
their numbers? Kaestas, Baidyas—all who lived in villages fled, 
when they heard the name of the Bargis. Ladies of good family, 
who had never before set foot on the road fled from the Bargis with 
baskets on their heads. (Similar descriptions follow of other well-to- 
do classes). And pregnant-tvomen, all but unable to walk, began their 
labour on the road and were delivered there. And all the Sikdars 
and village officials fled for their lives when they heard the name 

l Bargi ’_ From every village, big or small, people fled in fear of 

the Bargis. 115 

But even such hasty wholesale flight was of no avail. When 
they had plundered all they could in the fields, “Maratha horsemen 
entered the villages and set fire to large houses. They stole all their 
gold and silver and did many foul things to the women. Bang alas 
(Bungalows), Chaudris (thatch-roofed houses), Vishniu-rriandapas 
(temples)—they burned them all, large and small. They destroyed 
whole villages and swept, looting, into all the four directions. They 
bound some people, their hands behind their backs, others they 
threw to the ground and while they were on their backs on the 
ground, kicked them with shoes. They shouted over and over again 
“Give us money ,, , and when they got no money they filled peoples’ 
nostrils with water, and some they seized and drowned in tanks, 
and many died of suffocation. In this way they did all manner of 
foul and evil deeds. When they demanded money and it was not 
given to them, they would put the man to death. Those who had 
money gave it. Those who had none were killed.” 6 

This passage is followed by a long list of places burnt, destroy¬ 
ed and houses razed to the ground. No such vivid account of the 
brutal oppression of the Marathas is to be found anywhere else and 
this is the justification of the long quotation. It is also of great 
historical importance. The view of the Marathas entertained by the 
Bengalis, and probably also in other parts of India invaded by the 
Marathas, is certainly not calculated to favour the idea of a politi¬ 
cal hegemony of Hindu India under the'Maratha rule, and we may 
understand why the dream of ShivajI of founding a Hindu empire 
was never realized. 

Another type of Bengali literature which also broke an alto¬ 
gether new ground was the Book of Travel. It is represented by the 


645 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Tirtha-mangala. Krishna Chandra Ghoshal, a rich man of Kidder- 
pore near Calcutta, made a journey by boat as far as Benaras and 
Allahabad. Bijayaram, a member of the party accompanying him, 
wrote an account of the journey and of the places visited, shortly 
after their return to Calcutta in 1770. The book written in simple 
verses contains much interesting information. 

Prose Literature: 

The vast Bengali literature described above and in the pre¬ 
ceding two volumes was all written in verse and there was no prose 
Bengali literature, properly so called, during the period under re¬ 
view. There are short sentences in the Vaishnava esoteric and cate- 
chismal treatises and long or short letters written in prose, but 
hardly any composition that could be really called literature, except 
a few books belonging to the two following categories: 

1. Tracts written by Christian Missionaries, mostly Portuguese. 

2. Translation of Legal Codes by the order of the East India 
Company towards the end of the 18th century. 

This needs no detailed discussion. 

As regards the first, two small tracts are said to have been 
written in prose by the Portuguese missionaries towards the end 
of the 16th century and a Bengali Grammar and Dictionary in the 
seventeenth century; but these are no longer available. 

The oldest Bengali book written in prose, so far known, is the 
Kripdr Shdstrer Arthabhed (written as Xrepar Xaxtrer Orth Bhed). 
It was composed by Manoel da Assumpcam in Dacca in 1734 and 
printed in Roman type in Lisbon in 1743 together with the Portu¬ 
guese original. He also published in the same year a Bengali Gram¬ 
mar in Portuguese with a Bengali-Portuguese Dictionary. The next 
in point of time was the Brahman Roman Catholic Sambdd —a dia¬ 
logue between a Brahmin and a Roman Catholic in which the latter 
seeks to establish the superiority of Christianity to Hinduism. It 
was composed in 1743 by a Hindu of East Bengal converted to 
Christianity. He was born in an aristocratic family but was stolen 
in his boyhood by the Arakanese pirates (1683). A Portuguese Mis¬ 
sionary purchased him and converted him to Christianity under the 
name of Dom Antonio. 

These two books clearly show the beginning of the Bengali 
prose. The only other prose writing is found in two long letters 


646 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 

written by Maharaja Nahdkumar in 1771 and 1772 and in a large 
number of short letters. 

It was in the first two decades of the 19th century that we find 
the beginning of the literary prose style, properly so called. But 
though it falls during the period covered by this volume, it is dealt 
with in the next volume for the sake of showing a continuous deve¬ 
lopment. 

Bengal owes a debt of gratitude to the Portuguese not only for 
their pioneering efforts for the development of Bengali prose style 
but also for the first printed books in Bengali; the Portuguese had 
established a printing press in Goa—the first in India—in 1556 
A.D. Bengali language borrowed many Portuguese as well as Arabic 
and Persian words. We often forget that familiar words like al- 
mirah (almdri), botdm, chhabi, sdban, Darajd, jandld, etc., are real¬ 
ly derived from the Portuguese words with only very slight alter¬ 
ations. 

II. HINDI 

Hindi literature during the period under review continued the 
style and tradition of the preceding period and was not marked by 
any originality, though several writers give evidence of high talent 
and technical perfection. The poets mostly wrote in Braj bhdshd and 
their composition was highly artificial, full of ‘pretty sentiments and 
rhetorical flourishes’. Particular reference should be made to Bhu- 
shana (1613-1712) who wrote several short works panegyrizing the 
great Maratha hero Shivaji in most musical Braj bhdshd marked by 
ardent patriotism of a Hindu, clothed in beautiful poetic image. 

The Hindi prose, both in Khari Bolt and Braj bhdshd, whose be¬ 
ginnings go back to the 16th century A.D., was highly developed. 
Very good progress of Khan BoB, i.e., Delhi Hindi is evidenced by 
the prose rendering of Yogavdsishtha Rdmdyana completed by Ram- 
prasad Niranjani in 1741 and the Jain Padmapurdna of Pandit Dau- 
latram (1761). Another writer of repute is Sadasukhlal Niyaz of 
Delhi who composed some episodes from the Vishnu Purdna in San- 
skritic Hindi. Mention may also be made of Insha Allah, one of the 
earliest writers to turn Hindi prose from religious to secular sub¬ 
jects. 

The development of modern Hindi from the beginning of the 
19th century is dealt with in the next volume. 


647 



I 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 
III. ORIYA 

Reference has been made in the preceding volume (p. 564) to 
the rise of an artificial style in Oriya. Its great exponent, Upendra 
Bhanja (1670-1720), introduced a new era in Oriya literature which 
continued throughout the period under review. His works, not less 
than 42 in number, demonstrate the treatment of all the literary 
genre of Orissa. The following view of an eminent literary critic 
gives a fair idea of his style and literary output: 

“The tour-de-force of the Sanskrit Chitra-kavyas, poems with 
verbal plays, acrostics, combinations of different sounds etc., find 
their unheard of fulfilment in Upendra Bhanja’s works. Love- 
romances, poems based on the Sanskrit epics and the Puranas, lyrics, 
compositions in various metres, works on rhetoric, lexicons—all of 
these feature in Upendra Bhanja’s literary output. About 10 great 
romances are the most esteemed among his larger compositions. In 
the Vaidehisha-vildsa, based on the story of the Rdmdyana, every 
word beginning a line and a half-line has ba (or va) as its first 
consonant; in the Subhadrdparinaya, similarly sa has been employ¬ 
ed, and in the Kald-kautuka every line begins and ends in the syl¬ 
lable ka. In the Avani-rasa-taranga, words with simple vowels 
only have been used. A section in the Koti-brahmdnda-sundairi can 
be made to give descriptions of three seasons, the rains, winter and 
summer, according as it is read in its entirety, or with one or two 
syllables of each line omitted.” 7 

Upendra Bhanja’s works exercised a profound influence upon 
Oriya literature and a large number of writers imitated him. The 
story of Krishna is almost a common theme of these writers, who, 
however, also wrote on PurSnic themes and love romances, but 
without any novelty. There are, no doubt, some exceptions. Men¬ 
tion may be made, for example, of Brajanath Badajena’s Samara - 
taranga } a spirited ballad describing the fight between the Marathas, 
who invaded Orissa, and the Oriya force led by the Raja of Dhen- 
kanal. Reference may also be made to Maguni Dasa’s Kdnchi - 
Kdveri, a historico-romantic poem based on the love between king 
Purushottama-Deva and princess Padmavatl. 

Reference should also be made to some family chronicles 
written in prose and a vast folk literature dealing with fasts, feasts 
and festivities. 

IV. ASSAMESE 

The most noticeable change in Assamese literature during the 
period under review is the greater emphasis laid upon secular, 


648 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 


rather than religious, subjects as before. Apart from stories and 
romances, books were written on astrology, mathematics, veterinary 
science, rituals, dancing and music. So far as veterinary science is 
concerned there are three treatises, namely, Hasti-Vidydrnava, an 
illustrated and scientific book on elephant-lore based on the San¬ 
skrit work Maitafiga-Uld and another book on the same subject with 
the same title, composed in 1734 by Sukumar Barkath; while a 
third book, Ashwaniddn, dealing with the diseases of horses, their 
prevention and treatment, was compiled in 1806 by Suryakharl 
Daivajna. As to the other scientific treatises, mention may be 
made of the Bhasvati, an astronomical work by Kaviraja Chakra- 
varti, and Kitdbat Manjari, a treatise on Arithmetic composed by 
Bakul Kayastha about 1734 A.D. Reference may also be made to 
the Hasta Muktdvali , a book on dancing by 6ubhankara Kavi and 
the romantic poem Mrgawati Charit by Ram Dvija. 

Reference has been made in the preceding volume (p. 563) to 
the origin and nature of the Buranjis. These prose chronicles con¬ 
tinued to be written during this period. Among the Buranjis 
written during this period or shortly before it, the following is a list 
of important ones with approximate dates within brackets: 

Padsha Buranji (c. 1650-178G), Asam Buranji (c. 1681), Kam- 
rupa Buranji (c. 1700), Kachan Burahji (c. 1706), Jayantia Buranji 
(c. 1742), and Tungkhungia Buranji (c. 1804). 8 

There are also Buranjis written in verse, two of which are well- 
known. Being commissioned by the last Ahom Prince Kameshwar 
Sinha in 1806, Dutiram Hazarika wrote the Kali Bharat —a history 
of the Ahom kings. Similarly at the command of the feudatory 
Prince Purandar Sinha (1832-38), Bishveshvar Vaidyadhipa wrote 
the Belimarar Buranji (History of Sunset), a chronicle of the last 
Ahom rulers. 

To this class of literature belongs the Durangardja-Vamshavali 
(Chronicle of the Darang Kings) compiled by Suryakharl Daivajna 
in 1798 and the Koch-Rdja-Vamshavali (Chronicle of the Koch 
Kings) by Rahikanta Dvija in 1802. 9 

V. GUJARATI 

Gujarati literature of the eighteenth century is quite rich in 
contents and in the varieties of literary forms, in spite of deterio¬ 
rating social, economic and political conditions prevailing in Guja¬ 
rat at that time. Recent research has revealed that hundreds of 


649 




THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


manuscripts of the works of Jain poets and authors of this period 
have been preserved in the Jain Bhandars at different places. It 
shows that quite a good number of poets and authors have made a 
very large contribution towards the development of the Gujarati 
literature of the eighteenth century. Most of the works of the poets 
and authors are still unpublished. The history of medieval Guja¬ 
rati literature will have to be written again when most of the 
medieval manuscripts are published and the works of the poets and 
authors are made available to scholars. 

In the medieval Gujarati literature, since the time of Hemchah- 
dracharya, particularly till the sixteenth century, the contribution 
is mainly from the Jain poets and authors. After the sixteenth cen¬ 
tury the medieval Gujarati literature flows into two different cur¬ 
rents, Jain and non-Jain. This demarcation between Jain and non- 
Jain literature is necessary in medieval Gujarati literature, because 
most of the poets and authors were inspired to write by the reli¬ 
gion they followed and the subjects of their works were mostly re¬ 
ligious; 

The major contribution of this period is in the field of Rasa 
literature, in which the poets have narrated the biography or history 
of important Jain Tirthahkaras, Acharyas, §hreshthis, Tlrthas, etc. 
Along with Rasa), contribution in the literary forms of Phdgu, Pra - 
bandha, Akhydna, Padyavarta, Bdramasi, Stavana, Sajjhaya, Kafi, 
Chdbakha 9 Arati, Pdja, Bhajcma, Bdldvabodha, etc., were made by 
several poets and authors. This literature throws much light on the 
social, political, economic, cultural and religious life and conditions 
prevailing in Gujarat and Rajasthan during that period. 

Jinalnarsha: 

Poet Jinaharsha (d. 1723) was born and brought up in Rajas¬ 
than. As a sadhu, he belonged to the Khartar Gachcha, and he was 
a disciple of Shahtihar$ha. He spent his later life in Gujarat, mostly 
in Patan. 10 

Jinaharsha is one of the major poets of this period. His con¬ 
tribution to literature is spread over a period of more than fifty 
years. He has written, both in Gujarati and Rajasthani, about 
seventy works of the types of Rasa, Chaupai , etc., and has written 
more than four hundred poems of the type of Stavana, Sajjhaya), 
Hundi, etc. Some of his important works are Chandan-Malayagiri 
ChaupaiVidydvilas Chaupai, Shukardja Rasa, Shreepdla Rgjano 
Rasa, Ratnashhha Rdjarshi Rasa, Kumdrpdl Rgsa, Harishchandra 


650 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 


Rasa, Haribala Lachbhino Rasa, Abhaykumdra Rasa,, Sheelavati Rasa , 
J ambus wdmi Rasa, Ardmshobhd Rasa. Most of his works are still 
unpublished. 

The longest work of Jinaharsha is Shatrunjaya Mahdtmya Rasa 
which is available in his own handwriting. The Rasa runs into 
more than 8,568 lines. The historical and religious importance of 
the chief Jain Tirtha, Shatrunja, is described at length in this Rasa . 
Jinaharsha had a great command over languages. He was also 
well-versed in Rag-RaginI and therefore we find in abundance varie¬ 
ties of musical tunes in his poetry. Among the stavanas, his famous 
Stavana named ‘Antarjdmi’ for Lord Farshvanatha is still boing sung 
everyday by devotees in Jain temples. 

Udayaratna: 

Poet Udayaratna was a popular and prominent poet of this 
period. He was a disciple of Shivaratnasuri. From his works we 
learn that he spent most of his time, as a sddhu, in Gujarat, in places 
like Patan, Ahmadabad, Cambay, Kheda, etc. He has written more 
than twenty-five Rasas and many poems of the type of Stavanas and 
Sajjhayas. Very few of his works are published. Among his Rasas 
the prominent are J ambus wdmi Rasa, Ashta-Prakdri Pujd Rasa, 
Sthulibhadra Rasa, Rdjasimha Rasa, Malayasundari Rasa , Yashodhara 
Bhuvanbhdnu Kevali Rasa, Lildvati Rasa, Harivamsha Rasa. 11 In 
Jambuswdmi Rasa , written in Kheda-Hariala town, the poet has 
narrated the life of Jambukumara. The Rasa runs into more than 
5,000 lines divided into dhals. Jambukumara, son of a merchant, 
was inspired by the preaching of Sudharamaswami and decided to 
adopt the path of renunciation, but his parents insisted that he 
should first marry the daughters of the merchants in order to res¬ 
pect their commitments and then he would be free to adopt dikshd. 
The parents knew that it was very difficult for a young man to 
think of dikshd once he entered married life. But to the surprise 
of his parents and of all, Jambukumara on the very first night of his 
marriage, successfully persuaded all his eight wives to adopt the 
path of dikshd along with him. -His parents and others also joined 
him. The story of Jambukumara itself is very interesting and the 
poet has shown distinct poetic qualities in narrating it. 

Udayaratna has written many stavanas and sajjhayas. His 
stavanas of Shamkheshvara Parshvanatha and his sajjhayas on 
anger, pride, infatuation and greed are very popular till today and 
are being regularly sung by the Jains. 


651 



THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Devachandraji: 

Devachandraji is one of the most remarkable poets of this cen¬ 
tury. A Rasa on the life of Devachandraji was written in 1769 and 
is available. This Rasa throws much light on the life and works of 
Devachandraji. 12 Devachandraji was born in Raj&sthan in 1760. 
At the age of ten he became Dikshit and then the disciple of 
Muni Rajasagara, who had forecasted, before the birth of Deva¬ 
chandraji, to his parents, that their son will be a great sddhu. Deva¬ 
chandraji was very bright and in his young days studied several 
shdstras and works of his predecessors. He spent several years in 
Gujarat and Saurashtra, did many religious performances, helped 
people and princes in times of natural calamities, made pilgrimages 
to Shatruhjaya and participated in religious discussions with leaders 
of other religions. He was one of the great scholars and philosophers 
of the period and was a very pious sddhu. He has written Stavana - 
Chovishi, sajjhayas, etc., which are full of deep meaning. His sta- 
vanas are very popular even now and are being regularly sung by 
the Jains in temples and Upashrayas. His language has the charac¬ 
teristics of both Gujarat and Rajasthan. 

Mohanavijaya ; 

Nothing is known about the birth-place and birth-date of this 
poet, but from his works we learn that he belonged to Tapa- 
gachcha and he was a disciple of Rupavijaya. He has written seve¬ 
ral Rasas, some of which are Narmada Sundarino Rasa 9 Punyapdl 
Gunasundari Rasa , Chand Rdjdno Rasa, etc. In all his Rasas, he has 
mentioned the year in which they were written. Thus most of his 
works were written in the beginning of the eighteenth century in 

the towns of Gujarat such as Mehsana, Patan, Saminagar, Rajnagar, 

* . 

etc. In addition to Rasas, Mohanavijaya has also written Stavana - 
Chovishi in which his stavana for Bhagavan Rishabdhev, beginning 

with ‘Olambhade Mat Khijo’ is very popular among the Jains. 

/ 

Jnanavimal: 

Jnianavimal was born in Bhinnamala, in the year 1638. He be¬ 
came a disciple of Dhiravimalgani. He spent much of his time in 
Surat, Cambay, Ahmadabad, Patan, Radhanpur, Palitana, Junagadh, 
etc., and passed away in Cambay at the age of eighty-nine. He has 
written several works both in prose and in poetry such as Sddhu- 
vandana, Jambu Rasa, Tirthamdla, Chand-Kevali Rasa, Ashokchandra 
Rohini Rdsa, etc., and has also written many stavanas, sajjhayas , 
bhashyas, etc. 


652 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 
Nemavijaya: 

Nemavijaya was a disciple of Tilakavijaya of Tapagachcha. He 
has written several Rasas and Bar-masas. Among his Rasas, Shila- 
vati Rasa, Vachchraja Charitra Rasa, Mantri Nrip Rasa and Teja- 
sara Rajarshi Rasa are available, though they are not yet published. 
The manuscript of Tejasara Rajarshi Rasa is available in his own 
handwriting. 

Prose Literature: 

During this century, as in the previous one, the Jain authors 
contributed very largely to the development of medieval Gujarati 
prose. In fact, there is hardly any literature in prose by the non- 
Jain authors and, therefore, the contribution of the Jain authors in 
this field is remarkable. Old manuscripts of more than three hun¬ 
dred different works in prose, of the type of Bdlavdbodha, Stabak, 
Tikd, Vartik, Sdroddhdr, etc., are available. 

Among the non-Jain poets of this period we have Shamal, Pri- 
tamdas, Dhiro, Bhojo, Day a ram and other poets who have contri¬ 
buted largely towards the development of the medieval Gujarati 
literature. 

Shamal: 

Though born in the later part of the seventeenth century, poet 
Shamal’s literary works were written during this period. Shamal, a 
Brahmin from Venganpur, knew Sanskrit, Braj and Persian lan¬ 
guages. Shamal, in the beginning, wrote religious didactic poems, 
but subsequently decided to write narrative poems. He has written 
puranic works in Gujarati such as Shiva-Purana, Angadvishti, 
Ravana-Mandodari Samvdd, etc., but his major contribution is in 
the field of fiction in poetry. His outstanding works are Simhdsana- 
Batrishi, Suda-Bahoteri, Vetdl-Pachisi, Pancha-danda, Madanmohana 
Padmavati, Vidydvilasini, etc. His fictions in poetry run into several 
thousand lines. Shamal’s poetry was very popular, particularly 
among the common people because his works are full of imagination 
and practical wisdom. Shamal is known for depicting very bright 
female characters and is also known for his chhappas describing pro¬ 
blems of practical wisdom. Poet Shamal is one of the most out¬ 
standing story-tellers of the medieval Gujarati literature. 

Pritamdds: 

Pritamdas (1720-1798), blind since birth, was born at Bavla, 
but he settled down in Sandesar in Kheda district. At the age of 


653 


THE MARATH& SUPREMACY 


fifteen he came in contact with some of the sddhus of the Rama- 
nanda sect and imbibed from them the knowledge of bhakti, vedanta 
and yoga. Pritamdas has written works like Saras-gitd, Prem-Pra - 
hash, Jhana-gita, etc*., and has also written many padas, some of 
which are also in Hindi. Pritamdas is much known for his sweet 
padas. His pada } Harcno Mdrag is very popular in Gujarati literature, 

Niranta: 

The padas of poet Niranta (1747-1852), born at Dethan near 
Miyagam, are still recited regularly by his followers during their 
daily prayers. Niranta has written in simple and lucid language 
poems of different types such as Sakhi, Kundalia, Jhulana , Dhol, 
Chhappa, Kafi, Vanr, Tithi and Mahina. He has written some poems 
in Hindi also, and he has even addressed letters in verses to some of 
his contemporaries who were known for bhakti, jnana and vairagya. 
Subjects of Niranta’s poems are mainly self-realisation through 
knowledge, premlakshana, bhakti, nirgunopasand, etc. 

Ratno: 

Ratno was a cloth-dyer of Kheda. He is known for his poem 
Mahina (1739) which is one of the best of its type in medieval 
Gujarati literature. In this poem he describes vividly the delicate 
feelings of love and separation of Gopis from Krishna, in the context 
of the natural surroundings which keep on changing according to 
the months of different seasons. 

Narbheram: 

Narbheram (1768-1852), a resident of Pij, was a disciple of 
Guru Chhotalal, who diverted him towards bhakti of Krishna. Nar¬ 
bheram, since then, used to visit regularly the places of pilgrimage— 
Dwaraka and Dakor. He has written several poems of bhakti of 
Ranchhodrai. In one of these poems he has described the bravery of 
Bhakta Bodana, who had daringly shifted the idol Ranchhodrai from 
Dwaraka to Dakor. 

Dhiro: 

Poet Dhiro, born at Gothada, started writing his padas at the 
age of seventeen. His married life was not happy as his wife was 
hot-tempered. This also seems to have made Dhiro interested in 
philosophy. He studied Sdmkhya, Veddrita and Yoga. Dhiro has 
written Ranayajna, Swarupani Kafi, Aval-Vani, Yoga Mdrga, Jhdna - 


654 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 


Kakko, etc. He is more known for his poems of the type of Kafi, 
which are written in five stanzas. The subject of his poems lays 
much stress on Atma-Jndna, (knowledge of the Self). 

Bhojo Bhagat: 

Bhojo Bhagat, a poet from Amreli, was illiterate as he never 
knew how to read or write. He was very popular among his fol¬ 
lowers who used to write down the poems for him. Bhojo has com¬ 
posed Selaiya Akhyan, Bhakta-Mal, Brahma-Bodh and a number of 
pada\s. Among his padas the type of Chdbakhd (lashes) are more 
popular. In Chdbakhds Bhojo attacked with bitterness, sometimes 
in the language of warfare, the hypocrites of different sections of the 
society including pseudo -sddhus. His language is simple and sin¬ 
cere and, therefore, it appealed to the masses. 

Bapu Gdikwdd: 

Bapu Gaikwad (1777-1843), a Maratha of Baroda, having come 
into contact with two of his senior contemporaries, Dhiro and 
Niranta, became detached towards worldly pleasures and subse¬ 
quently resigned from service in the State and spent his time in 
religious activities and in writing padcts. He has written poems of 
the typ'e of Kafi, Rajia, Garabi, etc., in which he has attacked the 
meaningless conventions of his time. Though a Maratha, he has 
written poems in chaste Gujarati. 

Poets of Swdmindrdyana Sect: 

During the eighteenth century, the people, particularly of the 
lower strata, in Cutch, Saurashtra and Gujarat experienced a tre¬ 
mendous wave of bhakti under the influence of Sahajananda (1781- 
1830) and his disciples, Muktananda, Nishkulanahda, Brahmananda, 
Prem-Sakhi, Premananda, Devananda, and others. His disciples have 
written hundreds of jjarabis and pad<is of bhakti and vairdgya in 
addition to longer poems such as Mukundbavani, Uddhavw-gitd. 
Brahmavildsa, Upadeshchintdmam (by Brahmananda). Among 
the poets of this sect Brahmananda and Prem-Sakhi are superior to 
ethers in their imagination, diction of language and style. 

Dayardm: 

Dayaram, who has been compared with Hafiz, or Byron, or 
Surdas of Gujarati literature, has written more than forty works in 
addition to his miscellaneous padas. Some of his important works 


655 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


are Rasik-Vallabh, Bhakti Poshan, Ajdmil Akhydn, Rasik Rahja)n, 
Satyabhamano-vivaha, Rukmini-vivdha, Rdsa-Leeld, PcCtra-Leela, Prem 
Parikshd, Hanuman-Garuda Samvdd. Dayaram has also written 
several poems in Braj, Maithili, Sindhi, Punjabi, Urdu, Marathi and 
Sanskrit languages. Dayaram’s major contribution to the Gujarati 
literature is his poetry of the type of Garrabi —lyrical poems on some 
single thought, feeling or situation. Gopis’ or Radha’s love for 
Krishna is a subject for his Garabis. Dayaram is a master of Garabis, 
as he achieves poetical heights in them. 

Poetesses: 

During this period some poetesses have also made contribution 
towards the development of Gujarati literature, though the authen¬ 
ticity of some of the works, said to have beqn written by them, is 
still doubtful. Among these poetesses we may mention Gauri Bai, 
Divali Bai, Krishna Bai, Radha Bai, Puri Bai, Varanasi Bai, Jani 
Bai, Nani Bai, Ratna Bai and Sadhvi Hemashree. 

Thus the medieval Gujarati literature of the eighteenth century 
is rich both in contents and in varieties of literary forms. On ac¬ 
count of the break-up of the Mughul empire and the incursions of 
the Marathas, there was confusion everywhere. The popular frus¬ 
tration found expression in religious literature. 

VI. PUNJABI 

There is a tradition, which is part of the history of the Sikhs, 
that in order to inspire his own followers and the people in general, 
Guru Govind Singh (1666-1708) kept in his employ fifty-two poets 
who composed in the prevalent mode of neo-classical Hindi poetry 
works whose themes were heroic, didactic and philosophical. All 
the waitings of these poets whose names are known to history, 
though all of them may not have been in attendance upon the Guru 
at the same time, were written down in the Gurumukhi script. 
They are reported to have recited their compositions in special as¬ 
semblies convened by the Guru. Their felicities of expression such 
as the pun, simile, metaphor and classical allusion are reported to 
have elicited great praise and ovation, and rich rewards are men¬ 
tioned to have been conferred upon these poets from the Guru's 
bounty. 

A dominant theme of these poets was to give poetic form to the 
teaching of Guru Govind Singh, who enunciated the gospel compre¬ 
hending the supremacy of meditation and bhakti, the vision of a 


'IF *3 


656 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 

society free from caste distinctions and sectarian rancour and the 
urge for heroic action to defend Right, in which the Indian mind 
would be able to see the resuscitation of the ancient heroic ideals 
of India. All this great body of literature, which is said to have 
comprised a great mass, is called collectively Vidyd-sdgara (ocean of 
learning). 

Unfortunately the bulk of the literature produced under Guru 
Govind Singh’s patronage was lost, and only a part has survived in 
scattered copies in different places. Bhai Mani Singh, priest of the 
holy Hari Mandir at Amritsar, now famous as the Golden Temple, 
at some time during the fourth decade of the eighteenth century 
got together whatever had remained of the compositions of the Guru 
Govind Singh era and compiled it to form a large volume, later 
known as the Granth of the Tenth Master (Dasham Granth). There 
are divergent opinions as to the authorship of the compositions con¬ 
tained in this large volume of more than 1,400 pages in print. The 
consensus appears to be to ascribe the prayers and some of the 
philosophical portions to Guru Govind Singh himself, an accom¬ 
plished poet, and the rest to other poets, whose contribution can¬ 
not now in all cases be accurately identified. 

One fragment highly valuable from the historical point of view 
is Bachittar-Natak, which contains a narrative of Guru Govind 
Singh's life up till about the year 1690. 

Dasham Granth comprises three versions of the epic of the god¬ 
dess Chandl, based on the story of her fight with Mahisasur, the 
Buffalo-Demon. Two of these are in Hindi, and the third in Punjabi. 
This last is believed to *be Guru Govind Singh’s own composition, 
while the other two are very likely by the hands of some bards. 
Guru Govind Singh got composed a great deal of literature of a 
martial nature, based on the tales of heroism from the mythology of 
India, whereby he sought to invoke the spirit of the heroic past and 
to arouse his contemporaries to crusade for the higher values to 
which he gave the name Dharma. Oriented to a similar objective 
are some Puranic tales—stories of the avatars or incarnations of 
Vishnu. In these, too, the dominant spirit in the episodes is heroism. 
Some portions of the Dasham Granth are devotional and philosophi¬ 
cal. These rephrase the monistic-monotheistic teachings of the 
Founders of Sikhism, in a classical idiom, taking their phraseology 
from the Indian spiritual sources, incorporating at the same time 
some vocabulary drawn from Islam. This last was intended to in¬ 
culcate the spirit of tolerance, and to raise the seeker to the higher 

657 


M.S.—42 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


levels of spiritual experience where the creeds melt into the uni¬ 
versal mystical vision. A number of hymns form part of the corpus 
of this Gromth s set to the classical Indian ragas. A considerable 
portion is taken up with short tales portraying the wiles of woman 
(Charitropakhyan ) in the medieval Indian tradition of social 
thought. These are likely to be by some of the poets attendant up¬ 
on the Guru. 

A number of similar stories in Persian called Hikayat (tale) 
are also given. One celebrated part of the contents is Zafar-Namah 
(Epistle of Victory) believed to be addressed by Guru Govind 
Singh to Aurangzib in the Deccan, castigating the emperor’s depu¬ 
ties for their treachery and tyranny, and breathing the spirit of 
freedom. Dasham Granth , thus, is a treasure house of history, de¬ 
votional literature and treatment of mythological themes. A detail¬ 
ed critical study of this remarkable volume is still to be made, 
though the process has already been initiated by Hindi scholars. 

A remarkable work in the volume of the Sikh literature of this 
period is a prose narrative Prem Sumarg . It is difficult to fix its 
precise date. Even the name of its writer is not known. From in¬ 
ternal evidence, however, this appears to be a kind of early sketch 
of Sikh polity of a period when the Sikhs had established their prin¬ 
cipalities or commonwealth over the Punjab, and free from Muslim 
persecution or fear of domination, could think of the principles on 
which their rule might be established. The principles articulated 
are humane, in the spirit of the Sikh religious teaching. The ruler 
is enjoined the duty to cherish his subjects’ welfare, to provide 
employment to all, and to maintain justice. There are traces of con¬ 
servatism, such as would belong to a society which emerged out of 
the Hindu masses. For its historical significance this work, though 
comprising less than 200 pages, is remarkable. Its language is a 
mixture of Hindi and Punjabi, the former predominating. 

Bhai Mani Singfi, the compiler of Dasham Granth, is credited 
with two prose works on Sikh religious themes. One is Bhagat 
Ratnavali, containing brief biographical episodes about the devoted 
Sikhs who were contemporary with the first six Gu'rus of the Sikh 
faith. The other, Gian Ratnavali, is a commentary on Japaji. This 
last one gives very valuable insights into the meaning of this diffi¬ 
cult sacred text. 

Among the Sikh and Hindu poets and writers may be men¬ 
tioned the names of Kirpaldas, Senapati, Sarupdas Bhalla, Kesar 


658 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 

Singh Chhibbar and Gulab Singh. A great poet, Nandlal, who had 
mastery over the Persian language, has left voluminous works of a 
devotional-philosophical character, which is a part of the Sikh reli¬ 
gious canon. Nandlal is reported to have been an especial favou¬ 
rite of Guru Govind Singh and attended his court. 

A number of Hukam-Namahs or Encyclicals of Guru Govind 
Singh, Mata Sundari, his widow and the hero Banda Bahadur were 
circulated to the Sikhs in the early part of the eighteenth century. 
These are brief, but contain valuable historical material. Their 
language is Punjabi with an admixture of Hindi, Recently these 
have been published and are a part of the background history of 
the Punjab. 

Some short epics, called Vars in Punjabi, appeared during the 
period under discussion. Besides Chamdi-di-Var, already mention¬ 
ed in connection with Dasham Granth, are Nadir-Shah-dLVar by 
Najabat, a Muslim, and Var Haqiqat Rai by Agra. Nadir-Shah-di - 
Var narrates the story of the devastation and loot of northern India 
by Nadir Shah. Its narrative is forceful and dramatic and its lan¬ 
guage is bardic Punjabi. Agra’s Var on Haqiqat Rai is the story 
of a Sikh youth of tender years martyred in 1734. It is deeply 
touching in tone and atmosphere. Haqiqat Rai is one of the heroes 
of the Punjabi people. A number of other Vars were composed on 
episodes from the life of Guru Govind Singh and from the Indian 
religious lore. 

Gurdas Singh, a devoted follower of Guru Govind Singh, com¬ 
posed his Var on the Guru’s eulogy, which is generally appended 
to the pre-existing Forty Vars of Bhai Gurdas who flourished earlier 
in the seventeenth century. This is a powerful paen of the glory 
of Guru Govind Singh and the Khalsa and the famous refrain runs 
through it— Wdh Wah Govind Singh ape Guru-Chela (Hail, Hail, 
Govind Singh! Master and Disciple). From internal evidence this 
too, like Prem Sumdrg points to its period of composition being 
sometime in the second half of the eighteenth century, when the 
Sikhs had begun vigorously the process of overthrowing the Mughul 
power in the Punjab. In a couplet in the body of the Var itself 
the year of its composition is stated to be 1757 (Vikram Era) which 
would work out to 1700 of the Christian Era. But that is not likely. 

Muslim Literature: 

Allied to the Var is Qissa (tale, romance), a form based on the 
Persian masnavi, and touching generally themes from Muslim reli- 


659 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

gious lore or romantic tales current among the Muslim people. 
Later, the themes of the Qissai came to embrace a wider field. In 
the eighteenth century the favourite theme of Qissa was the rom¬ 
ance of Yusuf and Suleikha, based on the story of Joseph in the 
Quran , though highly embellished and romanticized by the Muslim 
poets. Two ill-starred Muslim lovers of Sind, Sassi and Punni, 
Came in for treatment, and their story has been the theme of Punjabi 
poets now for more than two centuries. Another famous romantic 
tale is that of Hir, the Jat belle whose love for the cowherd Ranjha 
is the national romance of the Punjabi people. While a number of 
versions of the story of Hir in various styles are extant, the ear¬ 
liest going back to Akbar’s time, the doyen of the Hir romancers 
is Waris Shah (c. 1730-90), to whom reference has been made in 
Vol. VII (p. 575). 

A form of narrative and romantic poetry current in the age was 
Si-Harfi , a kind of acrostic built on the letters of the Arabic al¬ 
phabet, each stanza beginning with one of these letters in succes¬ 
sion, and thus over the whole narrative. To carry this kind of nar¬ 
rative through was regarded as a matter of great poetic skill. 

A great deal of romantic and Sufi poetry was composed by the 
Muslim poets during this period. The Sufis wished to express the 
spiritual experience in universal terms, inclining however, to em¬ 
ploy the Muslim vocabulary. Bullah is the greatest Sufi poet of the 
period, and like Waris Shah, has acquired the status of the spokes¬ 
man of the Punjabi mind. Other Sufi poets are Muqbil, Fard 
Fakir, Hamid and Sayyid Ghulam Qadir. Muqbil also made his ver¬ 
sion of Hir, which popularly ranks second only to that of Waris 
Shah. Muslim poets as a whole may be distinguished by their use 
of the vocabulary drawn from the Perso-Arabic sources, though in 
their general orientation they are overwhelmingly Punjabi. The 
Punjabi language for them was till then their favoured medium of 
expression. Urdu, which became later the dominant language of 
education and administration, came only with the establishment of 
British rule over the Punjab. The Muslims have excelled in the 
romantic and lyrical fields of poetry besides the Qissa or tale. Dur¬ 
ing this period their general sensibility was national and free from 
religious rancour and they expressed the general woes of the people 
in the period of the decline of the central authority at Delhi and 
the repeated invasions from Kabul and Iran, the loot and the anar¬ 
chy. While the literature of this period is not generally great, it is 
historically valuable and contains a few masterpieces. 


660 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 

VII. MARATHI 

Marathi literature during the period under review was varied 
in form and artistic in style. The age of spiritual poetry of the saints 
had already given place to that of the poetry of the Pandits. The 
authors of this period continued the earlier tradition, but they wrote 
with a greater sense of art. It was the age of Maratha supremacy 
in the political field which inspired many poets to compose patrio¬ 
tic poetry. The literature of this period may be classified under 
four sub-heads: (i) Scholastic poetry (traditional Pandit poetry), 
(ii) Ballad poetry (the Powd&ds and Ldvms), (iii) The Bakhars and 
historical letters in prose, ynd (iv) Miscellaneous. 

Pandit or Scholastic poetry: 

The traditional narrative poetry based on the Epics and Puranas, 
which began earlier, got a fresh impetus in this period. The scholar 
poets of this period tried to enrich the literature externally and in¬ 
trinsically in various forms. Along with the old traditional narra¬ 
tive poetry, a new class of biographers and composers of verses 
known as padas to be sung at the time of kirtanas came into exist¬ 
ence. 

Kacheshwar Brahme (1731) belonging to the traditional narra¬ 
tive school wrote Gajehdra-moksha (95 slokas) and Sud&macharitra 
(103 slokas) in various metres. He also wrote Adi Bavachi (121 
Ovi and Abhangas ), an autobiography, and some padas. Shahii 
Chhatrapatl of Satara and BalajI Vishwanath, the Peshwd, were his 
disciples. 

Bajaji alias Niranjan Madhav (1703-1790) was a near contem¬ 
porary of Samraj, Nagesh and Vifhal. Being an ambassador of the 
Peshwds in distant territories such as Karnataka, he was noted for 
his political activities. Simultaneously he was engaged in writing 
stotras (hymns), biographies, works on travel and Vedantic com¬ 
positions continuously for thirty-seven years. Krishndnanda Sindhu 
(1735) is known to be his first composition. It took twelve years 
to complete. He wrote Chittabodha-Rdmdyana ) a commentary on the 
seven Kandds of Adhyatma-Rdmayana. Out of it, only the Bdla- 
kanda is available. He also wrote Jnaneshwaravijaya (1765) in 
1038 Ovi verses, a biography of Jnaneshwar based on the work of 
Namdev. His other work is Vrittamuktdvali (1761), a treatise on 
prosody. His Subhadrdchaihpu is the only champu in Marathi lite¬ 
rature. His other works on prosody are Vritta-Vanamdla and Vritta- 
vatansa, which were written at the age of seventy. His twenty-one 


661 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


stotras written on various occasions are compiled in his Stotrakalpa. 
Of these, Ramakarnamrita of 111 slokas is the longest one. His 
Niro§htha Rdghavacharitra is a typical example of word jugglery. 

Niranjan Madhav’s travel literature consists of his religious 
visits to various places in India such as Uttaramanas, Dakshinamanas, 
Sri Prayag and Kashi. He describes graphically in it how the so- 
called priests and government officials harass pilgrims for their sel¬ 
fish purposes. He refers to the jizya or poll-tax of the period. He 
also describes the other side of the picture, viz., the lovely banks 
of the Ganga and gaily dressed ladies trying to please the youths. 
He is also known to have written Bodhapradipika and Advaitdmrita, 
prose commentaries on Shankaracharya’s treatises. Though he ap¬ 
pears to have borrowed many ideas from Sanskrit, he has maintain¬ 
ed his individuality and appreciative sense, full of devotion. 

A new class of writers composing pasdas appeared on the scene 
in this period. The Ndradiya Kxrtan tradition, though age-old, had 
taken a popular turn at this time on account of the padas sung in 
sweet tunes. They wrote short devotional poems to be sung with 
sweet melodies in Klrtana. The average man welcomed them as 
they appealed to his ear and mind. 

Tryambak alias Madhvamuni (1731), belonging to the Madhva 
school of philosophy, occupies a prominent place in this respect. He 
is more known for his padas describing practical life than for his 
narrative poetry. His padas like Chxmandsa Rama and Uddhavd 
Shdntavana Karajd are as sweet as honey. After Tukaram, he came 
forward to popularise the Bhakti school by his appealing words. 
Amritrai alias Raiji (1698-1753), the disciple of Madhvamuni, sur¬ 
passed his guru by his melodious padas. His poetry in Kanaka 
metre known as Katav attracted the people by its harmonious and 
lucid words. His Santapadachl jod de re Han is very popular. He 
possesses an extraordinary skill in drawing pen-pictures. His 
poetry is enriched by an artistic mixture of Hindi and Sanskrit 
words. His alliterations are so powerful that the audience is carried 
away by the delightful magical sound in his poetry. It was Amrit¬ 
rai who was mainly responsible in making the Kirtana tradition 
popular by his padas. Even the Klrtanakdrs of today use freely his 
padas to create interest in their Klrtanas. The rich vocabulary and 
the skill in the. arrangement of words coupled with his wonderful 
memory are some of his special features. 

The new tradition of the padas included Abhangds, Aratls , Sto- 
trds, Ashfakds, BJvtipdlis, Prabhdtagitas (songs of dawn), DhavaUs 


662 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 

(invocations) and Paifrias (lullabies). They had some relation to the 
earlier tradition of Bhajant KXrtana in this respect. 

Though writing of biographies began in the initial stages of 
Marathi literature, this century saw the rise of the biographers who 
established a regular biographical tradition in Marathi. NabhajI of 
Gwalior (1700) wrote Bhaktamdla, a book containing the biographies 
of saints in the local dialect. It is not a biographical work in the 
true sense of the term, as it mentions only the names of saints. 
His disciple Priyadas wrote Bhaktirasabodhini, a commentary on 
Bhaktamdla , and Martand Bawa wrote a Marathi commentary on 
Bhaktirasabodhini which is also known as Bhaktamdla . These com¬ 
mentators added their own material to the original and their com¬ 
mentaries naturally developed into the biographical form. 

Daso Digambar’s Santavijaya (34 chapters) belongs to this 
school. It may be noted that these biographers never critically 
analysed their material consisting of anecdotes which they received 
traditionally. 

Mahipati Tahrabadkar (1715-90) stands out as the foremost 
writer who devoted all his life in writing the biographies of saints. 

The biography of Tukaram in his Bhaktavijaiya (1762) is his 
masterpiece. Although his work is marked by a historical sense, he 
does not seem to have made use of his material for discovering the 
* truth, naked, unblushing truth, the first virtue of more serious 
history’, which as Gibbon points out, should be the sole recommen¬ 
dation of any good biography. Mahipati wrote other biographies, 
viz., Smtalilamrita. Apart from these, he composed Kathdsdrdmrita , 
Tulsimahdtmya, Ganesapurdrui, Dattdtreyacharitra, Rishipanchami, 
Anantachaturdashi , texts of religious or ritualistic nature. Apard- 
dhanivedana Stotra and Pdnduranga Stotra are some of his other 
works in addition. Mahipati did a lot of pioneering work and fur¬ 
nished profuse data for the use of future biographers of saints. 
Thus by his writings he has added a new dimension to the art of 
biography in Marathi, though we may not agree with his viewpoint. 

After Mahipati, Bhlmaswami of Ramdasi Math, Tanjore, and 
Rajaramprasadi, the noted biographer of Ramdasi School, carried on 
this tradition further. Rajaramprasadi, the author of Shribhakta - 
manjarimdla, narrated the lives of nearly a hundred saints, not in¬ 
cluded in Mahipati’s work. These biographers wrote like other nar¬ 
rative poets whose works were characterised by devotion. 


663 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Moropant (1729-94) was the most luminous star in the galaxy of 
narrative poets of this century. In the words of V. L. Bhave, “he 
was well versed in all the shastras. A man of keen intellect and 
high erudition, he was a versatile national purdnik (an exponent of 
puranas).” 13 He was the last poet of the narrative tradition before 
the advent of the British paramountcy and Indian renaissance. 

Moropant’s period oi writing may be conveniently divided into 
four parts as follows: First period (1752-61); Pant, as he is popu¬ 
larly called, started his composition of poems at the age of about 
twenty-two. Kushalavdkhydna is his first work. Besides, he wrote 
Brahmottarkhanda, Shri Krishna Vijaya (first part 1-49 adhydyas ), 
Pralhadavijaya, Madalasacharitra, Harischandrdkhydna, Devimahdt - 
mya , Saptashafi, Vinayakamahdtmya and Sdra-Rdmdyana. 

Second period (1761-72): He wrote Sitdgitd , Sdvitrigitd and 
Rukminigita —all female songs in the beginning of this period. 
Later he wrote Shri Krishna Vijaya (50-79 adhydyas ), Suddma - 
charita, Bhasmdsurdkhyana, Bhrigucharitra and many slokas 
(hymns) in praise of holy rivers like the Krishna and also of deities, 
Shri Krishna Vijaya (latter part: 80-90 adhydyas ), Mantra Rdmayana, 
Aryamuktamdla, Samshayaratndvali, Arya Kekdvali, Ndmdryd , all 
in Aryd metres, and also some poetical chapters like Bhishmabhakti- 
bhdgya, Avatar amJald, , etc. 

Third period (1772-82) was the glorious period of the composi¬ 
tion of Mahabhdrata. During this period he wrote Amritamanthana, 
Vdmanacharitra and Mantra Bhdgavata ( 10th chapter of Bhagavat 
Purana). 

Fourth period: In this last period, Mantra Bhdgavata } Hari - 
vamsha , Sankirna Rdmayana (about 108 chapters, but actually 90 
available) were his voluminous works. Shloka-Kekdvali is the 
famous devotional poem of this period. As compared with his ear¬ 
lier writings, his later works are of a higher order from the literary 
point of view. His Mahabhdrata, the story of Pandavas, as he calls 
it, is rich in presentation and surpasses the works , of other writers 
on this subject. Its place is unique in the history of Marathi lite¬ 
rature. 

Moropant followed meticulously the method of expanding and 
abridging portions of the original Mahabhdrata, Rdmayana and Bhdga¬ 
vata Purana into Marathi. He paid more attention to the story ele¬ 
ment in these works and skipped philosophical discussions and des¬ 
criptions. These are not mere translations, as some scholars assert, 


664 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 


because he has maintained his individuality of conceiving absolutely 
original ideas which are often absent in such types of works. 

Jyotipant Dada Mahabhagawat, the exponent of the Bhdgavata 
Purana, and Sohiroba Ambiye, author of Siddhdntasamhitd, Mcihad- 
bhuvaneshwari, and also of padas, abhangas, were contemporaries of 
Moropant, who continued the tradition of philosophical poetry. 
Krishnadayarnava, author of Harivarada, Madhavaswami of the 
south, the exponent of Bhagavad Gitd, Anu Gita and Yogavdsishta 
and Shivaram, the exponent of Bhdgavata Purana of this century be¬ 
long, to this school, while Gopala, Shubhananda and Anantatanaya, 
all composers of Mahdbhdrata, were the exponents of the school of 
longer narrative poetry of this period. 

Bardic Poetry: 

Side by side with Bhakti movement of the traditional narrative 
poets dedicated to ‘spiritual democracy’, the Shdhirs or the com¬ 
posers of historical ballads ( Powddas ) and lyrics of love ( Lavnis ) in¬ 
spired the people with national spirit, as well as romantic love, the 
natural instinct in human life. The ballads are historical poems 
which sing of the valiant deeds of the Maratha heroes. This poetry 
taught people how to live and enjoy vigorously a practical life. The 
Powadas or ballads are much older than the Lavnis. They have their 
origin in the reign of Shivaji and his times. Out of the three hun¬ 
dred ballads available, seven belong to this period. About hundred 
and fifty Powddds were composed during the Peshwa period, parti¬ 
cularly the latter part of it, and the remaining in the beginning of 
the British period. The Shdhirs, belonging to all castes, recited 
mostly the historical incidents of their times and entertained the 
people in the popular language. They sung to the accompaniment 
of the drum, the lyre and cymbals. “Apart from their (ballads) 
value as national poetry,” says H. A. Acworth, “their phraseology is 
well worthy of study as an example of the flexibility, the force, the 
richness, and capacity of the vernacular language of the Maratha 
ryot”. 14 Prof. S. R. Sharma writes, “This is a mode of poetic com¬ 
position which is peculiar to Maharashtra, and its vogue has not died 
out even now....” 

If the Powadd is masculine in its robust vigour, the Ldvni is femi¬ 
nine in its tone and tenor. 15 The great stalwarts of this Ldvni form 
were Anant Phandi (1744-1819), Parashuram, (1754-1844), Ram Jqshl 
(1758-1813), Prabhakar (1769-1843), Saganbhau (1778-1840) 
and HonajI Bala (1790). Anant Phandi is known for didactic 

* 665 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Kat&vs and Parashuram for his pictures of social life and varied sub¬ 
jects. Scholarship forms part of the poetry of Ram Joshi, while the 
‘outer’ or descriptive element is very strong in Prabhakar. Sagan- 
bhau has a special love of saints and gods of Maharashtra. Honiajl 
started a new experiment in this field by his lucidity and musical 
tunes. These Shahtrs not only sang the heroic deeds of the Mara- 
thas, but also lamented the deaths of the heroes and the decline and 
fall of the Peshwas. These poets sang spontaneously on public 
platforms the songs which were mostly unwritten. Although some 
of the Lavnis are pornographic, a great majority of them are un¬ 
doubtedly poetic. Honaji’s Ghanashydm Sundard Shridhard (an in¬ 
vocation to Lord Krishna at dawn) is a case in point. A few of 
these Ldyms are typically philosophical. The Shahirs continued their 
tradition even after the downfall of the Maratha State in 1818. 
This literature marked the decadence of Maratha power and society. 

The Bakhars and Historical Letters: 

While the Powd^ds (ballads) are in verse, the Bakhars —the 
chronicles of Maratha history—of this period are in prose. The term 
Bakhar is the metathetical form of the Arabic word Khcubar which 
means news or report. In Marathi this term is used in a limited 
sense, namely, political history or the history of the times. The 
writers of Bakhars wrote imitating the Tawarikhs of the Muslim 
potentates. 16 The Bakhars were written to order by court-writers for 
their masters. Like the Poroddas , the Bakhars had their tradition in 
Shivajfs times, though they had their origin even earlier. In the 
Peshwa period this form of literature developed as the Maratha 
kingdom expanded. Raj wade estimates the total number of the 
Bakha/rs at more than two-hundred. 17 Actually only half of them are 
extant and of these about seventy have so far been published. They 
can be classified as biographies, autobiographies, family histories, 
accounts of great events, news and reports and translations. 

The oldest Bakhar , according to Raj wade, is Shdlivahandchi 
Bakhar. 18 There are about twelve Bakhars dealing with the life and 
achievements of Shivaji. A few Bakhars are contemporary, while a 
great many are of later period. Most of the Bakhars have been com¬ 
posed on the events of the Peshwd period. The battle of Panipat 
forms the theme of many of them. Bhdusdhebanchl Bakhar , a con¬ 
temporary one, dealing with this theme is unique among all the 
Bakhars from the point of view of literary style, narrative skill and 
impassioned prose. Bhausahebanchi Kaifiyat and Raghunath Yadav’s 
Panipatchl Bakhar are also contemporary ones on the same subject. 

66 6 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 


The Kaifiyat is believed to be the original, while BhausahebancKi 
Balchar is an enlargement of it. 19 The other contemporary Bakhars 
on the same subject, viz., the autobiography of Nana Phadnis and 
Holkardnchi Thaili, throw new light on the history of the times. 
Peshwydnchi Bakhar by Krishnaji Vinayak Sohoni narrates the full 
history of the Peshwds beginning with BalajI Vishwanath up to 
Baji Rao II, the last of the Peshwds. Written in the last days of 
the Peshwds it is reliable only for events of the last Peshwa’s regime. 
The Bakhars composed during this century are both rich in expres¬ 
sion and subject. Like the bardic poetry, Bakhar- writing continued 
even after the downfall of the Marathas in 1818. Malhar Ramrao 
Chitnis has left to us the lives of the Satara Kings in the Bakhar 
form. 

The beginnings of historical letters written by prominent per¬ 
sonalities can be traced to the rise of the Marathas under Shivaji. 
This form of writing was however, fully developed during the 18th 
century. Some of the letters merit our attention for their literary 
value. To mention a few of them: Letters written by Brahmendra 
Swami Dhavadshikar, the Guru of Chhatrapati Shahu Maharaj of 
Satara and Baji Rao, Chinujiajl Appa, BalajI BajI Rao and others. 
Even ladies like Tara Bai, the wife of Rajaram, Anahdl Bai 
and Ahalya Bai Holkar wrote letters which are not only informative 
but interesting too. The Peshwd Daftar in forty-five volumes edited 
by Sardesai practically covers the whole Peshwd period and deals 
with the important events of the times. Some of them e.g., No. 4, 
Reports about Anandi Bai and No. 19, Peshwd Madhav Rao’s opposi¬ 
tion to Raghunath R5o, reveal the personalities of their writers. 

Ajnapatra, a treatise on polity was written in 1715 under the 
orders of Shambhuji of Kolhapur. It is ascribed to Ramchandra 
Pant Amatya, the statesman who saved the Maratha kingdom under 
Tara Bai’s leadership. Divided in nine chapters, the document de¬ 
picts Maratha administration in ShivajI’s times. It discusses the 
duties of a ruler who desires to see his kingdom prosper. The 
Ajnapatra is an important document written in a powerful and 
masterly style. It is valuable both from the literary as well as the 
historical point of view. 

The Bakhars and historical letters contain many Persian words 
which were current in court circles. Though foreign, they enrich¬ 
ed the Marathi language with force and meaning. They fill in the 
lacunae of prose-writing during this period. Like bardic poetry, 
they clearly reflect the true picture of Maharashtra of those times. 

667 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Miscellaneous ; 

During the last phase of the Peshwd period, Shahmuni (Shah 
Husain), a Muslim follower of Mahanubhava Sect, wrote Siddhdnta- 
bodha (1795) in ovi verse (50 adhydyas ). He himself refers in his 
work that his personal name was Shah and Muni was his preceptor. 
He propounds the Advaila philosophy. He attempted to harmo¬ 
nize the philosophy of Mahanubhava with the Advaita philosophy. 
He refers to the various commentaries on the Gita, such as Digaui - 
ban, Shfi Hari, Madhusudani, Bhdskari and Bhingdri and also Jna- 
neshwar’s Bhavartha Dipika f Vaman’s Sama Sloki and Yathartha- 
dtpika and Sapta Shlokis of Nivritti, Sopana and Mukteswari of 
Mukta Bai. It is noteworthy that there are practically no Arabic 
and Persian words in his work. He maintains that Allah, Jesus and 
Vishnu are one and the same. Krishna Muni Panjabi alias Khyali 
Bahadur, another Mahanubhava writer composed his poems in 
various languages, particularly in Hindi. Mukundraj Karanjekar, a 
Mahanubhava poet, also belongs to this period. His sto'tras are well- 
known. Besides Lilrnnritasihdhu including Rukmini Swayamvara of 
Pandit Damodar Dharashivkar of Vasmat, Padasangraha of Vaku 
Bidkar, Bharatarnava of Mahant Relkar are some other works of the 
Mahanubhavas of this period. In the opinion of Y. K, Deshpande, 
Kaivalya Sanjwam, a prose commentary on the Gita by Govind Muni 
Jamadkar may perhaps belong to this period. 20 

Some Jain poets also contributed to Marathi literature at 
the end of the eighteenth century. Among them was Jina Sagara. 21 
He is known as scholar poet. He wrote Jivandhdrdpurdna (1744) 
in 1530 ovis. The subject of this work is the story of JIvandhara, a 
contemporary of Mahavlr. He also composed Vratakathd (stories ol 
religious rites) and short religious stories and stotras in verse. His 
translation of Manatungacharya’s famous Bhaktamarastotra is very 
delightful. ScCtiinahdtmya 9 a short poem by an anonymous author, 
belongs to the period of Raghuji Bhosle II of Nagpur (1772-1816). 
Mention must also be made of Mahati Sagar’s Ravivdr Kathd (1801) 
and Adinath Panchakalydni (1810), Vishalldrti’s Dharmaparikhd 
(1&07), and Ratnaklrti’s Marathi translation (1812) of Shatkarmo - 
padesha, a Sanskrit work by Sakalabhushana of sixteenth century. 

The Virasaivas also played a great part in contributing to Mara¬ 
thi literature in this century. Among them was Brahmadas who 
wrote Jnandbdhitaranga (1708) in 3857 ovi 1 verses. This is the bio¬ 
graphy of Allamaprabhu, a great figure among the Virasaivas. Its 
style is lucid and narration attractive*. 


668 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 


The Ganeshopdsakas (the devotees of Lord Ganesh), too con¬ 
tributed greatly to Marathi literature by their works. For example, 
Niranjandas Ballal of Bid wrote Ganeshagitatika (6323 ovi verses) 
in 1729. Before that he composed Ganesha Purana (1726), a Marathi 
treatise based on the original one in Sanskrit. Yadumanik wrote 
Sanjivini (1725), a commentary on certain portions of Ganesha 
Purana and Ganesha Gita. Ganesh Yogindra (1703-1808), another 
noted writer of this School, composed Ganesha Vijaya (4522 ovi 
verses), Yogeshwari, a commentary on Ganesha Gita, Ganeshguhya 
Stotra (201 ovi verses ), Mayureshacharita and &lokas, Abhangas and 
Aratis in praise of Lord Ganesh. Peshwa Nana Saheb, a devotee of 
Lord Ganesh, wrote Shri Ganeshakutukamrita which is rather in¬ 
complete. 

Ajnasiddha of Nagesh sect composed Sankatharanl (a Stotra 
work of 137 ovi verses), Varadanagesha, a philosophical treatise, 
stotras, Aratis, ets. in the first decade of the eighteenth century. 

D. K. Kelkar, a perceptive critic has aptly remarked: “The lite¬ 
rature of the 18th century reflects the values of a static or stagnant 
society. The one refrain is to stoically accept one’s position in 
society and find salvation in it. There is no call in it for revolt 
against social or political injustice. Women are condemned as the 
source of all evil. The low castes are persuaded to accept their de¬ 
graded status as arising out of the deeds of their past life. One firm 
impression which this literature leaves on the minds of readers is 
one of acquiescence in their wretched condition. There is no trum¬ 
pet call in it to break centuries-old shackles and march forward to a 
new life.” 22 

[See Appendix at the end of this chapter]. 23 

VIII. TAMIL 

The century following the death of emperor Aurangzib was a 
period of stagnation and wretchedness in India. The shifting politi¬ 
cal situation, the endless internal conflicts, the Anglo-French rival¬ 
ries and their repercussions, all contributed to the general demorali¬ 
sation. Even in the Tamil country, removed though it was from the 
scene of many of the conflicts, the epidemic of demoralisation was 
seen raging violently. The old vitality was gone, the age-long zest 
for life was no more, and the Tamils were but inexpertly fumbling 
with the arts of war and the arts of peace. Literature too. was in 
a bad way. In the mathas, reaction and obscurantism sat enthron¬ 
ed; and in the courts, the poetasters lisped the language of banality 
and futility, turning out verses with clock-work precision and life- 


669 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


lessness. It was a waste land in appearance, lacking pith, lacking 
colour, lacking life. 

But this bleakness and seeming barrenness were (as events 
proved later) but the seed-time of a renaissance. It was during this 
century that the Christian missionaries sowed—though in their own 
ways and for their own purposes—some of the seeds of rebirth. 
They set up printing presses in Iitdia, learned the indigenous lan¬ 
guages, issued vernacular editions of the Bible and generally drew 
the first uneasy outlines of a scientific study of the Indian languages 
and literatures. The Danish missionary, Zeigenbalg, wrote a Tamil 
grammar and put the Bible into Tamil in the first quarter of the 
eighteenth century. The Italian Jesuit, Constantine Beschi, was a 
more dynamic figure and with his forceful personality and adventu¬ 
rousness he made many converts and won a place in the affections 
of the Tamil people. He began learning Tamil during his stay in 
the Tinnevelly district and mastered the language sufficiently to com¬ 
pose in the fullness of time a full-fledged epic in Tamil by name 
Tembavani. It is remarkable as a tour de force rather than as a 
supreme classic. But in its peculiar historical context, Tembavani 
acquires an importance that must not be belittled. Tembavani is a 
Christian purdna in thirty cantos, retailing Biblical episodes" and 
charged with a Christian atmosphere. Fr. Beschi’s Aviveka Parana 
Guru Kathai is a children’s classic. The Guru and his followers are 
variations of the Wise Men of Gotham, suitably clothed in tlie Tamil 
garb. Fr. Beschi’s literary labours included the composition also of 
grammars and catechisms. Known popularly as Virama Munivar , 
Fr. Beschi lived a colourful and adventurous life and died in 1746 
in the Tinnevelly district. 

There were, besides, Muhammedan poets, who let into the world 
of Tamil a significant Islamic stream in thought and mysticism. 
Sakkarai Pulavar, one of the earliest of them, composed a Tamil 
poem on Medina and another, Muhammad Ibrahim, wrote a Muhai- 
degn Purdnam. A third Muhammedan poet, Masthan Saheb, was 
a consummate lyricist and devotional poet. In this manner, Chris¬ 
tian and Islamic cross-fertilization of Tamil letters gave the much 
needed pith to the soil, promising a rich harvest in the tomorrows to 
come. 

The one outstanding Tamil poet of the eighteenth century was 
the great Saiva mystic and bhakta, Thayumanavar. He was born 
of Vellala parents, and for a time he was in the service of the ruler 
of Trichinopoly. After living the life of a householder for a short 
time, he became an ascetic on the death of his wife and wandered 


670 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 


from place to place singing soul-stirring songs that were a unique 
blend of rapture, mysticism and philosophy. It has been rightly 
said that Thayumanavar taught the shdstras in terms of music. The 
fervour of his devotion may be seen in strains like the following: 

Jewel! Precious Gold! saying so I danced, 

Flood of Bliss! saying so I danced, 

Cried seeking and desiring You, 

Whimper-ed and screamed; 

My whole being thrilled as I saluted, 

Tears in torrents streamed down my cheeks, 

And I was reduced to exhaustion. 

Have I ever stood apart from You, 

Haven’t I ever been your slave, 

However unworthy I should be, 

Wouldst Thou abandon me? 

Thayumanavar’s was a welling love that embraced all mankind 
and he accordingly declared: 

Beyond desiring a happy life for all, 

I know no other thought, O Lord! 

To see in another's mine own pain and pity it — 

May Your grace teach me this wisdom, O Lord! 

Thayumanavar’s apprehension of the indwelling God can be in¬ 
ferred from a moving asseveration like this: 

1 cannot worship Thee, O Lord, 
in any material form; 

I find Thee in the flowers, 

and how then may I pluck the dew-filled gems? 

Neither can I raise my hands 
before Thee in worship — 

I feel ashamed because Thou art 
Within me all along. 

The songs of Thayumanavar are grouped under Paraparakkanni, 
Painkilikkanni and Ennatkanni. 

Two or three more eighteenth century writers deserve mention 
here. Arunachala Kavirayar was well versed in Tamil and Sanskrit 
and tried his hand at various literary forms. He is today remem¬ 
bered mainly on account of Ramandtakam, a dramatised version of 
the Rdmdyana . Rajappa Kavirayar composed two Saiva works, 


671 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Kuttala Stha'lapuranam and Kuttala Kuravanchi. Vedamalayappan 
Pillai wrote the Maccha Purdnaih, largely based on the Sanskrit ori¬ 
ginal. Gurupada Dasar composed the Kumaresha Shataka'm con¬ 
sisting of a century of homely stanzas evoking vivid pictures and 
reiterating moral or worldly-wise maxims. It is very good verse, 
but only very rarely poetry. 

In conclusion, reference may be made to what may be called a 
unique type of Indian literature. This is the diary in Tamil prose 
written by Ananda Ranga Pillai, a commercial agent to the French— 
a Dubhdshi (one who knows two languages) and adviser to Dupleix, 
the French Governor of Pondicherry. Ananda Ranga Pillai kept a 
diary of events during the period 1736 to 1760. It contains not only 
a faithful record of events but gives evidence of the writer’s “pro¬ 
found capacity for political judgment.” It is justly regarded as the 
most valuable source of history for the period and has earned for 
the author the title “Pepys of Tamilnad”. The manuscript of the 
diary, written by the author mostly in his own hand, is fortunately 
well preserved, and only a few pages have been recently published, 
But there is an English translation of the whole diary by H. Dod- 
well. None before Pillai, and only a few after him, have left a lite¬ 
rary work of this kind in any Indian language. Ananda Ranga 
Pillai died on 12 January, 1761, only four days before the English 
captured Pondicherry. 

Reference may also be made to another type of literary work 
in Tamil, semi-historical in character. A good illustration is fur¬ 
nished by the ballad in memory and honour of Tej Singh who was 
appointed Governor of Jinjee (c. 1700) by Zu’l-fiqar Khan and died 
thirteen years later while defending the fort besieged by the Nawab 
of Arcot. Tej Singh’s wife committed suicide by becoming a Sa'ti. 
A modern writer has observed: “The Tej Singh-Rajan ballad is as 
famous in Tamilnad as that of Prlthviraj Chauhan is in Rajasthan. 
The ballads made the theme popular by dwelling on the romantic 
and heroic elements which have a historic basis but really partake 
of the character of folk songs. The poet’s talents are best displayed, 
for example, not in recording the actual events but in describing the 
occasion of the hero bidding farewell to his wife on the eve of his 
departure to battle.” 

IX. TELUGU 

Changing political and cultural environment of the 18th century 
had its impact on the growth of Telugu literature as elsewhere. 


672 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 

The rise of petty principalities and foreign pockets brought about a 
radical change in the character and quality of the literary works of 
the period. Hitherto, poetry used to be mostly the monopoly of the 
niyogi brahmins. Now, with the change, vaidikai brahmins and 
many non-brahmins began to compose shatakas, yakshaganas, prose 
works, ballads, dandakas (a type of encomium), treatises on gram¬ 
mar, prosody and other laws of poetic composition, lexicons and 
commentaries on classics, besides imitations of the great prabandhas 
of the past—all of which show that the creative geniu^ of the authors 
was at a low ebb. The dialects and slangs of various parts of the 
country and the foreign vocabulary found place in the compositions 
of the times. The religious unrest of the day and the society was 
reflected in literature more than before. As early as in 1712 the 
Christian missionaries introduced the printing press, and other 
foreigners, many things including the stuff and habits of coffee and 
tobacco. It was a period of transition in our society and literature 
where adherence to and pursuance of the tradition was being over¬ 
powered by an urge for a change, and a new order was already in 
the womb. A brief mention of some literary works would illustrate 
the truth of these remarks. 

Ananda Rangaratchandam of Kasturi Rangakavi was the result 
of a fruitful research on prosody and occupies an important position 
among the works on the subject. His Sambanighantuvu is a lexicon 
of pure native Telugu. 

Radhamddhava Samvadam of Velidinala Venkatapatl is a work 
of poetic genius with vivacious characters and dialogues and made 
an indelible mark amongst a host of sringdra kdvyas in Telugu. 

Rlgvedi Venkatachalam made a free style translation of Bhoja’s 
Champil Ramayana into lucid Telugu keeping the emotional pulse of 
the theme as high as possible. 

The Kuchimanchi family in the East Godavari District has long 
been celebrated for its scholars and poets. Timmakavi of this 
family who assumed the title of Kavisdrvabhauma was a prolific 
author who was patronised by the Pithapuram court. He was a past- 
master in pure Telugu compositions— Ramdyanamu and Neelasun- 
dariparinayamu. His Rasikajanamanobhiramamu is an erotic poem 
and a foster child of Vdsucharitra in its craft played with word and 
phrase. Glimpses of his contemporary society are discernible in his 
work called the Bharga Shataka and the Kukkuteshwara Shataka. 
The plight of a common peasant is interestingly portrayed in his 
own slang in the Bharga Shataka. In the latter shataka the poet 

673 


MS—43 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


denounces the character of misers, criticises the base and the vile, 
sympathises with the ill-fated agriculturists, preaches morals and 
principles of good conduct and devotes exclusively a few verses for 
the depiction of the evening of his own life. The personality of the 
poet can be seen in these verses and moving through them the 
reader is automatically affected by a touching experience. The 
Kukkuteshwara Shataka has inspired several other poets to compose 
similar verses of social significance. Timmakavi’s Sakala Lakshana - 
sara Sangrahamu is a scholarly treatise on the validity of poetic 
usage and its grammatical justification. 

Kuchimanchi Jaggakavi is as much famous as notorious for his 
poem called Chandralekha Vildpamu. He first wrote Chandralekha 
Vildsamu, an amorous poem. When he did not get reward from his 
patron he changed it to Chandralekha Vildpamu (i.e., the hue and 
cry of Chandralekha) which debased the fine face of the erotic senti¬ 
ment of the poem, yet reserved a secure place for it in the porno¬ 
graphic literature of the country. He was no doubt an able poet 
endowed with imagination and scholarship. His Bhaktamandara 
Shataka stands as a full compliment to his poetic pride. 

Enugu Lakshmana Kavi’s translation of the three shatakas of 
Bhartrihari, on account of his skilful rendering, besides being quite 
faithful to the original, has an original flavour of its own and be¬ 
came very popular. 

Adidam Surakavi, son of Bala Bhaskar, was a famous poet of 
those times and was much feared by his antagonists for his biting 
tongue. Royal patronage was extended to him by Padavijayarama 
Raju (1741-57) but afterwards during the despotic rule of Seetarama 
Raju he left the Vijayanagaram court offering castigating criticism 
of the misrule in his Rdmalingesha ShaJtaka. His Kavijanaranja- 
namu competes with Vasucharitra in its pedantic setting. Kavi 
Samshaya Viccheda is a treatise on some special aspects of Telugu 
Giammar; Chandraloka is a translation of Appayya Dikshit’s 
Kuvalaydnanda Kdrikas which are otherwise labelled as Jayadeva’s 
Chandraloka; Andhranamaseshamu is a small dictionary of the pure 
Telugu vocabulary in verse form. 

Gogulapati Kurmanath Kavi was undoubtedly a great poet of 
the century. His Mrityunjaya Vildsamu is in a class by itself in 
Yakshagdna literature. His Simhddri Narasimha Shataka is histori¬ 
cal in its appeal. It gives us a vivid picture of the unhappy results 
of the Muslim inroads into our country and the destruction of tern- 


674 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 


pies; the poet questions God in various ways about his partiality, 
silence and existence even. 

The Shuka Saptati of Palavekari Kadiripati, assigned by literary 
historians to this century, is an interesting poem of erotic tales told 
in a lucid style, pleasing manner and sweet idiomatic Telugu. 
Mangalagiri Ananda Kavi was a Brahmin poet of the 18th century, 
who has given an effective portrait of Jesus Christ in his Vedanta rasa - 
yanamu. His chief source was the Bible. He has another poem to his 
credit— Vijaytinandana-vilasamu , the story of Shashirekha’s marriage 
with Abhimanyu drawn from the Hindu mythology. His style and 
descriptions are captivating. 

Gudipati Kodandapati was the author of a commentary on the 
Amuktamalyada, the magnum opus of Sri Krishna Deva Raya, the 
ruler of Vijayanagar (1509-1530 A.D.). He also rendered 

Bhanudatta’s Rasamanjari into Telugu; his verses are memorable for 
constructional delight. 

Telangana consists of nine districts in the present Andhra Pra¬ 
desh, which was formerly in the Nizam’s dominion. There was a 
marked flourish in literature in that area during the 18th century—a 
number of small royal principalities like Surapuram, Gadwal, Palvan- 
cha, Domakonda, Jataprole, Vanaparti, etc. contributed to the 
growth of literature. Independent of any patronage, Lingamurty of 
Parashuram Panthulu family, originally belonging to a Maratha 
stock, composed a great work called Sitdrdmanjaneya Samvddamu 
wherein good poetry is coupled with lucid exposition of the advaita 
philosophy in all its aspects. It became since its appearance a hand¬ 
book of every teacher and preacher of philosophy in the Telugu 
country. 

The Maringati family of Nalgonda district is reputed for its 
generations of scholars. Venkata Narasimhacharya (1730 A.D.) was 
a great scholar poet and composed 13 poems in Telugu, out of which 
only Chiluvapadaga Rereni Katha (in pure Telugu) and Godavadhuti * 
parinayamu have been published. The scholarly family of the Tiru- 
mala Bukkapattanamu was associated with and held in esteem by 
the rulers of Surapuram. Kiriti Vehkatacharya, a distinguished 
scholar poet of this family composed 13 works. His Achalatmaja 
Parinayamu is in double entendre, wherein the marriage stories of 
Sita and Parvati are woven into one—a feat of scholarship and a 
kind of intellectual gymnastics. 

Vi 

The Telugu literary muse had its heyday in Tamil Nadu and 
also in Karnataka even from earlier times. 


675 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


ShahjI Bhosle (1684-1712), the eldest son of Ekoji I, the founder 
of Maratha rule in Tanjore and the step-brother of ShivajI the 
Great, composed twenty plays in Telugu which display a blend of 
the form and spirit of the Yakshagana and the Veethi Nataka or the 
popular street-play. All his court poets, Darbha Giriraju and others 
composed such plays in numbers. Curiously enough, the erotic ad¬ 
ventures of ShahjI happened to be the theme of many of those plays. 
TukojI (1728-36), brother and successor of ShahjI, wrote two plays 
in Telugu Shivakama Sundariparinayamu and Rdjarahjana Vidyd 
Vilasamu. The latter is a spiritual descendant of Krishna Misra’s 
Prabodha Chandrodaya and has adopted the technique of Sanskrit 
drama to some extent. He conferred the title of ‘Andhra Kalidas’ to 
Aluru Kuppana, the author of the Pdrthasdrathi Vijaya or the Bhaga- 
vata Yakshagana and the Achdrya Vijayamu. Ekoji II composed the 
Ramdyana in dvipada metre. Pratapa Simha extended his patronage 
to Muddupalani who composed the Rddhikd Satitvanamu, a poem 
which is replete with all the charm of the erotics and a sweet expres¬ 
sion but lacks in decency and decorum. 

Shri Narayana Tirtha, the author of the famous Sri Krishna 
Leeldtarangini in Sanskrit composed Parijatapaharanarh Yakshagana 
in Telugu. The great celebrity in the world of music, Tyagaraja, was 
just coming into limelight through his unique skill in the art of 
music and his compositions. 

The Madurai court witnessed its golden age during the reign of 
Vijayaranga Chokkanath (1706-38). Its speciality lies in its crop 
of prose literature and erotic poetry. Vijayaranga has to his credit 
two beautiful pieces in prose— Shrirahga and Mdgh Mahdtmyam. 
His courtier Sanmukham Venkata Krishnappa rendered Pinavee- 
rana’s Jaimini Bharata of the late 15th century and Chemakura’s 
Sarvangadhara Charitra of the early 17th century c., into prose in 
a grandiloquent style. Another court-poet called Kundurti Venkata- 
chalapati rendered all the three great classics— Bhdrata } Bhagavata 
and Ramdyana into Telugu prose. 

The Shashdnkavijayam of Sesham Venkatapati and the Ahalyd 
Sahkrandanam of Sanmukham are the two popular poetic adulations 
of adultery that the court of Vijayaranga offered to the lovers of 
sringara. 

Telugu literature received some attention and patronage in 
Karnataka even before the 18th century at the hands of some 
Kempa Gowda princes and Chikadevaraya Wodeyar. His son and 
successor on the Mysore throne was Kanthirava Narasa Raju (1704- 


676 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 


14) who was the author of eight works—more or less of the Yak - 
shagdna type, and scores of sringara padas. 

Gunuguturi Venkata Krishnayya of Kolar composed his Nala- 
Rdghava Yadava Pandaveeyamu, every verse of which has a four-fold 
meaning to suit the four stories running concurrently. 

Koti Raya Raghunath Tondaiman’s poem called ParvaUpari - 
nayam is the product of a creative genius of a high order, rich in 
scholarship, descriptions and chaimatkars and crafty in poetic diction. 
Nudurupati Vengana, his court poet, compiled a masterly lexicon on 
indigenous Telugu in veitee form called Andhra Bhashdrnavam. 

To conclude, there was indeed a rich crop of literary works but 
not of the highest quality. Some of them are translations from Sans¬ 
krit and some are imitations of Telugu classics. Kavbdjamano - 
ranjanam, Rasikajanamamohhirdmam and Kavijanaranjancmh are some 
of the heirs and adopted children of Vasucharitra. Most of the trans¬ 
lations of the period are, of course, quite faithful to their Sanskrit 
originals, but they are neither sound in their method of translation, 
nor do they exhibit the natural potentialities of the poet as in the 
case of the translations of the previous generations, for instance of the 
Kavitraya or Sreenatha or Potana. Enugu Lakshmana Kavi’s trans¬ 
lations from Bhartrihari and the like are only a few exceptions. Like¬ 
wise there are a few poems beaming with an original touch of their 
own, which are products of a rich imagination and results of a real 
craftsmanship, e.g., Rddhdmadhava Samvadamu, Shashdnka Vija- 
yam, Ahalyd Sankraiidcmam. The literature of the period was 
mostly influenced by the padas of Kshetrayya of the previous century 
in structure and spirit. A few Yakshaganas of the period like Tyaga- 
vvnoda Chitra Prabandha, Rdjamohana Koravanji, Rajaranjana 
Vidyavilasamu, Mrityunjaya Vilasamu and a few shaitakas like the 
Kukkuteshwara, the Simhadri Narashmha and the Ramalingeshwara 
shatakas show an individuality of their own. The prose literature is 
no doubt a pride of this period to the extent that the ages bygone 
did not see so much of output as this, but it lacks novelty in theme or 
language or style. 

A variety of themes is also seen in the literature of the time. 
Classical themes from the Rdmayana, the Bharata and the Bhdgava'ta 
were very much respected, but contemporaneous and foreign themes 
were also accepted. The erotic muse played her part with no little 
eclat, but the philosophical, didactic and devotional elements also had 
their sway. The Sitdrdmdnjaneya Samvadamu can be counted as 
one of the few best literary productions of the period. 


677 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

The general trend of the literature of the period shows slackness 
in the traditional texture, decency and soundness and a considerable 
craze for experiment which pursues its prospect in modernity. 

X. KANNADA 

Karnataka in this period passed through political revolutions 
which broke up even the nominal unity given to it by the Vijayanagar 
empire. The northern parts were divided between the Marathas 
and the Nizam while in the south Mysore and Keladi chiefs disputed 
the sovereignty. The chiefs of Keladi-Ikkeri were followers of Vlra- 
saivism while the Wodeyars of Mysore, though occasionally patro¬ 
nising the authors of other faiths, mainly encouraged Brahminical 
authors. Hence we find that Brahmin authors who had until then 
left the field of vernacular literature mostly to the Jains and Vira- 
saivas turned out works in greater numbers than the Jains and 
Virasaivas put together. The local chieftains or Poligars were 
mostly interested in local histories and legends. With the disappear¬ 
ance of the Keladi chieftainship at the hands of Haidar, Virasaiva 
as well as Brahmin authors were deprived of patronage. Haidar 
and Tipu usurped the throne of Mysore, and Kannada literature in 
the south showed a decline down to the beginnings of the nine¬ 
teenth century. 

The Jain authors of the period were mostly concerned with the 
vindication and glorification of their faith. The story of PadmSvati 
was told in yakshagdna and sangatya by Rama and Surala. 
Payanna (1748) wrote Ahiihsd Charite and the Jain Ramdyana story 
was dealt with in the Jina Ramdyana of Chandrasagara Varni (1810) 
and Padmanabha. Ananta wrote a history of Gommata. Brah- 
mananka wrote the Jina Bharata and Chandrasagara, Parasurdma 
Bharata. Padmaraja and his younger brother Devachandra 
(1770-1841) were the only two Jain authors of some eminence. 
Padmaraja wrote a story of Pujyapada in the sangatya metre. 
Devachahdra was associated with Colonel Mackenzie and 
collected many local legends in his Rdjdvali Kathe which professes 
to give a history of many local dynasties and castes. His Rama - 
kathdvatdra deals with the Ramdyana story. He appears to have 
been a precocious and prolific author of shatakas, yakshagdnas, 
commentaries and philosophical works. Chandrasagara Varni 
wrote some small semi-historical works like Kadamba Purdna and 
Bijjala Raya Purdna. His Mulla-shastra professes to derive Islam 
from the teachings of an apostle from Jainism. 


678 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 


Among the Vlrasaiva authors Ka<Ja Siddha, Yogananda, 
Nirahjanarya, Nijalingaradhya and Shivayogishvar have written 
shatakas. Vlrasaiva ritual is described in the works of Nirvana 
Mantri, Virakta Shadakshara and Mahumurti. Ni^chihtatma and 
Virupanayya have dealt with the story of Virabhadra. Among the 
Pur anas the Kanchi Purdim of Niranjanamurti and Halasya Purdna 
of Murige Swami may be mentioned. The Yakshagdna form has 
been employed in Nandinath’s Valli-Kanthabharana, Kapotavakya 
of Nanjayya, the Stories of Karibanta and Sdrangadhara by Sam- 
bayya, Girijakalyana of Ganga, Saundarakavya of Nuronda. 

The Brahmin authors who dealt with the Bharata story are 
Lakshmakavi (1723) and Paramadeva of Ttirahga Bharata 
(1777). Lakshmakavi wrote in the vdrdhika~sajtpadi metre and main¬ 
ly concentrated on the relationship between Krishna and Arjuna. 
He is also the author of Rukmangada Charitre. The Rdmayana ver¬ 
sions are found in the Ananda Rdmayana of Timmamatya, 
Hanumadrdmdyana of Subramanya, Mula Balaramayana of Hari- 
das, Rdmayana of Varada Vithal and Venkamatya (a minister 
of Haidar Ali). Among the Purdnas Depa’s Devdnga Purdna and 
Markandeya Purdna of Bele Raya are of note. Sthaila Purdnas or 
Malndtmyas were written by Vaidyeshvarabhakta ( Setu) f Ven- 
katesha ( Hdldsya ), Rangayya ( Kaveri) f Singaracharya (ShrU 
ranga), Kalale NanjarSja and others. Bobbur Ranga in his Ambika 
Vi jay a and Parashurdma Rdmayana shows a little originality. Patta- 
bhirama, a Brahmin author, wrote for the sake of a Jain friend 
Ratnashekhara Charite in strict accordance with the tenets of Jain 
religion. The Sdngatya, Yakshagdna and Chaupadi forms have 
been employed by several authors for the stories of Padmini 
(Chennayya), Chandrahasa and Sitd Kalyana (Giriyamma), MalU- 
karjuna (Kashi Ram), Sibi (Chenna) and Nala (Kempayya). Depa 
has narrated the story of the Battisa Putthali. 

The women authors of note were Helavanakatte Giriyamma and 
Cheluvamba. Cheluvamba was the queen of Dodda Krishna Raja 
(1717-1731). Her Varanandi Kalydna deals with the legend of 
Bibi Nachiyar. She has also composed songs and commentaries. 
Helavanakatte Giriyamma was a lady of great sanctity, and spiri¬ 
tual attainment. She has composed many songs instinct with devo¬ 
tion and narrated the stories of Chandrahasa and TJdddlika in the 
sdngatya metre. 

The Haridas movement is represented by Vijaya Das (1725) 
and his disciples. Vijaya Das’s songs have the ankita Vijaya 


679 


THE. MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Vithala. His four pupils Gopal Das, Venugopal Das, Mohan Das 
and Hayavadana Das were men of great devotion. Varaha Timm- 
appa and Vithal Das (c. 1759) have also composed numerous songs. 
Gopal Das’s disciple Jagannath Das, besides songs dedicated to 
Jagannath Vithal, has written Harikathdmrta sdra. Guru Gopal 
Das and Varada Gopal Das were also pupils of Gopal Das. Vyas 
Vithal Das was a disciple of Venugopal Das. Venkata Das and Mana 
Madure Das lived at the end of the eighteenth century. Shrida 
Vithal Das and Shripati Das were also pupils of Jagannath Das. The 
songs composed by these are very numerous and there are also com¬ 
positions of many unknown authors with many ankitas. 

The history of Mysore was written by Nagarada Puttayya and 
Shanubhoga Venkataramanayya, whereas the Keladi Nripa Vijaya 
of Linganna gives the history of the chiefs of Keladi. Madakeri 
Rajendra Dandaka is the eulogy of a chief of Chitradurga. The 
Vaidya Kanda of Brahma and Vaidya Samhitasararnava of Kalale 
Vira Raja are works on medicine. 

Kalale Vira Raja’s sons, Deva Raj and Nahjaraj were the all- 
powerful Dalavais and king-makers in the middle of the eighteenth 
century. Nahjaraj was a great scholar as well as a general and a 
patron of Sanskrit, Telugu and Kannada authors. The Nanjardja- 
yashobhusana (containing a drama Chahdrakala parinaya) by Nrsimha 
is written in praise of him. Karachuri Nahjaraj, as he is also 
styled, discovered the genius of Haidar at the siege of Devanahalli 
and was responsible for the rise of Haidar who ultimately proved 
as ungrateful to his master and patron as to the nominal Maharaja. 
The political and martial exploits of Karachuri Nahjaraj, who was 
the de facto ruler of Mysore, extended to the whole of the south as 
described by Peixoto. Nahjaraj wrote in Sanskrit Sahgita Gangd- 
dhara and other works. In Kannada about twenty works have 
been attributed to him. Of these, seven describe the sanctity 
of holy places like Sivaganga, Bhadragiri, Setu, Halasya Kshetra, 
Nanjangud, and Kashi. From the Skanda, Padma , Bhavishyottara 
Puranas he has selected and translated Shiva Gita, Shiva Dharmot- 
tara and other portions describing the greatness of the Saiva faith. 
He has also rendered the Bharata, Harivamsa and Mdrkdndeya 
Puranas into Kannada prose. Under his patronage Nuronda wrote 
Saundara Kdvya and Venkatesha Halasya Mahatmya. Katti Gopala- 
raja, related to Immadi Krishnaraja of Mysore (1734-66), also wrote 
a Sthala Purana. Shalayada Krishnaraja (1748-74), who resided at 
Mysore, was also a prolific author. He wrote several Shatakas and 
philosophical works like Vivekdbharanu and Anubhava Rasayana. 


680 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 

His Satpratyaya deals with metres. Other compositions are in the 
form of songs and Yakshagdnas. 

Haidar’s minister Vehkamatya (c. 1770) wrote in Sanskrit 
Alaiinkdramanidarpana, Sudhdlahari, Kdmavildsa Bhana, Mahendraka 
Dima, Kharadarpaghdtana —a vydyoga, a kdvya — Hanumajjaya f a 
prahasana—Kukshvmbhari Bhaikshava and in Kannada a Rdmayana 
in vardhikashatpadi, a champu Ramabhyudaya y and Hanumadvilasa . 
Jakkamatya (1750) wrote a commentary on the Saundarya Lahari . 
Chidananda is the author of Juana Sindhu, Devi Mahdtmya, Tattva 
Chintdmani and Panchikarana . In the same advaita tradition 

9 * 

Shivaram composed Siva Bhaktisara in the Bhdminisatpadi metre. 

XI. MALAYALAM 

By the dawn of the 18th century Malayalam literature was in its 
full bloom, thanks to the rich contribution of Ezhuthachan, who is 
looked upon as the father of modern Malayalam. His translation 
of Adhydtma Ramayanam and Bhdratam brought a revolution in 
Malayalam language in so far as it underwent a thorough change in 
its vocabulary and style, freeing itself from the bondage of the 
archaic forms almost akin to Tamil, and establishing itself as an in¬ 
dependent language, with a bias for Sanskrit. It was the works of 
Ezhuthachan that standardised the language of Kerala. Modern 
Malayalam has not changed in its style and idiom from those of 
Ezhuthachan’s. 

The major literary output of the century was in the form of an 
indigenous play composed for the art of kathakali, the dance drama 
of Kerala. The kathakali plays are known as dttakkatha, literarily 
the story for dance drama. It seems the Gitagovinda of Jayadeva 
gave a model to this type of literary composition. The verses 
or slokas in Sanskrit metre narrate the story and the dialogue is 
composed in imitation of songs in Gitagovinda, set to music in ap¬ 
propriate ragas of classical Karnatak style. 

The Raja of Kottarakkara, a principality in south Kerala, was 
the first exponent of dttakkatha literature. He composed eight plays 
based on the story of Rdmayana and they were known as Rama- 
Tvdttam plays. Literary status to this type of plays was given by 
another royal poet, the Raja of Kottayam, belonging to north Kerala. 
His works are based on the stories in Mahabhdrata. Unnayi Varyar, 
who composed the story of Nala (N ala char it am) in four parts, is 
considered to be the greatest among the Kathakali poets. Critics of 
the day maintain that Nalacharitam dttakkatha is an original work 


681 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


of great dramatic excellence. No other poet in Malayalam could 
rise to his level in retelling a purdnic story with as much originality 
as any poet could claim, not only in the presentation of the theme 
dramatically but also in the portrayal of the different characters in 
the play so realistically. Even the minor characters in the play 
leave an indelible impression on the minds of the readers. The 
songs or padas from Nalacharitam are so popular among the women 
of Kerala that they are adapted to a folk dance of women known as 
kaikottikkali. 

• • t 

Unnayi Varyar had many followers in the field. Nearly hundred 
plays were composed during the century by poets belonging to all 
categories and standards. Irayimman Tampi, Maharaja Karttika 
Tirunal, Ashvati Tirunal Raja and Kilimanur Koil Tampuran are 
but a few among them whose plays gained popularity through the 
medium of the dance drama, Kathakdli. 

, Devotional literature in Malayalam found its heyday during the 
early phase of this period. Ezhuthachan was indeed the pioneer in 
this field and many works in imitation of his Ramdyana and Mahd - 
bharata were composed, giving emphasis to the Bhakti cult, by the 
ardent followers of its first exponent. Jvdnappdna by Puntanam 
Nambudiri, a contemporary of Narayana Bhattatiri, the author of 
Nardyaruyam, is a unique work in the branch of philosophic poetry. 
Written in simple and unostentatious language Jnanappdna , the song 
of real knowledge, is a sincere approach to the advaita philosophy by 
the author who uses no unintelligible technical expressions to drive 
home in an inimitable simple style his vision of life to the readers, 
both literate and illiterate. 

It was during this period that the evangelists and missionaries 
from the West made their contributions to Malayalam by compiling 
dictionaries in the language, translating the Bible into simple prose 
and Writing original works in prose and verse on Biblical themes. 
The modern prose owes much to the innovations of these Western 
missionaries. They were more conversant with the speech of the 
illiterate mass of the country and thus picked up genuine popular 
usage from their mouth to be employed in literary writing. It niay 
be said that thanks to these foreigners, more or less, a revolution 
in prose writing was effected, freeing it completely from the bond¬ 
age of pedantic Sanskrit style. In short, Malayalam prose found its 
own genius in their writings only, which remain even today a model 
to the modern prose writers. 


682 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 

Books on astronomy, astrology, mathematics and medicine were 
written during this period by scholars in Sanskrit. They are either 
in the form of commentaries on the original Sanskrit works or in 
imitation of them in the local language. These writings, for ob¬ 
vious reasons, have a bias for Sanskrit style and these two different 
strata of prose writings, one in popular style and the other in scho¬ 
lastic and pedantic language, came into vogue. It took nearly two 
centuries to evolve a happy blending of these two styles and to bring 
Malayalam prose to its present form, rich in vocabulary with San¬ 
skrit language but at the same time flexible, pliable and effective 
with popular parlance. 

Kunjan Nambiar, the people’s poet of Kerala, lived in this cen¬ 
tury. He brought about a revolution in the cultural and religious 
outlook of the people by bringing art and literature from its high 
and pedantic sphere down to the popular standard. The art and lite¬ 
rature, especially the histrionic arts, and religious, philosophic and 
Puranic writings, were the monopoly of the caste Hindus, actively 
connected with temples and other religious institutions. The Nam- 
budiri Brahmins, princes and the intermediary communities alone 
were directly connected with the temple arts like kuttu, kutiyattam 
and kathakali which were strictly and exclusively presented in the 
temple precincts. These temple arts served as effective media for the 
propagation of Sanskrit literature and Hindu religion through Pura¬ 
nic stories. Among caste Hindus the non-Brahmin communities, viz., 
the Nayars, who formed the majority'of the population and who were 
subdivided into many clans, were not directly involved in the above- 
mentioned cultural and religious activities. They had the privilege 
of witnessing the above from a respectable distance. Only the no¬ 
bility among them were influenced beneficially; the rest whose main 
vocation was either military service or hunting, remained somewhat 
aloof in so far as the cultural enlightenment was concerned. The 
lower Hindus and the others like Christians and Muslims were com¬ 
pletely cut off from this higher strata of society. Casteism, un- 
touchability, slavery and many other social evils were rampant 
throughout. 

Kunjan Nambiar who belonged to the intermediary community 
of temple servants expounded a new solo dance art known as tullal 
for which he himself wrote more than fifty works, all in simple, but 
elegant verse. Kunjan, in fact, is the first people’s poet. Of 
course, he chose Puranic themes for his dance recitals, but he re¬ 
told the stories in a different manner. He narrated the stories in the 
social background of his times, converting all Puranic characters 


683 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


into ordinary human beings, the exact type of which he picked up 
from among the people around him. Thus Arjuna, Duryodhana, 
Kaihsa and Ravana were the prototypes of the kings who ruled diffe¬ 
rent principalities during his times. They talked and behaved like 
ordinary men. At the same time the poet was keen about preserv¬ 
ing the spirit of the Puranic stories he handled. The people, espe¬ 
cially the illiterate mass who heard him, felt that they were listen¬ 
ing to their own stories. The Puranic themes, thus retold, attained 
the status of being a realistic representation of the lives of the people. 
This, indeed, was a new innovation in those days as the people were 
made to feel by the poet that art and literature have predominantly 
a social function to perform. 

The dominant note of his works was humour and satire. Kun- 
jan Namblar’s poetical works thus attracted the masses more than 
the writings of any of his predecessors. They enlightened and edu¬ 
cated the people. They created a social awareness among them. 
And no wonder 4 , even today Kunjan Nambiar is looked upon as the 
greatest of the popular poets, the best humorist and satirist, and 
more than that, a poet of progressive outlook. 

Ramapurattu Varyar, a contemporary of Kunjan Nambiar who 
wrote only one original poetic f work, namely, Kuchelavrittam, the 
story of Kuchela (Sudama), is considered to be the morning star of 
the modern Malayalam lyrics. 

The importance of Kuchelavrittam cannot be exaggerated as it 
is the first work in Malayalam which embodies the personal emotions 
and feelings of the writer. The longer poems of lyrical nature 
written two centuries later by the modern poets, especially Ullur 
Parameshvara Ayyar, Vajlathol Narayana Menon and Kumaran Asan, 
the great trio of the century { found their model in Kuchelavrittam . 

Many missionary workers from abroad settled down in Kerala, 
and their contribution to the language and literature is praiseworthy. 
Several works on grammar were written by them, and indeed they 
are the pioneer works in the field, although treatises on grammar 
were there in the language in the traditional style. A travelogue, 
the first of its kind in the language, was written by a native missio¬ 
nary, Governor Parammekkavil Toma Kattanar, who accompanied 
his Bishop Kariyattil Joseph to Rome towards the end of the century. 

The period under review is characterised by a few distinctive 
features. The best of the classical poets Unnayi Varyar, Kunjan 
Nambiar and Ramapurattu Varyar flourished in the first half of the 


684 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 


century. The literary output of the period maintained a high quality. 
The prose writing made its appearance during this period, inaugu¬ 
rating a new branch in literature. The close of the century witness¬ 
ed a decline in the quality of literary productions. 

XII. URDU 

The Urdu poets of Delhi, writing under the influence of Wali 
(1667-1707) were partial to lham, which was, at that time, prac¬ 
tised not only in Persian but in Hindi also, especially in Dohas. 
Yet their poetry was not without genuine emotions and charm. The 
language, however, continued to be in a fluid state. The rules of 
grammar and spelling were not cared for; Urdu poets also did not 
bother about Radif and Qaftyas as the Arabic and Persian poets 
did. They, in fact, paid more attention to the sounds of words than 
to their relative spellings. Abd-us-Salam Nadvi condemns these 
‘defects’ of their poetry, but Muhammad Husain-Azad had rightly de¬ 
fended them on an earlier occasion for these poets had written in 
the language and idiom of the day. However, a few of them may be 
noted here. 

Najmud-din Sliah Mubarak Abru (1692-1747) is one of the ear¬ 
liest poets who wrote under the influence of Wali, whom he pays 
due homage by calling him as his teacher. 

Sharf-ud-din Mazmun (1689-1745) was a soldier-turned-dervish 
and a poet. His style is very much artificial. 

Sayyid Muhammad Shakir Naji (d. 1754) died young. He, a 
promising poet, is accredited with a Mukhammas, wherein he had 
criticised the king and his courtiers for their cowardice and effemi¬ 
nacy shown at the time of Nadir Shah’s invasion and destruction of 
Delhi in 1739. 

Ashraf ‘Ali Fughan (d. 1772) kept himself away from lham. 
His style is smooth and direct. His poetry has an element of pathos 
in it. Shah Hatim (1699-1787), a leading poet of the time of 
Muhammad Shah, wrote under the influence of Wali and was closely 
connected with the lhami poetry. But he, nevertheless, joined the 
reformers of his time and made a selection of his poetry and called 
it “Diwan Zadeh” (1757). Along with others, Hatim brought about 
many learned and academic changes in the Urdu language and 
poetry. They believed in and insisted on using the loan-words from 
Arabic and Persian in the original* sense and with the original spell¬ 
ings. This meant subservience to Arabic and Persian and, yet, it 


685 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


became the fashion and practice of the then and future writers and 
poets of Urdu to follow their dictates. But it had its own reaction 
which got manifest in the prose-works Rani Ketki ki Kahani and 
Darya-e-Latafat of Insha. 

Mirza Muhammad Rafi Sauda (1713-1780) decided on the advice 
of Khan-e-Arzu, to go over from Persian to Urdu. This decision had 
a far-reaching effect on his own poetic career and the development 
of Urdu poetry. In fact, Sauda did more than any other single 
writer of the day in raising Urdu to the status of a literary language 
for, unlike his predecessors, who were mostly ghazal-writers , he 
wrote, besides ghazals, qasida, satire, masnavi, wasokht and other 
lesser forms in Persian. Sauda seems to be well conversant with all 
the moods and human feelings at all levels of life, and he has, at his 
command, an ample vocabulary to express them with ease and 
vigour without showing any sign of exhaustion, strain or repetition 
at any time. He is the pioneer of Tamsilia Shairi in Urdu. He is 
rightly considered as the greatest qasida and satire writer of Urdu. 
In his social satires, he castigates the political, social and moral vices 
and defects of his age. Some of his personal satires are unpardon- 
ably vulgar. 

Mir Muhammad Taqi Mir (1722-1810) is called Khuda-e-Sukhan 
(the Lord of Speech). It is a homage that people pay him for his 
great service rendered in the cause and uplift of Urdu poetry. He 
was a man of great merit and talents, which were duly reflected in 
the art and realism of his poetry. He wrote what he actually felt 
in his heart and mind pertaining to his personal life or the environ¬ 
ment he lived in. As such his poetry, especially his ghazals, is a 
graphic document of his own moods, sentiments and feelings and the 
happenings of his age. His non-Ishqia masnavis are a fine example 
of objective poetry. They give the impression of being exact and 
truthful. His emotional experiences are that of a sad, gloomy and 
pathetic nature. He is ever quiet and subdued. We rarely come 
across a happy and joyful expression in his poetry; yet, it is moving 
and powerful and has a direct appeal to his readers. He has hun¬ 
dreds and not just seventy-two couplets of lasting beauty, neverthe¬ 
less, his readers agree with Shefta that “his (Mir’s) high is very 
high and his low is very low”. His style is simple and direct. His 
best media of expression are his ghazals, especially those written 
in shorter metres. 

Khwaja Mir Dard (1719-1785) is known for his learning and 
scholarship on the one hand and for his piety and high values of life 
on the other. He had mysticism in his blood. His religious studies 


686 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 

.. / 

were very deep. He lived a life of contentment and had a sterling 

character. He was well-versed in music and was duly acknowledg¬ 
ed as a Guru. He is accredited with a number of Khayals, Thumris 
and Dhrupads. His services to the Urdu language and ppetry are 
great. The mushairas held at his place were well-known for their 
literary contribution. Delhi poets like Sauda, Mir and Soz parti¬ 
cipated therein and, later, they discussed the ways and means of im¬ 
proving the Urdu language and enriching the Urdu poetry. 

Dard’s poetry embodies authentic ideas of Sufism. In his non- 
sufistic poetry, he is keen and sincere and expresses his ideas in a 
simple and direct style. Like Mir, he too excels in ghazals written 
in shorter metres. 

Dard’s younger brother, Mir Asar, will ever be remembered for 
his beautiful masnavi called Khwab-o-khayail which depicts the earth¬ 
ly as well as the spiritual love of the poet with utmost intensity of 
his feelings. It is a lyrical and subjective masnavi without a story. 

Mir Ghulam Hasan (1727-1786) is known as a great masnavi 
writer on the strength of his Sihr-ul~Bayan. It is the best metrical 
romance in Urdu. Mir Hasan’s skill and excellence lie in his direct 
and simple style, vivid description, appropriateness of expression 
apt to the compositions of the occasions. But his characterisation of 
aristocratic ladies is uncharitable. Sihr-ul-Bayan reveals his know¬ 
ledge of humanity, nature and life, especially in their externals. 
Astonishingly enough, he maintains the same good level in his mas¬ 
navi throughout. He, as yet, is unsurpassed in the domain of mas- 
nam-writing. 

Now, we come to a very notable poet called Wali Muhammad 
Nazeer (1740-1830). He was a school-master and wandered from 
place to place seeing and tasting life at all levels. He never cared 
for the dictates of etiquettes or the accepted norms of poetry with 
regard to thought, subject, form, diction and expression. He wrote 
of what he saw and felt in life and that too in a way which satis¬ 
fied his own sense of language and poetry. He wrote of the masses 
and for the masses, who liked his poetry, for it touched their heart 
and mind. He is ever fresh in singing of the life and culture of the 
land and its people, no matter to what caste, creed and religion 
they belong to. His language and expression is bold and original. 
In matters of descriptive poetry, he equals Mir Anis of Lucknow. 

The prominent poets of the period who gave a distinguishing 
shape to the language and poetry of Lucknow are described here. 


687 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Shaikh Ghulam Hamdani Mushafi (1750-1824) migrated from 
Delhi to Lucknow and enjoyed the patronage of Mirza Sulaiman 
Shukoh. He was influenced by the trends of life and poetry of 
Lucknow, but, truly speaking, they did not go well with his tempe¬ 
rament. Nevertheless, he serves as a bridge between the old and 
the new. He has something of Mir, Sauda, Insha and Jur’at, but he 
lacks the respective distinguishing features of these poets. He, as 
such, does not have any characteristic of his own. 

Sayyid Insha Allah Khan Insha (1756/58-1817) had a knack of 
learning languages. He knew Persian, Arabic, Turkish and many 
native languages. He was well conversant with the scientific prin¬ 
ciples connected with the nature of a language. At the same time 
he had mastered the art of poetry and was a noteworthy poet too. 
He was conscious of his attainments in the various fields. Now, with 
his wit and brilliance added to it, Insha became sarcastic and pugna¬ 
cious in his remarks. Over and above this, he always tried to assert 
himself. This led to many quarrels at Delhi and Lucknow. 

Insha may not, in future, be remembered much for his poetry, 
but he would ever be honoured in the domain of Urdu prose on ac¬ 
count of his Rani Ketki ki Kahani and Da\rya-e-Latafat. In Rani 
Ketki ki Kahani Insha has net used Arabic and Persian words, yet, 
it does not sound artificial. His style is direct and forthright. It 
seems to have been written as a revolt against the dominance of 
Arabic and Persian languages. It gives an air of independence to 
the ‘local* language. The same trend is evident in his Darya^e- 
Latafat , a work on linguistics setting principles which are valid even 
today. These books amply prove that Urdu has a genius of its own 
and that it should not be tied down to Arabic or Persian, etc. 

Shaikh Qalandar Bakhsh Jur’at, a close friend of Insha, got at¬ 
tached to Mirza Sulaiman Shukoh. His poetry is a true picture of 
life at Lucknow where he was brought up. His poetry, however, 
written before his early blindness, is distinguishable from the one 
written after it. The earlier poetry is gay, witty and joyful, where¬ 
as the latter one, has an under-current of seriousness and pathos. 
His blindness deprived him of what life had given him or could 
have given him. Religion or intellectual pursuits could not help him 
in his misfortunes. It was bis devotion to music which sustained 
him in his hard, difficult and unfortunate life. 

Imam Bakhsh Nasikh (d, 1838) had acquired a taste and refine¬ 
ment of language which is amply borne out by his poetry. But his 
poetry like his ethics has no depth. Although he believed in the 


688 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUtRY 


greatness of Mir’s poetry, he ardently followed Sauda, and, yet he 
has not given us an admixture of both. It is rarely that we come 
across a personal note in his poetry. Hence, not so as a poet, 
Nasikh would certainly be ever remembered for his stupendous ser¬ 
vice rendered to the Urdu language. He not only carried forward 
the work of early scholars of improving and developing the Urdu 
language with greater vigour and vehemence, but he also became 
almost the first person to codify and formulate definite rules regard¬ 
ing the usage, diction and grammar of Urdu. He also fixed the gen¬ 
ders and formulated idioms to be used in Lucknow. Along with 
him and his disciples, others too followed his dictates. This made 
the language of Lucknow independent of the one at Delhi. 

Khwaja Haidar ‘Ali Atish (1778-1846) merits a greater notice as 
a poet. He was independent and care-free by nature and lived a life 
of contentment being satisfied with what he got from Nawab Muham¬ 
mad Taqi, his patron. This has given vigour and power to his ex¬ 
pression and language. His poetry was very popular on account of 
his craftsmanship, smoothness in versification and refinement of his 
language. 

Something need be said about Rekhti with regard to Urdu 
poetry produced in Lucknow. Rekhti is the feminine form of 
Rekhta 9 Urdu poetry in general, for it is written in the language 
of the women-folk which is different from that of the men. Hashimi 
of Bijapur is said to be the first poet to write Rekhti , but it had no 
complete form as such. Hence, because of the completeness and the 
varied feelings of a woman in love with a man that it depicts, the 
credit of its intention is given to Sa‘adat yar Khan Rangin (1756- 
1834), who is said to have got the idea from Insha. Rangin was 
mostly in the company of courtesans and dancing girls and his poetry 
reflects his amours with them. 

In Rekhti, woman narrates the love on her side. It was new 
and unique compared to the general love poetry in Urdu, and as 
such, it was a return to the Hindi tradition wherein a woman des¬ 
cribes her feelings of love for her man. But Rekhti seldom rises to 
this level. The language of Rekhti is not treated as a literary one, 
yet it has its own importance, for, it distinctly tells us of the lan¬ 
guage used by women at large. Rekhti became popular as it satis¬ 
fied the taste of the degenerated nobility of the time. 

The period under review is mostly important for its poetry. 
But it attains significance with regard to prose because of InSha’s 
two monumental works, Rani Ketki ki Kahani and Darya-e-Latafat, 

689 


M.S.— U 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


mentioned earlier. They were preceded by Deh Majlis (1714) of 
Fazli and Naw Tarz-e-Murassa of Ata Husain Tahseem (1798). 
Both are highly Persianised and written in a rhythmic and affected 
style. A little different from them is Gulshan-e-Hind of Mirza ‘All 
Lutf. In comparison with the language used in Urdu poetry the lan¬ 
guage of these prose-books sounds most unrefined and under-deve¬ 
loped. Perhaps writing prose was not in vogue at that time. Per¬ 
sian was used practically for all prose expressions. Moreover 
poetry was very popular and it was used while writing letters also. 
Prose, therefore, had no chance to improve and develop. 

Hence the credit for direct, simple and, yet interesting Urdu 
prose goes, in general, to the writers connected with the Fort William 
College of Calcutta, which was founded to teach the native lan¬ 
guages to the British employees of the East India Company. In this 
regard, Mir Amman deserves a special mention for his Bagh-o-Bahar, 
which is written in almost the spoken language of the day. Other 
writers of significance are Sher ‘Ali Afsos, Haidar Bakhsh Haidari, 
Nihal Chand Lahauri, Bahadur ‘Ali Husaini, Kazim ‘Ali Jawan, Hafi- 
zuddin and Lallu Lalji. 

XIII. SINDHI 

Sind is known among the Sindhis as providing a fertile soil for 
the growth of poetry. There is a large number of poets—both clas¬ 
sical and modern—who have moulded the life and thought of the 
Sindhis. Of these, there were three stalwarts—the Triumvirate of 
Sindhi poetry—Shah (the Prince), Sachal (The Truthful) and Sami 
(the Master). Their poetry throws a flood of light on what the 
Sindhis are^-on their customs, manners, religion, ways of life and 
ways of thought. 

Shah is the foremost among these three poets. He puts the 
kettle to the boil; Sachal takes the lid off it; while Sami passes the 
beverage on to the rank and file of the people so that they may be 
brought to an intense awareness of God even in the day-to-day 
affairs of life. There is not a scholar, past and present, but has paid 
tributes to these three who are still the primary sources of literary 
inspiration. 

Shah is a great narrative artist, who puts across to the reader 
his philosophy of life, love and God through characters that are alive 
and are yet symbolic and almost legendary as well. But in all his 
works, it is he who is the hero or the heroine, he who celebrates in 


690 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 

himself the upsurge in the hearts of men, he who is every man: he 
is the Seeker, he is the Talih or Jagyasu. 

This great poet was born in 1689 and died in 1752. But though 
he is dead, he survives in his work and in the hearts of those who 
love him. 

Whatever Shah said in symbols, Sachal said in plain language. 
He is direct and forthright in his utterances, clear and lucid as are 
the great Greek poets. 

When asked about his religion, he says: 

“I am not a Muslim, nor a Hindu; 

I am bigger than either.” 

When told that by birth he was a Muslim, he looks up and 
says: 

“It is not the Raima that makes me a Muslim 
Nor did the Prophet bring faith from Arabastan”. 

“Oh! Sachal, you are the King of Kings 
Though you may be only a man in the eyes of Man!” 

This is Sachal, the revolutionary poet who followed in the foot¬ 
steps of Shah and carried the message of his Master in the rough-hewn 
language of the common man, touched with the wonder and beauty 
of a mind in harmony with the pulse of the Infinite. It is a wonder 
that though Bilwal and Shah Inayat, the great Sufis, were tortured 
and killed for their seemingly blasphemous utterances, Sachal escap¬ 
ed the gallows. This is because even the MIrs and Talpurs, who 
were the rulers of Sind, were his followers, and therefore, no one 
dared lift his hand against the Master. 

Sachal was a revolutionary. He had a restless, seeking mind, 
for it is only through spiritual unrest, through a desire to know, that 
one can reach out to the ultimate Reality. He wanted others to be 
equally restless, so that they might be his comrades in his search of 
the Great Ideal. Sachal was born in 1739 and died in 1829. 

Sami, the Master, was born in 1743 and died in 1850. He teaches 
us the eternal verities of life, teaches us that the world is a shadow 
and that the only reality lies within the deep-feeling heart of man. 
And this wisdom of his is evolved out of life rather than from a study 
of books, and comes straight from the heart to speak to that which 
lies deeply buried in the heart of man. 


691 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Sami speaks directly from the heart to the heart in a language 
which surprises by its directness and freshness. This is one of the 
chief charms of his poetry, for it finds an answering echo in the minds 
of the high and the low alike. He himself used to say that he had 
merely vernacularised Vedantic lore. 

Here are some slokas of Sami which illustrate his philosophy: 

“God is manifest, O S’ami! like the sun, 

The blind see HIM not, unclosing their eyes; 

Why dost thou at every door run, 

And chatter like lunatics, O unwise?” 

* * # 

“The fool perishes in ego’s vortex, 

Entangled like an ape’s hand filled in greed; 

He awakens not to draw the veil of darkness; 

When the Master wills, S’ami is from misery freed!” 

* * * 

“He who hath the chaos of ignorance destroyed, 

Achieves the mighty pinnacle of Atman.” 

XIV. ARABIC 

Like the previous centuries of Muslim rule in India, the period 
under review also saw the Arabic language being learnt and studied 
by the Muslims as an indispensable medium for acquiring theological 
education, which assumed a special importance following the downfall 
of Mughul supremacy. As the religio-ethical and socio-economic 
health of the Muslim community came to be adversely affected by 
the weakening of the imperial authority, the intelligentsia among 
them, particularly the doctors of divinity, went for the revitaliza¬ 
tion of the Muslim morale by means of religious reforms. And 
Arabic became the natural medium for fulfilling the requirements 
of religious rethinking among the Muslims in the early part of the 
eighteenth century. Behind the production of Arabic religious 
literature worked the powerful reformist movement of Shah Wali- 
ullah Dehlavi, son of the eminent theologian of Aurangzib’s time, 
Shah ‘Abdur Rahim Dehlavi. 24 

Born in 1703, four years before Aurangzib’s death, Shah Wall- 
ullah 25 represents the transition of the Indo-Islamic Culture from the 
medieval to the modern perilod. On his return from the Hejaz, 
where he received his formative education under the acknowledg¬ 
ed masters of theology, Shah Wallullah wrote his chief works in 


692 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 


Arabic. His magnum opus, the Hujjat Allah al-Bdlighaih, which 
earned him the title of Imam Ghazall of India, constitutes his most 
important contribution to theological dialects. In this outstanding 
work, the author attempts a rationalist approach to religious pro¬ 
blems and takes an evolutionist view of human history. His other 
notable works include Ta’wil Ahadith, on the interpretation of the 
sayings of the Prophet; al-M.usawwa, a copious commentary on the 
well-known work, al-Muwatta, of Imam Malik; al-Tafhtm aU 
Ilahiyya , dealing with Sufistic doctrines; and ‘Iqd al-Jtd fi Ahkdm 
al-Ijtihad wa’l TaqUd, on the problem of ijtihdd (use of individual 
reasoning) and taqlid (conformity), used as an oft-quoted book of 
reference by. the ulema of later generations. Shah Wallullah also 
wrote Arabic poetry, which mainly comprises eulogistic poems 
on the Prophet. Shah Wallullah’s mission generated tremendous 
reformist shock-waves which reverberated through the posterity of 
Muslim intellectuals in India. After him, the mission was carried 
on most effectively by his illustrious son Shah ‘Abdul Aziz Dehlavl 
(d. 1823) 26 who employed, unlike his father, Persian rather than 
Arabic for his numerous compilations. Of his Arabic writings, the 
Sirr aUShahadatain, which deals with the rationale of the martyr¬ 
dom of Syedna Imam Hussain at Karbala, has proved to be the most 
popular and revolutionary book ever written on the subject by an 
author of Shah ‘Abdul Aziz’s calibre. 

It is generally remarked that the decline of Muslim political 
power brought about a simultaneous decay in the progress of Muslim 
learning. The opinion does not appear to be supported by facts. 
Though the disintegration of the Mughul administration gradually 
removed the economic stimulus which involved religious schools to 
produce trained qazis for the purpose of judicial appointments, the 
reduced calls thus made by the state employment on the Muslim 
man-power left more men free to devote themselves to academic and 
literary work. A number of educational institutions and founda¬ 
tions, such as those established by Ghazi-ud-dln Khan Firuzjang, 
Sharaf al-Daulah and Raushan al-Daulah sprang up in Delhi. The 
standardization of the curriculum of Arabic education was accom¬ 
plished in the period under review of Mulla Nizam-ud-dm (d. 1748) 
of the celebrated school of Farangi Mahall (in Lucknow). 27 The 
Dars-i-Nizamiyyah, as the curriculum was named after its founder, 
enjoyed country-wide acceptance (still retained by madrassahs 
throughout the sub-continent) and provided instruction in grammar, 
rhetoric, philosophy, logic, scholasticism, Quranic sciences, Islamic 
jurisprudence and Apostolic Traditions. 


693 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Mulla Nizam-ud-dln’s son, Maulana Abdul Ali ‘Bahr al-‘Ulum’ 
(‘Ocean of Learning’) 28 is the most well-known alumnus of the Far- 
angi Mahall School. A prodigious teacher, he taught in many leading 
religious institutions of the country before settling down in Madras, 
where he died in 1819. A prolific author, he wrote a number of trea¬ 
tises and dissertations, commentaries and annotations on religious 
texts of classical masters. Among his numerous disciples, Maulvi 
Muhammad Ghauth Sharaf al-Mulk (1822), 29 following his master’s 
example, compiled various works, of which the most notable is Nathr 
al-Marjdn fi Rasm-i-Nazmi’l, Quran in seven volumes. 

Bilgram, near Lucknow, is a place with which are associated 
names of great litterateurs and scholars, the foremost among them 
being Sayyid Ghulam ‘All Azad (d. 1786), 30 who wrote in 1764 a very 
curious w r ork, entitled Subhat al-Marjan, which deals with topics 
such as references to India in Quranic commentaries and hadith , bio¬ 
graphies of Indian scholars, rhetorical figures of Sanskrit and types 
of lovers depicted by the poets. Azad happens to be the most im¬ 
portant Arabic poet of India. He has left seven diwans, selections 
from which have been published under the title, Sab’ah Sayydrah. 
For his collection of na’t (panegyrics in praise of the Prophet), Tasll- 
yat al-Fu’dd, Azad has rightly won the title of Hassdn al-Hind, like 
his Persian counterpart Khaqani who is known as Hassan al^Ajam. 
Azad had a critic in his younger contemporary, Muhammad Baqir 
‘Agah’ (d. 1805) of Madras who deserves mention as a prolific writer 
and a good poet in his own right. Another noted literary figure of 
Bilgram is Murtada ‘All Zabld! (d. 1790), 31 who compiled a compre¬ 
hensive lexicographic commentary entitled, Taj al-Urus on the well- 
known Qamus of Maj al-DIn Flruzabadl. His Ithaf al-Saddt, an 
illuminative commentary of Imam Ghazali’s Ihyd bears ample testi¬ 
mony to the author’s knowledge and wonderful learning. Rahman 
‘Ali has listed a total of sixty-six works by Zabidl. Another con¬ 
spicuous lexicographer of the 18th century is Muhammad ‘Ali al- 
Faruq of Thanabawan, who compiled a dictionary of Arabic techni¬ 
cal terms, called Kashshaf Istildhdt al-Funun. Among other poets 
of Bilgram deserving mention are Syed Tufail Muhammad (d. 1738) 
and Sayyid Muhammad Yusuf (d. 1758). 

A learned family of Khairabad, near Sitapur (in U.P.) pro¬ 
duced scholars and theologians of eminence, such as Sifat Allah ibn 
Madlnat Allah (d. 1744) and Shaikh Ahmadullah (d. 1735). ‘Allama 
Fadl-i-Imam KhairabadI (d. 1837) 32 attained great fame for his very 
popular text-books on logic, entitled Mirqat. 


694 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 

Sayyid Dildar ‘All Lakhnawl (d. 1812), 33 the first Shia mujtahid 
of India, flourished during the period. His contemporary, Tafaddul 
Husain Khan Kashmiri (d. 1800), who knew Arabic, Persian, English 
and Latin, was the author of several treatises on mathematics, in 
which he had excelled in his time. Mirza Mazhar Jan-i-Janan 
(d. 1780), the revered Sufi saint, had a large number of learned dis¬ 
ciples, of whom QadI Thana ‘ullah Panlpatl (d. 1810) won wide ac¬ 
claim as ‘Muhaddith’ and has been described by Shah ‘Abdul ‘Aziz 
as the “Baihaqi of India”. 


XV. PERSIAN 

In the post-AurangzIb period of the history of Mughul India, the 
status of the Persian language faced a challenge as a result of the 
collapse of the central authority of the Muslim rulers and the emer¬ 
gence of Urdu as the potential lingua franca of the country, though 
it was not until 1837 that Persian ceased to be the official language 
of India. Excepting the art of historiography and memoir-writing, 
which found favour with both the Muslims and the Hindus, there 
occurred a virtual decline in the output of poetical compositions 
during the period. The time-honoured emigration of writers and 
versifiers from Persian-speaking lands of Central Asia to India, 
which reached its zenith in the heyday of the Mughul ascendancy 
under Shah Jahan touched a low ebb in the second half of the seven¬ 
teenth century. But the Persian and Afghan invasions of the sub¬ 
continent, though devastating both in nature and extent, brought in 
its wake numerous men of culture who perfected their creative art 
on the Indian soil. The native Rekhta writers invariably had some¬ 
thing to write in Persian too. 

Shah Wallullah Dehlavl, 34 the doyen of Islamic learning in India, 
though writing mostly in Arabic, took a revolutionary step by trans¬ 
lating the Quran into simple Persian. Persian translations of the 
Muslim scripture were attempted earlier, but none of them had gain¬ 
ed such currency. The reason of the translation’s popularity was 
that it formed a part of the broad-based movement initiated by the 
savant to bring the knowledge of the Quran within the reach of the 
average literate Indian Muslim who generally spoke Persian. 
Equally popular was the tafsir, named Fath al-‘Aziz, written by his 
illustrious son, Shah ‘Abdul ‘Aziz Dehlavl, 35 who also had several 
other religious works to his credit, namely Bustdn al-Muhaddithin, 
‘Ufala-i-NafVah and Tuhfa-i-I'thnd ‘Ashariyya. About the same time, 
‘Allama Fadl-i-Imam KhairabadI prepared the famous Amadndma , 
which proved to be a must for anybody who desired to learn Persian*. 


695 



THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

As theology was the subject-matter of scholars of Arabic, writ¬ 
ing of history and biography became almost an obsession with those 
who tried their hand in Persian. The mass of historical writings 
clearly outweighs the quantity of belles lettres created during the 
period. 

Mubarak Allah Wadih. (d. 1716), who received the title of Iradat 
Khan in the 40th year of Aurangzib’s reign, wrote in 1714 his history 
entitled, Tdfikh-i-Irddat Khan or Mdqtal al-Salatin, containing chro¬ 
nicles of the seven years following Aurangzib’s death down to the 
year 1714 when Farrukh-siyar entered Delhi. He has also left a 
diwdn and a mathnawi, known as Aina-i-Raz. Muhammad Shall 
Warld, who served for some time under Prince ‘Azam but soon re¬ 
tired and devoted himself to writing, compiled two historical works, 
named Mir’at-i-Wdriddt and Tdrikh-i-Chaghtdi and four mathnawis , 
viz., Gulistdn-i-Nayrang, Mir’at-i-Farrukhi, Chaman-i-Dtddr and 
Sdql Ndma>, apart from a diwdn of lyrical odes. A precious narra¬ 
tive of the life and reign of Muhammad Shah was written by MIrza 
Muhammad Bakhsh ‘Ashub (d. 1785), who was also a poet of no 
mean order. Mir’at-i-Ahmadi of Ali Muhammad Khan, who was ap¬ 
pointed Diwan of Gujarat in 1746, is a very reliable source of accu¬ 
rate information of diverse kinds about the Mughul empire, parti¬ 
cularly Gujarat. It happens to be the only work of its kind after 
Abu’l Fazl’s Ain-i-Akbari . 

The Persian tradition of Hindu historiography, which had its be¬ 
ginning during Shah Jahan’s reign with works like the Chahdr Cha - 
man of Chandra Bh5n Brahman 36 and the Shahjahdn nama of Bhag- 
wan Das, was maintained throughout the eighteenth century with 
undiminished brilliance. Lai Ram’s Tuhfat al-Hind, a general history 
of India from the earliest times to the reign of Farrukh-siyar and 
written in 1735, provides a rare instance of a Hindu author’s complete 
self-identification with the Muslim view-point and style. 37 Imitating 
the same pattern is the Tdrikh-i-Muha,mmadshdhi of the noted Kaya- 
stha historian, Khushal Chand. The Shdhndma-i-Munawwar al-Kalam 
of Shiv Das Lakhnawd is a valuable document depicting the life and 
time of Farrukh-siyar. It is not a connected history, but a compila¬ 
tion of court news and detached narratives, official letters and far - 
mans. Ray Rayan Anand Ram Mukhlis (d. 1751), an eye-witness 
of much that occurred during Nadir Shah’s Indian sojourn, was a 
versatile Hindu scholar of Persian. Besides a diwdn and some 
epistles, he wrote a very authentic account of Muhammad Shah’s war 
with Nadir Shah. The Majma c aUAkhbdr of Harsukh Rai, written 
in 1805, is a general history divided into eight books, the seventh 


696 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 


of which deals with rulers of different provinces of India, while at 
the end of the sixth is given the history of Mughul rulers up to the 
time of Shah ‘Alam. Lakshmi Narayan Shaflq of Aurangabad, author 
of the famous biographical dictionary, Gul-i-Ra’na , wrote several 
important historical and topographical works, such as Haqiqatha-i- 
Hindusthdn, Ma’dthir-i-‘Asafi and Ahmdl-i-Haidard f bad. His tazh- 
ldra of poets, named Chamanistan-iShuafard, occupies a coveted 
place in the history of Persian biographical literature. 

The Awadh rulers patronized several Hindu chroniclers, of whom 
Harcharan Das and Harnam Singh deserve mention. The former 
wrote Chahdr Gulzdr-i-Shujd’i, dedicated to Nawab Shuja-ud-Daulah, 
which is a discursive but significant book of history, while the latter 
compiled Tdrikh-i-Sa‘adat-i-Javoid, dedicated to Sa‘adat ‘All Khan, 
Nawab Vazir of Awadh, which is a general history of India, useful 
for the biographical details it gives of the nobles and dignitaries from 
the time of Muhammad Shah to that of the author’s own. 

The eastern part of the tottering Mughul empire, particularly 
the Bengal Subah, made a commendable contribution to the Persian 
historical literature of the 18th century. The celebrated Siyar al- 
Muta’akhkherm of Ghulam Husain Tabataba’I is a general history of 
India from Aurangzlb’s death to Nadir Shah’s departure in 1739, with 
special section on the history of Bengal from the death of Nawab 
Shuja-ud-Daulah to the ye^r 1781. Rightly considered as the last 
great historian of Muslim India, the author has some penetrating 
observations to make regarding the East India Company which was 
rapidly acquiring political hegemony in the country. The Siyar is 
written in the style of a private memoir, the most useful and engag¬ 
ing shape which history can assume. There are also poetical pieces 
composed by the historian. 38 

Among the independent subdhdars of Bengal, Nawab Ali Vardi 
Khan is the most conspicuous for his patronge of chroniclers, scholars 
and poets. Yusuf All Khan (d. 1781) wrote the Tdrikh-i-Bangdla-i- 
Mahdbhatjangi, 39 which is a unique store-house of valuable historical 
details, gathered by the author from personal observation and expe¬ 
rience. The author of the Siyar is heavily indebted to this book for 
his own account of All Vardi, of the Maratha invasions of Bengal and 
of the Afghan rebellion. Yusuf All’s other notable works include 
Hadiqata-i-Safa , a comprehensive history, remarkable for its extre¬ 
mely accurate chronology and its notices of the learned persons of 
single epochs. There is also a memoir of poets and a rare compendium 
compiled by him. Yusuf All’s son-in-law, Nawab All Ibrahim Khan, 
who held the office of Chief Magistrate of Benaras, was the author 


697 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


of several voluminous tazhkiras, including Khuldsat al-Kalam. 
Tarikh-i-Ali Ibrahim Khan, composed during the administration of 
Lord Cornwallis, is a clear and succinct account of the Maratha wars. 

Tarikh-i-Bamgala of MunshI Salimullah 40 and the Riydd al-Salatin 
of Ghulam Husain Salim 41 were written at the instance of English 
patrons. The former work, which is of special value for the career 
and administration of Murshid Quli Khan, was written by the order 
of Governor Henry Vansittart (1760-64), while the latter, which is 
the fullest account in Persian of the Muslim history of Bengal from 
the earliest times to 1786, was composed in Malda at the behest of 
George Udny, the author’s patron and commercial Resident of the 
East India Company’s factory at Malda. 

Two interesting works, relating to the history of the Nizamat in 
Bengal, which bear the stamp of rhetorical skill are the Waqdi-Fath-i - 
Bangdla, written in 1748, by Muhammad Wafa and the ‘ Ibrat-i-Arabdb - 
i-Basar written in 1757, by Rai Balmukund, where narratives are 
throughout written in chronogrammatic sentences. Another title 
worth mentioning is Maharaja Kalyan Singh’s Khuldsat al-Tawarikh 
written in 1783, 42 which comprises a portion which is sometimes dif¬ 
ferently called Wariddti-Qdsismi. The work is a good statistical 
account of Bengal and other provinces of the Mughul empire. 

To the court of Sayyid Muhammad Riza Muzaffarjang (d. 1791) 
Naib Nazim of Bengal, were attached two chroniclers, Muhammad ‘All 
Khan Ansarl and Karam ‘All, whose works Tdrikh-i-Muzaffari and the 
Muzaffarndma respectively are indispensable source materials for the 
reconstruction of the history of the period in which the two authors 
lived. Closely associated with Nawab Muzaffarjang was one Haji 
Muhammad Beg Khan, whose son Mirza Abu Talib Khan 43 became 
one of the most interesting intellectual luminaries of the 18th century, 
A man of keen intellect and wide learning, he wrote on a variety 
of topics and composed poetry, criticism and travelogue. In 1791, 
he brought out at Calcutta a scholarly edition of the Diwdn-i-Hdfiz 
which was followed in 1792 by Khuldsat al-Afkar , a magnificent sur¬ 
vey of the biographies of about 500 ancient and modem poets of 
Persian. He also compiled two works of history, namely, a histpty 
of the kings of India and Lubb al-Tawdrikh, a compendious accoun 
of the kingdoms of Europe and other western countries. Tafdih al- 
Ghdfilin is a first-hand account of the events connected with the 
administration of Nawab Asaf-ud-Daulah of Awadh. He also wrote 
a diwdn which was edited by A. Swinton with English translation 
under the title Poems of Mirza Abu Talib Khan and was published a 


698 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 

London in 1807. But what fetched MIrza Abu Talib Khan a lasting 
fame is his account of his travels in Asia, Africa and Europe, entitled 
Mastr-i-Talibt fl bilad-i-Afranp. The travelogue became so popular 
that it was translated into English, French, German and Urdu, some¬ 
times with more than one edition. 

The Nawabs of Bengal, being men of learning and culture, ex¬ 
tended liberal patronage to men of letters and scholars. During the 
rule of Nawab All Vardi Khan, Murshidabad shone as a focal point 
for poets and writers, most distinguished of whom, according to the 
author of the Siyar , was Mir Muhammad ‘All Fadil, 44 held in high 
esteem for his vast learning and scholarship. Murshid Qull II, son- 
in-law of Nawab Shuja-ud-Daulah of Bengal and deputy governor of 
Jahangirnagar, was a gifted poet and wrote good poetry under the 
pen-name makhfi. 

The poetical literature of the period under review is quanti¬ 
tatively negligible as compared with that of the preceding. In this 
connection, it is remarkable to note that almost every poet of name 
had some biographical writings to his credit too. Among such versi¬ 
fiers the pride of place belongs to Shaikh Muhammad ‘All Hazan 45 One 
of the most accomplished writers of the age, Hazin, after extensive 
wanderings in Iran and Arabia, emigrated to India in 1733, mainly to 
avoid Nadir Shah’s persecutions in his native country. At last, he set¬ 
tled down in Benaras where he died in 1766. His Kulliyat, which con¬ 
tains qasidas, ghazals, ruba’is and mathnawis, reflects an excellent 
blend of classical and modern styles in Persian verse. His auto¬ 
biography, Tazhkirat al-Ahvyal, compiled in 1741, is a veritable repo¬ 
sitory of information about the events and leading personalities of 
his age. The Tazhkirat al-M.uasirin, comprises short biographical 
notices on about a hundred contemporary divines and poets. Hazin’s 
friend, All Quli Khan Walih (d. 1756) of Daghistan, 46 is a very colour¬ 
ful literary personality of the time. An aristocrat by birth, Walih 
came to India in 1735 and received in course of time honours from 
Muhammad Shah. Though he completed a diwdn in 1748, Walih’S 
fame chiefly rests on his monumental memoirs of poets, entitled Riydd 
al-Shua’ara , which contains quotations of verses of undoubted merit, 
observations on prosody and poetical figures, historical information 
and critical judgments on poetical qualities of poets discussed. Ac? 
cording to Sprenger, “in India this Tazhkira is more esteemed tha© 
any other.” 47 

Siraj ud-Dln All Khan Arzu (d. 1756) 48 was an excellent, poet, 
a reputed scholar and an officer of rank in the time of emperor Far* 
rukh-siyar. Patronized by Raja Anand Ram Mukhlis, Salarjang and 


699 



THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Shuja-ud-Daulah, Arzu wrote a number of works on a variety of sub¬ 
jects. He wrote commentaries on Sikandarndma of Nizami 
qasidas of Urfi and Gulistan of Sadi. His lexicographical works 
are: Chirdgh-i-Hidayat, a dictionary of poetical expressions used by 
the poets of his time, -and the Ghardib al-Lughdt, a vocabulary of 
Hindi words in Persian. But his masterpiece is Majma al-Nafdis } a 
biography of 1419 classical and modern poets of Persian. Ghulam 
All Azad BilgramI, 49 mentioned above in connection with his contri¬ 
bution to Arabic studies, is the author of several remarkable Persian 
books, of which the most notable are: Ma’dthir al-kiram, lives of 
saints and mystics of Bilgram; Yad-i-Baidd, alphabetically arranged 
biographies of 532 classical and modern poets; Scfrrw Azdd; Khazana - 
in-Amirah; and a diwdn of ghazals. 50 “The fame of the poet’s learn¬ 
ing”, remarks T. W. Haig, “is such that parents take their children 
to his shrine in order that they may, by picking up with their lips 
a piece of sugar from the tomb, obtain both a taste for knowledge 
and the ability to acquire it.” 51 

The Mughul royalty, though shorn of their political influence, 
displayed glimpses of their hereditary cultural lustre. Emperor 
Shah ‘Alam who reigned between 1759 and 1806 was the foremost 
among them to have a fine literary taste. He adopted ‘Aftab’ as his 
pen-name and compiled a collection of Persian verses, entitled 
Diwan-i-Aftab . 

With the close of the 18th century, and the beginning of the 19th, 
the great political game of the British trading company for the esta¬ 
blishment of the British paramountcy in India started. As a part 
of the concerted policy of the new rulers to put down as effectively 
as possible the last vestiges of the Mughul power and dominance 
in India, Persian was sought to be abolished as court language in 
Hritish India, apparently on alleged economic grounds but really on 
a^ political one. Persian formally ceased to be the court language 
with effect from 20 November, 1837, by a legislative order. 

XVII. SANSKRIT 

A brief survey of Sanskrit literature during the days of Maratha 
supremacy and the early British rule reveals that Sanskrit continu¬ 
ed to flourish along with the other regional languages. The patro¬ 
nage of the rulers, munificent donations of the agraharas to dis¬ 
tinguished poets, and the literary activities at the popular pilgrim 
places and temple centres like Benaras encouraged Sanskrit writers 
in different fields. Royal personalities like Sarphoji (1711-28) and 


700 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 


Tukoji (1729-35) in Tanjore, Martanda Varma in Travancore, Kalale 
Nanjaraja in Mysore, Kolluri Rajashekhara in Andhra, the Peshwds 
in Maharashtra, Sawai Jay Singh in Jaipur, and Maharaja Krishna- 
chandra of Nadia (1728-82) in Bengal, invigorated, as it were, the 
Sanskrit literature that was at a low ebb, at least in North India, 
during the Muslim rule. With the advent of the British rule, San¬ 
skrit study gained gradually a prestigious status. 

Another noteworthy feature of this period is the foundation of a 
few Sanskrit institutions. The Peshwds of Maharashtra had set 
aside funds for the dakshina, which was responsible later for the 
present Deccan College. The rich collection of the Saraswati Mahal 
Library at Tanjore has for its nucleus the Sanskrit manuscripts, 
zealously preserved by Raja SarphojI. In 1791 was founded the 
Varanasi Rajaklya Sanskrit Mahavidyalaya, known at present as the 
Varanasi Sanskrit Vishvavidyalaya. 

The Kdvya Literature: 

Mahdkavya: 

Anantanarayana (also known as Pahcharatna), under the patro¬ 
nage of king SarphojI, wrote Raghavacharita (also known as San- 
grahardmayana ) describing the story of Rama in 12 cantos. The 
story of Ramayana forms the theme of another poem entitled Rama - 
charitam (12 cantos) by Ramavarma, the Yuvaraja of Cranganore. 
But a more noteworthy work based on Rama’s life is the poem Rdgha - 
vlyarh (20 cantos) composed by the famous poet of Sanskrit and 
Prakri 4 , Ramapanivada of Malabar. He also wrote Vishnuvildsa 
(8 cantos) eulogizing the deeds of Vishnu in his different incarna¬ 
tions. Another Maithilian poet Krishnadatta, the son of Sadaram, 
composed Radharahasya (22 cantos) depicting the amours of Radha 
and Krishna. Ghanashyam (also known as Aryaka), the minister 
of the king Tukoji of Tanjore (1728-1735 A .D.), in his poem Vehka- 
feshacharita narrates the story of Lord Venkateshwara of Tirupati. 
The Kerala poet Ramapanivada wrote Mukundastavah at the in¬ 
stance of king Ramavarma. Shiva’s defeating Kali by his cosmic 
dance at Chidambaram is the theme of Nateshavijayam (7 cantos) of 
Vehkatakrishna, patronised by Gopal, a governor of ShivajI’s pro¬ 
vinces near Chidambaram. Duhkhabhanjana of Benaras composed 
Chandrashekharacharita. Another great poet Ramfabhadra Dikshit, 
the son of the grammarian Yajharam Dikshit, composed Patanjali- 
charita (8 cantos) describing the life of Patanjall, the well-known 
author of Vydkarana Mahdbhasya. His patron, the king SarphojI of 


701 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Tanjore, bestowed upon him the agrahara of Shahjirajapura (now 
known as Tiruvalnular). An important work for the history of Tan- 
jore is Shahendravildsa (8 cantos) of Shridhara Venkatesh, des¬ 
cribing the exploits of the patron king Shahji. 

Slesha Kavya: 

Poems with words having two or more meanings were also 
attempted. The story of Rama and Nala was simultaneously narrated 
in the two cantos of the Rdghavcmaishadhlya of Haradatta, the son 
of Jayashankar of the Gargya gotra. The Kosalabhosallyam (6 
cantos) of Seshachalakavi deals with the story of Rama and Shahji. 
Ghanashyam’s Abodhdkaram, narrates the story of Nala, Krishna 
and Harischandra, at once. He also wrote the poem Kalidushana , 
which can be read both in Sanskrit and Prakrit. 

Champu Kavya i; 

The Champu literature continued to grow with themes, reli¬ 
gious and biographical. Based on the Bhagavata, we have the Bha - 
gavatachampu of Somashekhara (also known as Rajashekhara) and 
the Madhavachampu of Chiranjlva. Sarphoji, the second son of 
Vyankoji Raja wrote the Kumarasaimbhcivachampu. The other 
Chaihpus with religious themes are the Uttarachampurdmayana of 
Venkatakrishna, the Gaurimayurachampu of Appa Dikshit and the 
Garigdvataranachampu of Shankar Dikshit. The latter writer de¬ 
scribed the life of the Benaras king Chet Singh in his Shankara- 
chetovildsachampu. The other noteworthy biographical chaihpus are 
Vikramasenacharhpu of Narayana, the Dharmavijayachampu (deal¬ 
ing with the life of Shahji) of Bhuminatha, the Bhosalavamshavall of 
Venkatesh and others. Raghavacharya’s Vaikunthavijayachampu 
describes many temples and places of pilgrimage and Baneshvara’s 
Chitrachampu contains useful historical and geographical details. 
The political affairs of contemporary Deccan and Karnataka as well as 
the Anglo-French conflicts form the theme of the Anandaranga- 
charhpu of Shrlnivasa. 

S hdstranistha-kavya ; 

A few poets illustrated the alamkdra through their poems glori¬ 
fying the royal deeds. Devashankara Purohit’s Alamkaramanjushd 
praises the achievements of Peshwa Madhav Rao I and his uncle 
Raghunath Rao. The merits of the Tan j ore king Shahji are sung in 
the Shdhardjiyarh of Kashi Lakshmana. Sadashivamakhi, the son of 


702 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 

Kokkanatha, composed a rhetorical work Rdmavarmdyashobhiishana. 
The Gunaratnakara of Nrisirhha sings of king Sarphoji. Ramadeva’s 
Vrittaratndvali is a panegyric of Yashavantasimha, illustrating diffe¬ 
rent metres. 

Other Kdvyas: 

Shrldhara Venkatesh, a protege of the king ShahjI, composed 
Daydshatakarh, Mdtrbhushdtakam, Tdravalishatakam., Artihara- 
stotra, etc. Vancheshvara’s Mahisashataka is a satirical poem on 
the minister of the king TukojI of Tan j ore. Jagannath described 
the life of Sarphoji in his Sharabhardjavildsam. Dhundhiraja, the 
commentator of Mudrdrdkshasa f wrote the musical poem Shdha - 
vilasam following the pattern of Gita Govinda and Abhinavaka - 
d^mbari. Baneshvar wrote a century of verses on Benaras. The 
Angrejacandrika of Vinayaka Bhafta and the Itihdsatamomani of 
Ramaswami Raju deal with the British rule. 

On the life of Shankaracharya, we have Shankaradigvijayasdra 
by Sadananda Yati who also wrote a commentary on the Bhagavad 
Gita and an independent work entitled Pratyaktattvachintdmani, the 
Guruvamshakavya by Kashi Lakshmana Suri and the Brihaicchan- 
karavijaya by Brahmananda Sarasvati. Moropant, a Maharashtrian 
poet, composed in all about 4,918 verses in praise of Rama and other 
gods. His best known work is Mantra-Rdmdyana comprising 3,992 
verses. Among the Samdesha Kdvyas, patterned on Meghaduta r 
Chandraduta of Krishnachandra, Tarkalamkara, Tulasiduta of Trilo- 
chana, Kokiladuta of Haridas, Kdkaduta of Rama go pal, etc., were 
composed. 

Among the musical compositions, reference may be made to 

Shivagitimdlikd of Shri Chandrashekhara Saraswati, and Krishnalild- 

taranginl of Narayana Tirtha. Nahjaraja, the Sarvadhikari of 

Krishnaraja II of Mysore, composed the Saivite poem Samgita- 

gangddhara, imitating Gita Govinda. In the same strain are written 

Gita Sundara by Sadashiva Dikshit, and the Gita Gaiiapafi by 

Krishnadatta. 

* 

Parankusha Ramanuja composed Shriprapattih, Narasrriihaman- 
galashamsanam, Khsiranadistavah, Vihageshvarastavah, Devarajasfta* 
vah and other stotras. Vrajanatha’s Padyatarangini and Subhdsita- 
suradruma by Basava Nayaka of Ikkeri are the anthologies com¬ 
piled during this period. 


703 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Ndtaka, Natika: 

The life of their patrons was dramatised by many a playwright. 
Venkata Subramanya, a descendant of Appayya Dikshit, wrote 
Vasulakshmikalydnam, dealing with the marriage of his patron king 
Ramavarma of Travancore (1758-1798) with Vasulakshmi, a Sindhu 
princess for securing a political alliance. The Balamartandavijayam 
(5 Acts) of Devaraja, the son of Shesadri, describes the heroic 
exploits and liberality of his patron king Martandavarma (1729-1758) 
of Travancore. It also refers to the renovation of the shrine of Shri 
Padmanabha at Trivandrum by the king. The separation and the re¬ 
union of Kalavatl and the prince Nandaka form the theme of the play 
Kaltinandakam, written at the behest of the king Tulaji of Tanjore 
(1765-1787) by Ramachandrashekhara, who had performed a Paun- 
darikayaga. 

Vishvanath, the son of Trimaladeva of Andhra, who migrated to 
Benaras, composed Mrgdnkalekhd, a natika in four Acts, describing the 
marriage of Mrgankalekha, the daughter of the king of Kamarupa 
with the Kalinga king Karpuratilaka. This play was staged at the 
Kashi Vishveshvara festival. Another natika entitled the Skrhgdra- 
vdtikd, depicting the love of the Avanti king Chandrakell with Cham- 
pavati and Kantimati, was written by Vishvanath, the pupil of Dhun- 
dhiraja. The Maithilian poet-dramatist Krishnadatta penned Kuva- 
laydshviyam (7 Acts) depicting the love of Kuvalayashva and Ma- 
dalasa, Puranjanavijayarii (also known as Puranjanacharita ) based 
on the Puranjana-upakhyana of the Bhagavata } and an entertaining 
farce, the Sandrakutuhalam. On the occasion of the coronation of 
Sabhasundara, the grandson of the Chatrasal of Bundelkhand, was 
written the play Pradyumnavijayam by Shankara Dikshit. Liberal 
like the patron Vikramaditya, Ramavarmavanci Yuvaraja (also 
known as Ashvini Maharaja) (1757-1789), the son of Martandavarma, 
wrote Rukminiparinayam besides Malayalam dramatic pieces 
called Kathakalis. Jagannatha, the son of Balkrishna who was the 
minister of the king Sarphoji of Tanjore, wrote Ratimanmatham and 
Vasumatiparinayam. The famous poet land the devotee of Rama, 
Ramapanivada wrote two dramas, the Lalitdrdghaviyarh and the 
Padukapattabhishekarh. The literary genius of Almoda, Vishve- 
swara, the son of Lakshmidhar of Pande family, wrote a natika called 
Navamdlika describing the amours of Vjiayasena and Navamalika of 
Avanti. His other works are Rukminiparinayam, a ndtaka and Shrii- 
gdramanjari, a Sattaka in Prakrit. The life of Shri Ramanujacharya 
was'dramatised in the Yatirdjavijayani (also known as Vedanta - 
vildsam) by Varadacharya of Kanchi. 


704 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 
Allegorical Plays: 

Ghanashyam, the minister of the king TukojI of Tanjore wrote 
the Prachan^ardkudaya, to refute the views put forth in the play 
Samkalpasuryodaya of Venkatanatha Vedantadeshika. Jatadeva, 
who became a recluse after performing a somaydga, composed the 
play Purnapurusdrthachandrodayam wherein the king Dashdshva 
(i.e., the atma, the lord of ten horses in the* form of ten indriyas) is 
united with Anandapakvavalll (the highest bliss) with the help of 
Sushraddha and Subhakti. The union of Vidijd and jivdtmd is pre¬ 
sented in the Vidydparinayam of Vedakavi. In his Shivalingasur- 
yodaya (5 Acts), Malian Aradhya establishes the superiority of 
Vira-Saivism. Nrisiihha’s Anumitiparinaya explains the Nyaya 
doctrine of inference through the marriage of Anumiti (daughter of 
Paramarsha); and Nyayarasika Ramadev, (also known as Vamadev), 
the grand-son of Kashinath, the famous palmist of Bengal, wrote a 
humorous quasi-dramatic work entitled Vidvanmodatarangim where¬ 
in he brings home the truth of different religious and philosophical 
doctrines. Among the less important works, reference may be made 
to the Chittavrittikalydnam and the Jivanmuktikalydnam of Bhumi- 
nath (also known as Nalla Dikshit) and to the Amritodaya of Gokul- 
nath of Mithila. 

Other types: 

/ 

Varadacharya (known as Ammalacharya) wrote Vasantdtilaka* 
bhana (also 1 known as Ammal Bhana) to vie with the Shringdratilaka 
(also known as Ayya Bhana) of Ramabhadra. Ghanashyam’s 
Madanasamjwana, Ashvini Maharaja’s Shringdrasudhdkarabhd'tia 
and Jagannatha’s Anangavijaya are the other three noteworthy 
Bhdnas of this period. Kashlpati Kaviraja wrote the Mukunddnanda, 
a mishrabhana wherein the erotic adventures of the Vita alludes ob- 

f • 

liquely to the sports of Krishna. 

Among the Prahasanas, a reference must be made to Ghana¬ 
shyam’s Damaruka which is like a collection of select scenes. Rama- 
panivada wrote Madanaketucharitam, a prahasana and Chandrikd y a 
vitM, said to have been enacted during the reign of the king Vanchi- 
martantfa at Trivandrum. 

Miscellaneous Works: 

The tradition of writing pkas was vigorously followed by the 
prolific writer Ghanashyam, who wrote commentaries on many works 
like the Shakuntald, Mahdvimcharita, Venisamhara, Bhojachampu and 

705 

M.S.—45 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Dashakumdracharita. In a single night of a RamanavamI, he is said 
to have written a commentary on the Uttarardmacharita. He also 
completed the drama Mahdviracharita by adding the last two Acts. 
He is said to have written 64 works in Sanskrit, 20 in Prakrit and 25 in 
other dialects. His wives Sundarl and Kamala wrote a commentary 
on Viddhasdlabhanjika . Dhundhiraja’s commentary on the Mudrardk- 
shasa is well-known. Ramapanivada wrote also commentaries on the 
Krishnavildsa, Govindabhiseka and Dhdtukdvya and Achutaraya 
Modak on the Bhaminlvilasa. 

Vishveshvar wrote a katha called the Mandaramanjari. 

As an example of geographical works, Ramakavfs Pandavadig - 
vijaya, a work bigger than the Mahabhdrata, may be mentioned. It 
describes, through the conquest of India by the Pandavas, customs, 
manners and social conditions of different parts of India, before and 
after the Muslim conquest. It also includes the stories of Vikrama- 
ditya, Shalivahana, Shankaracharya, etc., and of the kings like Pra- 
taparudra of Orissa and Jayachandra of Kambhoja. 

Basava Nayak of Ikkeri compiled Shivatattvaratndkara f an 
encyclopaedic work giving the essence of different arts and sciences 
treated in the Vedas and the Agamas. Another encyclopaedic work 
covering contemporary history and other subjects is Bhuvanapradi - 
pika of Ramakrishna Shastri. Raghava Appa Khandekar wrote the 
lexiconic work Koshdvatamsa. 

It is interesting to note that the Missionaries at Serampore pub¬ 
lished in three volumes the Sanskrit translation of “ The New Testa¬ 
ment of Our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ ” entitled ishvarasya 
Sarvavdkyam. Sir William Jones and his wife published a list of 
Sanskrit works at the Royal Asiatic Society. 

Technical and Scientific Literature: 

Alamkdra: 

In his short-lived life of thirty-four years Vishveshvara Pandit, 
son of Laxmidhara, wrote many works like the Alomkarakulapradipa. 
Alanhkdrakaustubha, Alamkdramuktdvali , Kavln drak amd b harana . 
Rdvyatilaka, Rasachandrikd and a commentary on Rasamanjctri called 
the Vyadgd'rthakaumudi. Another well-known writer Baladeva 
Vidyabhushana of Bengal wrote a commentary entitled Sdhityakau - 
mudi on the karikas of the Kavyaprakasha , calling them the Bharata - 
Sviras. He gives his own illustrations in praise of Krishna and adds 
a chapter covering topics not referred to in the Bharata-Sutras. The 
Kdvyavildsa in two parts of Ramadeva (also known as Vamadeva and 
Chiranjiva) deals with Rasa and Alamkara. Kalyanasubramanya, 

706 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 


patronised by the king Ramavarma of Travancore, wrote the Alam- 
kdrakaustubha dealing with the Arthalamkaras only. Nagesha com¬ 
posed a number of commentaries such as Marmaprakdsha on the 
Rasagarigddhara, the Udyota on Pradipa, a commentary by Bhatta 
Govinda on the Kdvyaprakdsha, Uddharanadipika on the Kdvya- 
prakasha, Prakasha on the Rasammjari, and the Visamapada-Vydkh- 
ydnasatpadananda on the Kuvalaydnainda. Mammata’s Kdvyaprakd- 
sha was also commented upon by Bhimasen Dikshit of Kanyakubja, 
Gopalabhatta, Gokulanath Upadhyaya and Gokulanath, the son of 
Pitambara who wrote the Sudhdsdgara, Sdhityachwddmanl, Vivarana 
and the Rasdrnava respectively. Hariprasada, the son of Gangeshvara 
wrote the Kdvydloka in seven Prakashas and Achyutaraya Modak 
wrote the Sdhityasdra in twelve Prakaranas. A reference may also be 
made to works like Alamkaramakaranda of Kolluri Rajashekhara, 
Alamkdramanidarpoina of Pradhan Venkappayya, Aldrhkdrasamud - 
gaka, Rasaratnahdra and Visamapadi (a commentary on the Kdvya 
prakasha) of Shivarama Tripathi, the son of Krishnaram; KavikauStu- 
bha of Raghunath, Kdvyakaumudi or Ratnabhushana, the Kavyasdra- 
samgraha (comprising three parts: Kavyalakshana y Varnasamgraha 
and Subhdsitasamgraha) of Shrinivas Dikshit, the Rasamlmdmsd and 
the Nauka (a commentary on the Rasatarangim of Bhanudatta) by 
Gangaramajadi, the Rama (a commentary on the Chandrdloka of 
Jayadevapiyu§avarsa) by Vaidyanatha Payagunqla, the Rasikaranjana 
(a commentary on Bhanudatta’s Rasamanjari) by Vrajaraja 
Dikshit and the Alamkaramanjarl of Sukhalala. 

Grammar: 

The distinguished writer in Grammar, Nageshabha^ta (well 
known as Nagojibhatta), the student of Haripant, the son of Bhattoji 
Dikshit, wrote Paribhdsendushekhara } Laghumanjushd, Sphotavada , 
Laghushabdendushekhara and the Brihatshabdendushekhara } the 
commentaries on the Siddhdntakaumudl, the Mahdbhdsyapradlpod- 
yota, a commentary on Kaiyata’s Pradlpa, a commentary on the 
Mahabhasya and the Mahdbhdsyapratydkhydnasamgraha. Besides 
works on grammar he is accredited with a number of works on 
Dharmasastra, Jyotisha, Saddarshanas and Alamkarashastra. He as¬ 
cribes his commentary gabdaratna on the Praudhamanoramd to his 
teacher Hari Dikshit. His disciple Vaidyanath has written many 
commentaries viz., Gadd on the Paribhdsendushekhara, Chaya on the 
Mahdbhdsyapradipodyota f Raid on the Vaiyakaranasiddhantarnanjusd, 
Prabhd on the £abdakaustubha etc. 


707 



THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Jnanendrasarasvatl’s Tattvabodhim is a commentary on Sid - 
dhantakaumudi. 

Music and Dance: 

Tulajirao, the king of Tanjore (1729-35) wrote the Sangitasdram - 
rita, an extensive work on the southern system of music. His Ndtya- 
vedagama deals with dancing. Ahobila Pan<Jit (1750-77) composed 
the Sangitapdrijdta, which was translated into Persian by Dinanath. 
He, for the first time, described the twelve svairas in terms of the 
length of the string of the Vina. Based on this work, Pandita Shri- 
nivasa wrote Rdgatattvctivibodha wherein he fixes the positions of his 
shuddha and vikrita svaras with the help of the sounding string of 
the Vina. He also gives interesting details about the srutisvaras and 
the Murchhands. With the help of musicians, Pratapasimha Deva, the 
Maharaja of Jaipur (1779-1804) compiled the SahgUasdgara, an en¬ 
cyclopaedia of music. Tyagaraja, the great musician and the devotee 
of &ri Rama, composed some of his songs in Sanskrit, like the other 
two great musicians, Muttuswami Diksita and Shyamasastri. One of 
the distinguished writers of this period was the Maharaja Bala Rama 
Varma (1724-1798) of Travancore, who was also a poet of distinction. 
Based on the contemporary theatrical tradition of Kerala, he wrote 
the Balardmabharata, which, besides expounding the details of Bha- 
rata’s Natyasastra, refers to the details of Abhinaya as in vogue in 
Kerala. The King Narayanadeva’s treatise Samgitandrdyana (4 chap¬ 
ters) deals with music, dancing, musical instruments and musical com¬ 
positions. Vasudevapatra’s Kavichintdmam (24 Kiranas) deals with 
music in the last three Kiranas. 

Astronomy, Astrology: 

In the field of Astronomy, Raghava (also known as Appiajlpant 
Khandekar) wrote Khetakriti. Ramarudra of Bengal wrote Jyoti- 
shasdrasamgraha, Paddhcutichandrika and Panchdngdrka. 

Dinakar of Poona wrote a number of works on the Jyotish-shastra 
such as Grahavijnanasdrim, Masapraveshasdrim, Yantrachintdmarii- 
tlka, etc. Mathuranath wrote the Y antrarajahatand and Jyotishasid - 
dhdntasdrah. Chintamam Dikshit’s Suryasiddhantasdrini and Gold- 
nanda and Raghudev’s Dinasamgraha dealing with the auspicious days 
for religious observances, are the other noteworthy works. 

Medicine etc.: 

Under Mahadji Sindia, Jogaraja composed Ashvaphalaprakdsha, 
a work on the veterinary science. Another medical work Pratdpakal- 


708 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 

padruma was written by Ananta under the patronage of Pratapasimh 
of Jaipur. The Vichdrasudhakara of Ranga Jyotirvid of Junnar 
(district Poona) deals with piles. 

At the request of Rajavrajalala of Benaras, Bhaskara Nrsimha 
wrote a commentary on the Kdmasutra. 

D harmashdstra: 

The field of Dharmashastra was enriched by many works. 
Kashinath Upadhyaya wrote the Dharmasindhu (also known as the 
Dhormasdra ), Prayashcittendushekharai etc. Pandits like Cole- 
brooke, Kuberopadhyaya and Chitrapati wrote Dattakachandrikd and 
the Vyavahdrasiddhdntapiyusa respectively. Under the orders of the 
Prince Cheta Sinh of Benaras (1770-1781), Devaraja compiled 
the PrayashciHaswrngraha. Mayaramamisra Gauda composed the 
Vydvahdranirnaya, Vyavaharasdra, Mitaksarasara etc. Bapubhatta 
Kelakar wrote the Utsarjanopdkarmaprayoga, PrdyashchittamanjarX 
and ShrdddhamainjcLri. At the instance of Samgramasimha, the Sadd~ 
chararahasya was compiled by Anantabhatta. Nagesh, the son of 
Venkatesha of Haldipur wrote the Agamagrantha, Tarttrikamuktavali 
and SmrtyarthamuktdvaVi. Other important works were the Balam- 
bhatti of Balambhatta Payagunda, Ddyakramasamgraha of 6ri Krisna 
Tarkalamkara, DharmcCtattvaprakdsa of Shiva, Vratamja of Vishva- 
natha, Dattachandrika of Raghumani, Snvrtichandra of Bhavadeva 
Nyayalamkara, Nirnayasdra of Nandarama Misra, Navyadharma- 
pradlpa of Krparama, Sahanumaranaviveka of Anantarama, Nirnaya- 
kaustubha) of Vishveshvara, Vivadarnavasettu compiled by the Pandits 
Baneshvara and others at the instance of Warren Hastings, etc. 

Philosophy: 

In the realm of the Advaita philosophy, Sadashiva Brahmendra 
Sarasyatl, wrote Brahmatattvapraikdshikd, a commentary on the 
Brahmasutras, SiddhdrttakalpavalVi, a poetic version of the Siddhdnta - 
leshasangraha of Appayya Dikshit, Atrimndtrimviveka^cimgraha, 
Sarvavedantasdrasamgraha etc. Besides his commentaries on all 
the 108 Upanisads , Sri Upanisad Brahmendra Sarasvati wrote other 
works like the Bhagavadgitdbhdsya, Pararnddvaitasiddhdntaparibhd^a, 
and Tattvasiddhdntavritti —in all comprising 45,000 granthas. Ay- 
yanna Dikshit discussed the interpretation of the Brahmcvsutras by 
different teachers in his Vydsatatparyanirnaya and pointed out the 
tenability of the & diikarabhdsya . Among other works, we may men¬ 
tion Tryambak Shastri’s Bhasyabhdnuprabhd, ShriXtimatodaya) and 
Advaitasiddhdntavaijay anti. 


709 



THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


The Shuddhadvaita school was enriched by Dasha-digantavij ayi 
Purushottam (1668-1781), the seventh descendant of Sri Vallabha- 
charya. He wrote the Prasthanardtndkaird, AvatdravddqLVCili besides, 
commentaries on the Vallabhacharya’s Anubhdsyd 9 Tattvadipaniban- 
dha etc., and on Vitthalesha’s Vidvanmandana. He is said to have 
written more than 67 works comprising nine lacs of slokas. Gope- 
shvaraji, honoured as Sarvajna, wrote the commentary Raskrrvi on the 
commentary Prakasha of Purushottama on the Anubha&ya , and the 
Bhaktimdrtanda which analyses the doctrine of Bhakti under foujr 
heads viz. prdmdnd, prameya, sddhana and phala. 

The Dvaita doctrine was' further expounded by Raghunath TEr- 
tha (alias Sesachandrikacharya) whose commentary Sesachandrikd 
was written to complete the Tatparyachandrikd of Vyasaraya. His 
other works include a commentary on Tcmtrasdra, on the Isdvasyo - 
panisadbhdsyafikd (in 1,720 granthas) and on Karrnxmirnaya. Suma- 
tindra Tirtha of the Raghavendra Mutt was a prolific writer—a doc¬ 
trinaire, a poet and an Alamkarika. His works include glosses on 
the Prameyadipikd of Jayatirtha, the Rgbhdsya, the Tantrdsara etc. 
Satyaprlya Tirtha also wrote glosses on the Tdttvdprdkdshika, Mun- 
dakopcmi?dd, Mdndukyopdnisad etc. The magnum opus, the Bha- 
syadXpika (19,150 granthas), of Jagannatha Tirtha explains every 
word of the Madhvdbhdsya. He also wrote the Sutrddipikd (1,630 
granthas) giving the Madhva interpretation of the Brdhmasutrds. 
Vadindra Tirtha commented on the Tattvcuprakashika and composed 
the Gurugundstdva, a poem in thirty-six srdgdhdra verses, in praise 
of Raghavendra. The last of the pontifical writers was Satyadharma 
Tirtha, the contemporary of the Peshwa Baji Rao II (1795-1818). He 
wrote glosses on the Tdttvdsdmkhyand and on the Bhdgdvdtd, and 
commentaries on the Visnutdttvanirndya and on a part of Valmiki’s 
Rdmdydna, besides the Nitydsdmsdrilingdbhanga, a theological work. 
A compendium of Madhva philosophy called the Mddhvdsiddhdntd >- 
sqjrd was prepared by Vedagarbha Padmanabhacharya. 

Bhaskarakantha of Kashmir wrote the Bhdskdn, a commentary 
on Abhinavagupta’s Pratydbhijridvimdrsim. His Ldlldvdk is a 
Sanskrit translation of the Kashmiri work of Lalla. Shivopadhyaya 
expounded the Vij'nrnidbhditdvatantrd by writing a commentary on it. 
The Saivaite tenets were defended by Appayya Dikshit of Edayattu- 
mangalam in his Vimdtdbhdnjdna and by Tyagaraja Makhin (popu¬ 
larly known as Raju Shastri) in his Nydyendushekhdrd. 

Baladeva Vidyabhusana’s Govinddbhdsya cn the Brahmd Stitrds, 
Siddhdntdrdtna and Prdmeydrdtnavdli deal with the Chaitanya Vais- 


710 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 

navism like Vishvanath’s Kri^abhdvanamrta, Gaurdngalilamrta and 
Krisnahnikakaumudi. Among the Jaina works, a reference may be 
made to the Prameyaratndlamkara of Abhinavacharukirti Pandit- 
acharya. 

In the field of Nyaya, Krisnakanta Vidyavagisha wrote the 
Nydyaratnavali, the Uparndnachintdmanitikd and the Sabdashakti - 
prakdshikdfikd. Rudrarama’s Vadapariccheda, V yqkhytivyuha, 
Chittarupam and Vaishe§ikashdstrfyapadarthanirupamam as well as 
Gaurikanta Sarvabhauma’s Bhavarthadipika (a commentary on the 
Tarkabhasa) and Saduktimuktdvali deserve to be noted along with 
the Gadadharikarnikd of Krishnabhatta Arde and the Vydptirahas - 
yafika of Mahadeva Uttamakara. In the Prabhakar school, Rama- 
nujiacharya wrote the Tantrarahasya. 


APPENDIX 

The Historical Value of the Marathi Bakhars 

(By the Editor) 

The writer of this chapter has given an account of the Bakhars 
(pp. 666-667) but has not discussed the value of these well-known 
chronicles as source-material for history. As this is expected in 
a historical work, the following statement may be quoted as 
a reasonable one: 

“The Bakhars are neither acceptable as real literature nor as 
history. They can only be classed, as Hervadkar says, in a sepa¬ 
rate category, embodying both features. From the historical point 
of view they are very valuable as revelations of the spirit of Maha¬ 
rashtra—its characteristics, traditions, dress, ornaments, culture, 
social life, religious movements—in other words, the image and per¬ 
sonality of Maharashtra, are brought to life. As a source of Mar£thi§ 
culture they are invaluable. But as a source of authentic history they 
are dangerous—projecting a distorted, one-sided, prejudicial view of 
history—and cannot be accepted as source-material by any serious his¬ 
torian. Grave error has been perpetrated and harm done to Marath& 
history by the use of Bakhars in writing so-called histories.” 


711 




THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


NOTES 

1. Mukhopadhyaya, Sukhamay, Madhyayuger Bangla Sahityer Taihya O Kala- 
krama (In Bengali, p. 304). 

2. Ibid, p. 314. 

3. Ibid, pp. 321-22. 

4. The account that follows is based upon the text of the Maharashtra-Purana, 
Ed. by Eld Weird C. Dimock and Pratul Chandra Gupta, (1961). 

5. - Ibid, pp. 26, 28, 30. 

6. Ibid, pp. 30, 32. 

7- Chatterji, S. K.: Languages and Literatures of Modem India, p. 208. 

8. B. K. Barua, Assamese Literature (P E N. Books), p 87. 

9. History in Modern Indian Literature, Ed. by Dr. S- P- Sen, p. 45. The date of 
the Duranga-raja-Vamshavali is given by B. K. Barua as 1806 (op. cit.). 

1(J. Jinaharsha Granthavali, Ed. by Shri Agarchand Nahta. (Published by Shadul 
Rajasthani Research Institute, 1962). 

11. Jaina Gurjar Kavio, Pt. II, p. 386. 

12. Ibid, Pt. n, p. 473. 

13. Bhave, V. L., Maharashtra-Saraswat, 1963, p. 493. 

14. Powadas or Historical Ballads of the Marathas, Ea- H- A. Acworth, 1891 (Intro¬ 
duction) . 

15- S. R. Sharma, The Founding of Maratha Freedom (Orient Longmans), 1964, 
pp. 442-443. 

16. Rajwade, V. K., Aitihasik Prastavana , 1928, p. 2. 

17. Ibid, p. 349. 

18. Ibid, p. 348. 

19. G • S • Sardesai, Marathi Riyasat, Vol. 6, Peshwa Balajirao Nanasaheb, 1953, 
p. 437. 

20. Y. K. Deshpande, Mahanubhaviya Marathi Vangmaya, (Shaka 1847), p. 94. 

21. R. C. Dhere, Prachin Marathichya Navadhara, 1972, p. 23. 

22. D. K. Kelkar, Marathi Sahityache Sinhavalokan, (1963), pp. 506-509. 

23- History in Modem Indian Literature, Ed. by Dr. S. P. Sen, p. 146. 

24. Rahman Ali, Tadhkira-i-Ulama-i-Hind, Karachi, 1961, p. 296. 

25. Ibid, p. 542; S. M. Ikram, Ab-i-Kauthar, Lahore, 1940, pp. 191-224; Viswa- 
bharati Annals, Vol IV, Santiniketan, 1951, pp. 1-51; Zubaid Ahmad, The 
Contribution of India to Arabic Literature, Allahabad, 1946, passim ; Ghulam 
Husain Jalbani, Shah Waliullah ki Ta J lim, (in Urdu), Hyderabad-Sind, 
(Pakistan), 1963, passim; Aziz Ahmad, Studies in Islamic Culture in the Indian 
Environment, Oxford, 1964, pp. 220-222; Yusuf Husain, Glimpses of Medieval 
Indian Culture, Bombay, 1959, pp. 62-63. 

26. Encyclopaedia of Islam (New Edition), p. 59; Muhammad Ishaq, India*s Con¬ 
tribution to Hadith Literature , passim; Rahman Ali, op. cit., p. 302; Aziz 
Ahmad, An intellectual history of Islam in India , Edinburgh, 1969, pp. 68-70; 
Malfuzat-i-Shah Abdul Aziz, 1960, pp. 8-35. 

27. Rahman Ali, op. cit., pp. 525-526. 

28. Cf. Dr. Iqbal Ansari’s article on ‘Bahr al-Ulum* in Burhan Monthly, Delhi, 
Vol. 74, May, June and July, 1975; Rahman Ali, op. cit., pp. 304-306. 

29- Muhammad Yusuf Kokan, Khanwada-i-Qadi BaSr al-Dawlah, Madras, 1963. 
Vol I, p. 148. 

30. RahmaruAH op. cit, pp. 362-363, Brockelmann, GAL, SII, Leiden, 1938, p. 624; 
C. A. Storey, Persian Literature, pp. 855-862. 

31. Rahman Ali, op. cit., pp. 491-494. 

32. Cf. Burhan Monthly, Delhi, Vol. 75, September 1975, pp. 155-171. 

33. Si M. Ikram, op. cit., pp. 183-184. 

34. Rahman Ali, op. cit., pp. 142-143. 

35. Vide supra, foot-note No. 2. 

36. Vide supra, foot-note No. 3. 

37- See F. M. Asiri’s article, Chandra Bhan Brahman and his Chahar chaman, 
in Viswabharati Annals, Vol. IV, pp. 51-62; Iqbal Husain, Chandra Bhan 
Brahman, Islamic Culture, Hyderabad, xviii, 1945,- p. 115. 

38. Aziz Ahmad, op. cit., p. 237. 

39. S. M. Ikram, The Cultural Heritage of Pakistan , O U P., 1953, p. 108. 

40. Cf. the writer’s critical edition of the text, published by the Asiatic Society 
Cal., B I. Series, 1969. 


712 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 


41. Storey, op. cit., p. 716. 

42. Storey, op. cit., p. 718- 

43- Cf. S. H. Askari’s article on ‘Kalyan Singh’s Khulasat al-Tawarikh,’ in Indian 
Historical Quarterly, Vol. XVII, No. 3, 1941, pp. 340-358. 

44. Russell lecture delivered by Prof. Humayun Kabir at Patna College on ‘Mirza 
Abu Talib Khan’, as published in Indo-lranica, XVII, No. 4, pp. 1-23. 

45. Siyar, (Tr.), Vol. II, pp. 164-185. 

46. Storey, op. cit., pp. 840-849. 

47. Ibid, pp. 830-833. 

48- A. Sprenger, Oudh Catalogue, Calcutta, 1854, p. 132. 

49 Storey, op. cit., 834-840; Sprenger, op. cit., p. 133. 

50. Storey, op. cit., pp. 862-866. 

51. Historical Landmarks of the Deccan, Allahabad, 1907, p. 58. 


713 



CHAPTER XX 


RELIGION 

Hindu Religion ; 

A foreigner visiting India in the 18th century was much im¬ 
pressed by the religiosity of its people. From the early hours of 
the morning till late at night there were manifestations of the over¬ 
powering fervour of religion. In the morning, the river banks, 
lakes and ponds, were thronged with men and women taking a dip 
in the cold water, chanting religious hymns, and then making their 
way to the nearby temples to offer flowers and fruits and incense 
to their favourite deities. Then small processions with music play¬ 
ing, were seen winding their way to temples. In the afternoon the 
Puranik read out to his audience portions of religious works like 
Jndneshwari or Pdndav Pratdp or Bhdgavata Purdna. In the even¬ 
ing Hari Kirtans were common. 

In the house of the Hindu there was a small niche where he 
worshipped his family deities, and ancestors. When he sat down to 
lunch or dinner, he would make offerings to his deities. There 
were special days like Rama Navami, Ganesh Chaturthi to mark 
the worship of some God or other. Religious performances filled the 
days of the Hindu. There were temples dedicated to Rama, Shiva, 
Ganesh or Hanuman, in towns, among shady groves or on crests of 
hills which pilgrims were always visiting, greeting each other with 
the name of their deity from time to time. When the end came, 
the name of Rama was always on the lips of the dying man. 

As Forbes found out, “divested of extraneous matter, there was 
a great deal of purity and sublimity in the genuine principles of 
the Hindu religion. In its simplicity, it taught that there was one 
supreme ruler of the universe who was styled Brahma, the Great 
one; this supreme intelligence consisted of a triad or triple divinity 
expressed by the mystic word OM, and distinguished by the name 
of Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesh, or the creative, preserving and de¬ 
structive powers of the Almighty. Images of these attributes were 
placed in temples and worshipped daily.” 1 

This abstruse and sublime religion had, in course of time, been 
supplanted by a system of polytheism and idolatry. The higher 
ranks of the Hindus had always the Vedanta philosophy at th6 back 


714 


RELIGION 


of their mind. Not wishing to disturb the popular mind, or ac¬ 
tuated by their respect for immemorial custom, they permitted the 
worship of the established gods to continue representing them as so 
many forms or symbols of real Divinity. Thus “ancient polytheism 
kept its ground and was further corrupted by the introduction of 
deified heroes who superseded the deities from whom they derived 
their divinity.” 2 

Decay of learning was responsible for this state of affairs and 
led to gross superstition, a childlike faith in religious rites, idolatry, 
necromancy and belief in astrology from which the Indian mind is 
not yet totally free 

Symptoms of decadence were discernible in some of the reli¬ 
gious sects amongst the Hindus, but saints like Prananath in Bundel- 
khand, Shantidas and SwamI Narayan in Gujarat, RampraSad Sen 
in Bengal and Baladev Vidyabhushana in Orissa made heroic efforts 
to raise the spiritual life of the people to a new height. Bitter quar¬ 
rels prevailed amongst the Tenkalai and Vadakalai sections of the 
followers of Ramanuja in the south, culminating in the institution 
of a law suit by the latter in the court of the Collector of Trichino- 
poly in 1833. 3 The hostile attitude of Maharaja Krishnachandra of 
Krishnagar and his courtiers compelled the Vaishnavas of Navadwip 
to hide the image of Chaitanya in a jungle. As many as eighteen 
thousand Vaishnava Bairdgis are said to have been killed by the 
Nagas in a free fight between the two sects in 1729-30 A.D. 4 But 
the Peshwas followed a tolerant policy towards all religious sects. 
M. G. Ranade recounts that 8 Muslim Dargds, 10 places dedicated 
to the Devi, 52 to Maruti or Hanuman, 18 to Rama, 9 to Vishnu, 34 
to Vithoba, 12 to Balajl, 40 to Mahadeva, 36 to Ganapati and 32 to 
the aboriginal gods received financial help from the Maratha State. 5 
The preponderance of the temples dedicated to Hanuman and Rama 
must have been due to the influence of the preachings of Ramadas 
and his followers. 

A remarkable feature of the religious life of the eighteenth cen¬ 
tury was the production of a series of biographies of saints in some 
of the most important modern Indian languages. The earliest of 
these was written in 1712 by Priyadasjl in Hindi in the form of a 
commentary on Nabhajl’s Bhaktamdla. It is really a supplement to 
the original work which contained only a string of names with a 
few broad hints on the lives of saints. • Nafahari Chakravarti wrote 
his Bhaktiratndkara and Narottamavilasa in the early part of the 
eighteenth century in Bengali. The most prolific writer on the lives 


715 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


ot saints was Mahlpati (b. 1715), the grandson of the famous Mara- 
tha poet Bhanudas. He wrote the Bhaktavijaya in 1762 and the 
Bhaktaltldmrta) in 1774. All these books became immensely popular, 
and helped to sustain the strength and vigour of the masses in the 
midst of political catastrophe and economic spoliation. These works 
throw important light on the social life of the period. Great saints 
had appeared in Maharashtra from the thirteenth to the eighteenth 
century preaching divine presence everywhere. 

The Shakti cult in Gujarat received a great impetus from the 
writings of Vallabha Bhat (c. 1680-1751?), Nath Bhawan (c. 1681- 
1761?) and Mitnu Bhagat (1738-1796). All these poet-saints were 
Brahmins. Vallabha Bhat’s Garbds are sung in Gujarat even today 
during the Navardtri festival. They are full of tender sentiments, 
humility and the spirit of self-surrender which usually characterise 
the lyrics written by the Vaishnava devotees. Three new sects with 
distinctly reformist tendencies attracted a number of converts in 
Gujarat. The first of these was the Ramasanehi sect founded by 
Sadhu Shantidas according to some, and by Ramacharan according to 
others. 6 Being bom at Jaipur in 1719, he became an ascetic at the 
age of thirty-one, founded the sect in 1769 and died in 1798. He 
asked his followers to abjure image worship and to concentrate 
their thoughts on Rama. He prescribed the offering of prayers in the 
morning, noon and in the evening and prohibited the taking of any 
food at night. He was pained to find moral laxity in the Vallabha- 
chari sect. He enjoined strict moral discipline and did not allow 
men and women to sit together at the time of prayers. His fol 
lowers are to be found at Ahmadabad, Surat, Bombay, Poona, 
Hyderabad and in Rajasthan. They do not observe the Hindu festi¬ 
vals like Diwdli, Holi and Dasserah, but celebrate the Fuldol in the 
first month of spring, by feeding a large number of Sadhus with 
sweets. On this occasion eight of these Sadhus constitute a court 
to try cases of moral turpitude. Those who are found guilty are ex¬ 
communicated. 7 The second sect was founded by Madhavgar, a 
Karibi farmer of Nadiad in Gujarat in the early years qf the nine¬ 
teenth century. He raised his voice not only against the worship' 
of images, but also against the practice of rendering homage to 
Gurus. He condemned the caste distinctions and did away with the 
practice of untouchability. But as he had no church organisation to 
back up his efforts, he failed to make many disciples. 8 

The greatest of the reforming sects in Gujarat was founded by 
Sahajanahda Swami, who became famous as Swam! Narayan (1781- 
1830). He was bom at Chappaiya, about ten miles from Ayodhya, 


716 


RELIGION 


on the Rama NavamI day. Like Nityananda he became a Sannyasin 
at the age of twelve in 1793. His Guru was one Ramananda, who 
after visiting many holy places, settled in Kathiawar. Sahajananda 
was accepted as an incarnation of God as early as 1804, when his 
disciple Laljee described him as such in his book, called Yama 
Danda? About that time he settled down at Ahmadabad, but the 
orthodox Brahmins made his stay there so uncomfortable that he 
had to retire to Wartal. He erected there a temple of Lakshmi- 
Narayan. At present there are two other main shrines there, one 
containing the image of Krishna in the middle, Radha on the right, 
and Swam! Narayan on the left, and the other having images of 
Krishna, Dharma and Bhakti. He directed his efforts to the aboli¬ 
tion of bloody sacrifices, Satl, infanticide and especially the era¬ 
dication of immoral practices prevalent in the Vallabhiachari sect. 
A large number of people joined the Satsang, set up by him and 
gave up meat and wine. Many people belonging to the so-called 
criminal tribes gave up opium and tobacco and took to honest occu¬ 
pations. Prof. Monier Williams visited Wartal in 1875 on the occa¬ 
sion of the Kdrtiki Pumimd. He saw a concourse of at least 10,000 
members of the sect and estimated the strength of the sect at more 
than 2,00,000 persons. He procured a copy of the Shikshapatn of 
Swami Narayan, covering 212 precepts and published its translation. 
In these Swami Narayan prohibited adultery, killing of any living 
creature—not even a louse, flea or the most minute insect—and the 
use of intoxicating liquor. He showed some sympathy for the un¬ 
touchables and allowed them to sit in a corner at the ceremonial 
annual congregation. But his general attitude to the caste system 
was conservative in nature. He wrote: 

“Nowhere except in Jagannath Puri let a man accept water 
or food which has been cooked by one from whom food is not to 
be taken, even though that food may have formed the prasada 
of Krishna. 

“Let no one abandon the duties of the class and order to 
which he belongs, nor practise the religious duties of others.” 10 

He prescribed different sectarian marks for the twice-born classes 
and the Shudras. He was not in favour of remarriage of widows. 
He wanted them to live always under the control of the male mem¬ 
bers of their family and prohibited them from receiving instruction 
in any science from any man excepting their nearest relations. He 
asked his male disciples never to listen to religious discourses de¬ 
livered by women. He held the tenth book of the Bhdgavata 
Purdna as the supreme authority. 


717 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Prananath, a Kshatriya by caste, became prominent as a reli¬ 
gious teacher at Panna in Bundelkhand at the beginning of the 
eighteenth century. He acquired great influence on Raja Chhatrasal 
by helping him to discover a diamond mine. He was equally pro¬ 
ficient in Arabic, Persian and Sanskrit. He wrote as many as four¬ 
teen treatises, trying to prove that there is no essential difference 
between the teachings of the Vedas and the Holy Quran. The con¬ 
struction of his writings is purely in Hindi, but the vocabulary is 
mainly supplied from Persian and Arabic sources. He recruited his 
followers both from the Hindus and the Muslims and allowed them 
to retain the rituals and practices of their forefathers. But at the 
time of initiation they had to take the meal in the company of 
members of both the communities. The concluding portion of his 
book on the Day of Judgment exhorts: 

Put off sloth, be vigilant; discard all pride of learning. He 
who hears with perfect faith will be the first to believe. After¬ 
wards when the Lord has been revealed, all will believe... . 
Lay your soul at your master’s feet; this is what Chhatrasal 
tells you. 11 

The followers of the sect are called Dhdrrus because they consider 
God as their Dhdma or home. Prananath laid great emphasis on 
service, love and compassion for humanity. 

Another promoter of Hindu-Muslim unity was Jagjlvan Das, a 
Kshatriya belonging to Awadh. He was the disciple of a neo-Sufi 
named Bulla, the disciple of Yari Saheb (1668-1725). His Hindi book 
Juana Prahash was written in 1761. He founded the Satnami sect, 
though there were people called Satnamis even before his tim§. 
The Satnamis believe in monotheism, but adore the incarnations of 
Rama and Krishna. The lay followers of this sect are to be found 
in Varanasi, Kanpur, Mathura, Delhi, Ayodhya, Hyderabad and 
Gujarat. 

Shiva Narayan, a Rajput of the Uttar Pradesh, founded a sect 
in the first half of the eighteenth century with the object of bring¬ 
ing the Hindus and Muslims closer. Disciples were admitted to the 
sect not only from these two communities but also from the Chris¬ 
tian. Shiva Narayan wrote as many as twelve works in Hindi and 
one of these is dated 1735 A.D. He was a pure monist and he did 
not admit the validity of image worship. The followers of this sect 
are forbidden to use any animal food or intoxicant. They are ex¬ 
horted to follow the path of devotion and self-restraint and culti¬ 
vate the spirit of loving all mankind. 


718 


RELIGION 


Garibdas (1717-1778), born in a Jat family in Rohtak district, 
founded a small sect, the followers of which worship God in the 
name of Rama, Hari and Allah. Garibdas advised his followers to 
eschew empty rituals and to adhere to the path of love and devo¬ 
tion. The attempts to build up a synthesis between the Hindu and 
the Muslim faiths, however, failed to achieve any lasting success. 

The reformers who confined their activities to the Hindu fold 
only, attracted larger number of followers. One of them was Cha- 
ranadas, born in Alwar in 1703 A.D. He denounced the prevailing 
tendency to moral laxity and laid great emphasis on the purity of 
character. According to him: 

This universe is permeated by Brahman ; symbols like the 
Tulsi plant and Shdligrama shild are, therefore, useless. A 
good and pure life is the first word in religious life; love and de¬ 
votion are its soul. But these are futile unless they are ex¬ 
pressed through service, for the emotions of the heart are sub¬ 
stantiated by action. 12 

But, later on, the followers of the sect founded by him adopted 
Tulsi plant and the Shdligrama Shild with a view to disarming the 
hostility of other Vaishnava sects towards them. They worship 
Radha and Krishna. The secular followers of the sect belong mostly 
to the mercantile class. Their chief centres are in Delhi and in the 
upper part of the Doab. Charanadas himself wrote several books 
in Hindi and translated the Bhagavata Parana. His sister, Sahaji 
Bai, who succeeded him in spiritual authority, was also a learned 
lady. Her Hindi works, the Samdja Prakdsh and the Solah Nirnaya 
as well as the poems composed by her, are studied and recited even 
now. The Sadhus or clerical followers of the sect wear yellow gar¬ 
ments and a small pointed cap round the lower part of which they 
wrap a yellow turban. 

Towards the close of the eighteenth or the beginning of the 
nineteenth century a new religious sect was founded by Paltudas. 
His spiritual preceptor was Govind Saheb, born in the district of 
Varanasi. The centre of the sect is at Ayodhya. The Paltudasis do 
not worship any image. The adherents of this sect are to be found 
in Awadh and Nepal. 13 \ 

The Rama cult received a new orientation in the poetic com¬ 
positions of Ramasakhejl, whose Nritya-Raghava Milana was written 
in Hindi according to his own statement in 1747 A.D. He was born 
in a Brahmin family at Jaipur and was initiated by Vasishtha 


719 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Tirtha at Udipi. His works are considered as authoritative texts by 
the Rasika sub-sect of the Rama cult. The term Rasika is defined 
by him ‘as one who does not look at anything except the beauty of 
Rama and does not forget him even for a moment. When he hears 
the sound of a cuckoo or sees the dance of a peacock he becomes 
eager to meet Rama.’ He abjures the rituals prescribed in the 
scriptures and also does not care to refrain from the prohibitions 
ordained in them. 14 Ramasakhejl depicts Rama as performing the 
Rdsa-lild in a moonlit night on the banks of the river Sarayu. Like 
Krishna of the Bhagavata Puriina, Rama too disappears suddenly 
from the dance and his lady friends make frantic efforts to search 
him out in every bower. Following the examples of Rupa and 
Raghunath Gosvami of the sixteenth century, Ramasakhejl surrounds 
Rama and Sita with young devotees called Manjaris, whose highest 
ambition is to serve the holy couple without any expectation of re¬ 
ward. Besides these Rama is described as being surrounded by a 
hundred million male and female friends. In his Janakl-nau-ratna- 
manikya he describes the Danalild of Rama who, in the guise of a 
collector of tolls, exacts his dues in curds and pleasures from Sita 
and her female companions and later on takes them in a boat across 
the river Sarayu. The Naukd-vildsa of Krishna is hinted at in the 
Prakrit Paingala, a work of the fourteenth century and the Danalild 
is described by Narsi Mehta of Gujarat. These sports have been 
attributed to Rama in the middle of the eighteenth century by Rama- 
sakheji. This is a departure from Valmlki, Kamban, Kumar Val- 
miki, Krittivasa and other writers of the Rdmdyana in modern Indian 
languages who describe Rama as devoted exclusively to his single 
wife Sita. ; 

The followers of the Rasika sub-sect depict Rama as perform¬ 
ing Rasa-lild with Gopakanyas, Devakanyas, Nagakanyias, Gan- 
dharvakanyas and Rajakanyas in his adolescence before his marriage 
with Sita. 15 Even after his marriage he is described to have per¬ 
formed Rdsa-Uld with the maids of Devas, GandharVas, Kinnaras, 
Vidyadharas and Yakshas as well as human princesses. 16 In imitation 
of the Krishndhnika Kaumudi of Kavi Karnapura and the Govinda- 
lildmrita of Krishnadas Kaviraja, Ramacharan Das wrote the Ashta- 
yama-pujd-vidhi in the first quarter of the last century. The devo¬ 
tees of this sub-sect are instructed to consider themselves as sakhis 
or female friends of Sita and attend on her and Ramachandra, even 
when they are engaged in the most intimate relations. 

Some of the adherents of the Bengal school of Vaishnavism 
carried the identification of Chaitanya with Krishna to such an ex- 


720 


RELIGION 


tent that they atributed to the former the love sports of the latter 
and described Gauranga as a Nagara or lover of women. Qhaitanya 
is depicted in his standard biographies as a man of exceptionally 
pure character. He banished a favourite follower simply because 
he begged some fine rice from an old lady. But Narahari Chakra- 
varti composed numerous songs describing how Gauranga responded 
to the love manifested towards him by married ladies of Navadwip. 17 

Vrindavan and its surrounding areas became centres of propa¬ 
gation of the Bengal school of Vaishnavism amongst the people 
whose mother-tongue was Brajabha^ha. Priyadasjl, the commen¬ 
tator of the Bhaktamala, became a follower of the Chaitanyaite sect. 
His grandson, Rasajani Vaishnavadas completed the Bhdgavata in 
Brajabha$ha in 1750 A.D. and he commenced this work with adora¬ 
tion to Chaitanya. Many of the standard works of the Gosvamis 
were also translated in the Brajabha§ha in the eighteenth century. 

A new sub-sect of the Vaishnavas, known as the Kartabhajas t 
arose in the district of Nadia. According to the tradition current 
in this sect it was founded by a recluse named Aulchand about the 
year 1721 A.D. He recruited a band of twenty-two principal dis¬ 
ciples, the most important of whom was Ramasharan Pal, who is re¬ 
puted to have organised the sect. He probably died in 1783. The 
headship of the sect devolved successively on his wife, then his son 
Dulal and then the latter’s wife. In 1848 Akshoy Kumar Datta 
found millions of people adhering to this sect. Mahantas were set 
up at different rural centres to recruit new followers, to impart in¬ 
structions to them and to collect the customary gifts and remit them 
to the headquarters at Ghoshpa^a. 118 This sect introduced the re¬ 
cital of mantras in Bengali and acknowledged the authority of Gurus 
from the non-Brahmin community. Pious Mussalmans were also 
selected as the heads of certain centres and the devout Hindu followers 
did not hesitate to take the remains of their food in secret. 19 The 
Kartabhajas were far in advance of the orthodox community in 
matters relating to social reform. They encouraged the remarriage 
of widows and discouraged the observance of rigidity of caste system 
in dining. Though the majority of recruits to this sect belonged to 
the Shudra order, yet some high class Brahmins also accepted this 
faith. Thus Jay Narayan Ghoshal, the Raja of Bhu-Kailash, refers 
to Ramasharan Pal along with Jesus Christ and Nanak as prophets 
of the age in his KaruTM-nidhdna-vilasa, published in 1813 A.D. He 
also states in the preface to this work that is one, Guru is one, 

but devotees are many. At another place he regrets that he is too 
infirm to sing the qualities of the Kartd In 1819 Ward estimated 

721 


M. S —46 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


the number of Kartabhajds under the leadership of Dul&l Pal at 
20,00Q. 21 A number of followers of the Kartabhajd sect disowned 
the authority of the Pals and set up an eclectic sect called Rdma- 
'vallabht at Bamsabati. They regarded Ramavallabha as an incarna¬ 
tion of Shiva and held a great fair and festival on the Shiva Chatur- 
dashi day in his honour and paid equal honour to and sang the 
names of Kali, Krishna, God and Khuda with equal gusto. 22 Another 
branch of the Kartabhajd sect became known as Sdhebdhani. It 
was founded by DukhI Ram Pal, who preached against the servi¬ 
lity to the Guru and denounced image worship. They used to hold 
congregational worship every Thursday and freely partook of the 
food prepared by the devotees belonging to different castes and com¬ 
munities. 23 A sect known as the Spastaddyaka came into some pro¬ 
minence in Calcutta at the beginning of the last century. They did 
not recognise the divinity nor the absolute power of the Guru. 
Men and women lived in monasteries like brothers and sisters. The 
women shaved their heads but kept a small tuft of hair. 24 . 

A vigorous protest against the authority of the Guru was also 
made by the Kishori-bhaja sect, organised by Kalachand Vidyalan- 
kara of Vikrampur. According to this sect there are two universes, 
one external with the planets and the other internal in the body of 
human beings. Man and woman should consider each other as the 
Guru. Males regarded themselves as Krishna and the females as 
Radha. They used to meet at night and sing and dance together. 25 
Some of the songs recited by them were published by a band of re¬ 
formers who wanted to have the sect suppressed. 26 

Immoral practices indulged by a few persons here and there 
brought disgrace to the whole of the Vaishnava community both in 
western and eastern India. Ramaprasad Sen complained in the 
middle of the eighteenth century that the Vaishnavas corrupted the 
damsels and daughters-in-law in many households. 27 

The moral standard which prevailed amongst the Shaktas was 
not much higher. Ramaprasad himself describes, how the hero of 
his Vidydsundara prayed to Kali for success in his efforts to seduce 
an unmarried princess and received her benedictions. Bharat- 
chahdra goes a step further. As the goddess was pleased with the 
hymn composed by Sundara, she supplied him not only with the 
weapon with which the passage to the room of the princess was to 
be opened, but also took the trouble of writing an incantation on a 
copper-plate to help him in his design. In the earlier centuries 
deities like Chandi and Manasa are depicted as offering wealth 

722 


RELIGION 


power and progeny to their worshippers. But on the eve of the 
battle of Plassey they are represented as helping them in satisfying 
their carnal appetite. Signs of moral degeneracy can be detected 
also in the Shaivite literature. Rameshvara (c. 1677-1744) in his 
Shivayana describes how Shiva went out for alms to a village inha¬ 
bited by the Koch tribe; and the young Koch women on hearing the 
sound of his bugle came out in large numbers and were seduced. 28 
Raja Prithvichandra of Pakur also gives an account of the dalliance 
of Shiva with the Koch women in his Gauri-mangala, written in 
1806 A.D. 29 This is a sad transformation of the great deity who 
burnt down Eros by his angry look. 

The lower strata of the Hindu society in Bengal and Bihar wor¬ 
shipped strange creatures like Kaloo Rai, the patron saint of tigers, 
Rama Thakur, a ghost, and Malik Bayo, a deified Muslim conqueror. 
A poet named Nityananda wrote Kdloo-rdi-mangala under the pat¬ 
ronage of Raja Rajanarayan of Kasijora (1756-1770). The book re¬ 
lates how the ferrymen adopted the worship of Kaloo Rai, the lord 
of tigers. 30 The cult of Baro Bhaiya, twelve Demons, the son of 
Vana Durga, a tree-goddess, came into vogue probably in the eigh¬ 
teenth century. This village cult was affiliated to Tantricism and 
Sanskrit mantras came to be used in its worship. 31 

In some parts of Bihar the masses came to worship Rama 
Thakur, a ghost, whose cult was introduced, according to Francis 
Buchanan, by the grandfather of Raja Mitrajit of Tekari, who flou¬ 
rished in the middle of the eighteenth century. Buchanan also 
states that Malik Bayo, a Muslim conqueror, came to be worshipped 
as a village deity in the interior of the Gaya district. The Dusads 
worshipped a patron deity named Guriya. 32 

It is no wonder that the Depressed classes should have a sepa¬ 
rate goddess for themselves. The Brahmins of Southern India con¬ 
sidered it a defilement to tread upon the shadow of an outcaste 
Panchama. The upper castes of northern India did not consider it 
obligatory to bathe with their clothes in case of such a defilement, 
but they treated the Chandalas as worse than cats and dogs. There 
arose a number of saintly reformers amongst the Depressed classes. 
Following in the wake of Ra vidas, the Dorns or sweepers organised 
a sect called the Harischandris. Wilson only heard the name of the 
sect but could not ascertain what their tenets were. 33 Akshoy 
Kumar Datta found by means of personal investigations the exist¬ 
ence of at least two sects among the Depressed classes in Bengal 
and one in Orissa. Of these Balarama Hadi, the founder of the Balfc- 


723 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


rami sect, was born at Meherpur in the old Nadia district in 1785 
A.D. His followers considered him as an incarnation of Rama and 
he himself explained that he was called a Hadi because he created 
the Hadct or bone. The Balaramls condemned caste system and image 
worship. 34 A cobbler of Shantipur (Nadia district) named Dapa 
Muchi founded a sect called after the Sanskritised form of his name 
Darpa-ndrdyani. He preached the identity of man with God. 35 A 
sect known as the Chamar Vaishnavas flourished in Orissa. They 
gave initiation to the cobbler caste. 36 

Some of the hill tribes in Eastern India came within the fold 
of Hinduism during this period. A temple was dedicated to Krishna 
at Manipur during the reign of Charai Rongba (1698-1709). Gharib 
Niwaz Panhava, who was brought up by a Naga chief, ascended the 
throne of Manipur in 1714 A.D. He was converted to Vaishnavism 
of the Bengal school by Shahtidas Adhikari and advised his subjects 
to accept his religion as their own. The introduction of the new 
faith was opposed by Khongnangthaba, the champion of the tribal 
religion. But the King is said to have ordered the destruction of all 
the scriptures of the old religion. 37 According to some traditions 
current in Manipur, he became a follower of the Ramanandi sect 
later on. 38 The Chaitanyalte Vaishnavism was firmly established in 
Manipur during the reign of Jay Singh (1759 and 1763-1798) popular¬ 
ly known as Rajarshi Bhagya Chandra. He installed the image of 
Govinda in 1780 and introduced the artistic Rasa dance. 39 In 1790 
the Kachhari Raja of Khaspur and his brother became recognised as 
Kshatriyas after entering the body of the copper effigy of a cow and 
emerging out of it. 40 

In the border area of Orissa and Bengal arose two persons, 
Ramachandra Yati and'Raman anda Ghosh, claiming to be the incar¬ 
nations of. Chaitanya and Buddha, respectively. Ramanahda Ghosh 
composed the Rama-tattva in 1762 and the Chandi-mangala in 1766. 
This illustrates the catholicity of his views. He has been eulogised 
as the founder of a new sect by his disciples Krishnakanta and by 
Ramshankara Deva, the author of Abhaya-mangalai 41 Ramachandra 
Yati states in his Rdmdyana that Kali sent him to this world with a 
view to exterminate the Mlechchas. But towards the end of his 
book he admits that he has failed in his mission. A manuscript of 
his work is dated in 1779-80 A.D. 42 

A philosopher and leader of the Vaishnava community in Orissa, 
named Baladeva Vidyabhushana wrote an original commentary on 
the Brahmasutra some time before the battle of Plassey. He under- 

724 


RELIGION 


took the task because the followers of Ramanuja, Nimbarka and 
Vallabhacharya tauntingly said that while each of the older Vaish- 
nava sects had their special Bhashyas on Vedanta, the followers of 
Chaitanya had none. In explaining the aphorism II.3.47 he states 
that the individual is different from God. The sixteenth century 
philosopher, Jlva Gosvamin held that the relation between God and 
the individual is like that of Shakti with Shaktimat or the relation 
of the sun to its scattered rays. Baladeva thus made a significant 
departure from the philosophical tenets preached by the earlier 
teachers of the sect. His Guru was a disciple of Nayanananda, the 
grandson of Rasikananda, a great religious preacher of the early 
seventeenth century. Baladeva’s commentary on the Utkalikd- 
vallari of Rupa Gosvamin was written in 1764 A.D. 

The fervently emotional mystic songs composed by Ramaprasad 
Sen made the Shakti cult a great spiritual force in Bengal. He re¬ 
ceived a stipend in 1749 and a grant of land in 1759 from Maha¬ 
raja Krishnachandra of Krishnagar and got one-third of an acre of 
residential land at Halisahar near Kalyani from Subhadra Devi in 
1758. He condemned ostentatious ritualism and wrote: “Mind, why 
are thou so anxious? Utter Kali’s name, and sit in meditation. 
From all this pomp of worship the mind grows proud. Worship in 
secret, that none may know.” Again, he sang: “What have I to do 
with KasI? The lotus-feet of Kali are places of pilgrimage enough 
for me. Deep in my heart’s lily meditating on them, I float in an 
ocean of bliss.” He ridiculed the idea of fearing death and wrote: 
“You, a serpent, fearing frogs! How amazing! What terror of 
death is this in you, the child of the Mother-Heart of all? 43 

Hindu power having been reestablished in Maharashtra at the 
end of the 17th century, Hindu religion received a stimulus unknown 
before. Old temples were repaired, morning and evening worship 
and religious celebrations were revived. Repetitions of religious 
texts and of holy books like Gita, Jnaneshwafi, Kirtans became the 
order of the day. The Peshwds and their Sardars spent lavishly on 
building new temples and renovating old famous ones. Among other 
temples the Peshwds built were Vateshwar by the side of the river 
Karha, Baneshwar near Sivaganga river, Devadeveshwar on the 
Parvati hill near Poona, Shakunteshwar in the sands of the Krishna 
river. The Tryambak temple was completed in 1786. The Peshwds 
also built ghats or steps leading to fords at Varanasi, Nasik and other 
holy places. His jdgirdars emulated his example in raising temples, 
Dharmashalas, etc. The charities of Ahalya B&i Holkar, who built 
temples at Maheswar, ghats at Varanasi, are well-known. Nana- 


725 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Phadnis spent much money on temples at Menawali, Wai and other 
places up to Ellora. 44 

The poet saints from Jnaneshwar to Ramdas popularised the 
central doctrine of the Maratha religion. It was that the great 
Divine Being pervaded the universe, that the soul of every human 
being was part of the universal spirit and it was man’s duty to 
seek perfection and reunion with Brahman by devotion, deeds of 
charity and undergoing a process of purification. The highest 
bliss, Moksha, was the ultimate reward of the good, while the wick¬ 
ed were punished by being reborn in forms distant from the union. 
The doctrine of all-pervading Divinity was accepted all round, but 
in actual life God was worshipped in various forms as Shiva, Vishnu, 
Ram, Ganapati, Devi Rhavani, Khandoba, etc. Temples dedicated to 
these deities occupied prominent places in towns, and studded the 
country-side. 

Equally important with the public or communal worship was 
the worship of the family deities. Every household would have a 
comer assigned to worship and here would be a small collection of 
the Arddhya Devatd, the Kulaswdmi or the tutelary deity which in 
many cases would be Devi Bhavani or Khandoba. There would be 
small brass or silver idols representing Balakrishna, Parvati and 
Ganapati, Shaligram representing Shiva and a few taks which repre¬ 
sented the family ancestors. A Maratha after ablution in the morn¬ 
ing would spend some time in the Pujd before starting the work of 
the day. The higher castes spent more time and money over the 
daily rituals. Special days and occasions were marked for the pub¬ 
lic worship of particular deities by offering them incense, flowers and 
fruits and other gifts through Brahmin priests. The Ekadashi (11th 
day) of Asddha and Kdrtika became occasions for pilgrimage to 
Pand-harpur. Maha SMvardtri was dedicated to Shiva and there 
were special days for public worship of Ram, Ganapati and Datta- 
treya. 

The family priest or Upadhyaya advised the family about reli¬ 
gious and social observances. But its keeper of conscience was a 
saintly person of repute. In Hindu religion Sadhus and Sannyasis 
have always been held in great reverence on account of their selfless 
life and renunciation of worldly affairs. Some of these Sannyasis 
would get such celebrity that people would flock round them for 
advice and instruction. Such a person was styled Guru or Maha- 
purush. ShivajI, the founder of the Maratha State, venerated Ram¬ 
das. He likewise respected Mauni Bawa of Patgaon and found time 


726 


RELIGION 


to visit him amidst his busy round of duties. Brahmehdra Swami 
was the spiritual guide of the Peshwd family and much respected at 
Raja Shahu’s court. Maratha chiefs sought his intercession in their 
affairs. Mahadji Sindia used to seek advice of a Muslim saint Shah 
Mansur and used to prostrate himself at his feet. He spent much 
money in renovating temples at Mathura, Gokul, Vrindavan and 
Pushkar. 45 

Despite the general prevalence of Hindu beliefs the worship of 
pre-Aryan tribal gods continued to thrive. The general mass of the 
people were ridden by superstition, and the Brahmin priests did little 
to discourage queer ceremonies and strange rites. In villages, temples 
to Bhairoba and Jotiba were common. Bhairav was kept happy by 
application of oil and Sindoor and cured snake-bites. He also fore¬ 
casted the success or failure of undertakings. Mhasoba, Vetal, 
Vaghoba, Satwai, Tukai were other godlings whom the villagers fear¬ 
ed and worshipped. These aboriginal godlings had been transform¬ 
ed into manifestations of Shiva and his consort, and were supposed 
to look after the health and welfare of the villagers. The nearby 
fields and orchards and hills had their spirits to be appeased with 
buffaloes, goats and fowls, depending on the degree of their malevo¬ 
lence. There was not a river, ford or tank which was not haunt¬ 
ed by spirits and ghosts. Even the gates and walls of forts were 
not free from their influence. 46 

The Bhakti movement of the middle ages was a protest against 
the ritual of Brahmanism and the superstition of the masses. The 
supremacy of one God was the first creed with everyone of the saints. 
The various forms in which God was worshipped were believed to 
merge finally into one Supreme Being. The rude concepts which 
prevailed among the people, the aboriginal and village gods, their 
frightful rites and sacrifices were denounced in forceful language. 
In the annual concourses at Pandharpur and Jejuri men forgot their 
caste distinctions and hailed each other as brothers united in a com¬ 
mon endeavour. The movement had a general liberalizing influence 
on society and created a healthy social atmosphere rare elsewhere in 
India. 47 


Islam: 

The eighteenth century may be regarded as the period of transi¬ 
tion from the Medieval to Modern Islam in India, and Shah Wallul- 
lah of Delhi (1703-62) has been aptly described as forming the 
bridge between the two. He was born on a cultured Muslim family 


727 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


and his father Shah ‘Abd-al-Rahlm rendered great help in the com¬ 
pilation of the Encyclopaedic collection of religious edicts commis¬ 
sioned by Aurangzib. Waliullah proceeded to Arabia to study 
Islamic doctrines and sat at the feet of eminent teachers like Shaikh 
Abu Tahir Muhammad ibn Ibrahim al Kurd! of Medina who taught 
him Hadith, and Shaikh Sulayman Maghrib! who taught him Mali- 
kite Jurisprudence. He also studied under other Arab scholars. It 
is a strange coincidence that he was not only a contemporary of the 
great religious reformer, renowned all over the Islamic world, ‘Abd- 
al-Wahhab of Nezd (1703-87), but both sat at the feet, more or less, 
of the same eminent Arab teachers. An eminent scholar, who lays 
stress on this point, has observed: “The two systems these two 
divines of the eighteenth century world of Islam worked out had the 
same source of inspiration, going back through the tradition of the 
study of hadith in unmystical Hijaz to the orthodox discipline of 
ibn Taimiya, and though it is difficult to establish any theory of 
mutual influence of either on the other, their two systems did come 
closer, if not actually merge, in the Indian Islam of the eighteenth 
century.” 4 * 

This view, however, is not shared by all. For example, Murray 
T. Titus, the eminent author of the well-known book Islam in India 
and Pakistan , does not even mention the name of Shah Waliullah 
in connection with the Wahhabi Movement in India and observes: 
“The Puritanical sect, founded in Arabia during the eighteenth cen¬ 
tury by Muhammad ‘ Abd-ul-Wahhab, was destined to have far- 
reaching influences throughout the Muslim world, and nowhere out¬ 
side the land of its birth has that influence been more pronounced 
than in India. Although the sect as such has never been formally 
organised in India under the name ‘Wahhabi', yet the doctrine 
preached by certain of the Indian reformers have been of that 
school, and the popular tendency has been to describe their activities 
as the ‘Wahhabi' Movement'. 49 

There is, however, no denying the fact that the ideas and doc¬ 
trines of Shah Waliullah more or less conform to the Wahhabi doc¬ 
trine summed up as follows by Titus himself: 

“In general, the movement has been marked by renewed em¬ 
phasis of tcuwhid (the unity of God); adherence to the principle of 
ijtihad , or the right pf the individual to interpret the Qur’an and 
the hadith (traditions), and rejection of the four orthodox schools 
of canon law; opposition to the worship of saints, which they hold 
to be a form of polytheism (shirk); and earnest endeavour to re- 


728 


RELIGION 


move all traces of the practices of early faiths from the worship of 
Hindu converts to Islam.” 50 

These ideas were also preached by WalTulliah as has been briefly 
referred to in Vol. IX (p. 884) of this series. 

According to Titus, the first appearance of the Wahhabi ideas in 
India was about 1804 A.D. when the Farazi sect was founded in 
Eastern Bengal by Hazi Sharlatullah. 51 This, has been described in 
Vol. IX (p. 884 ff.), but, as pointed out there, the movement in India 
was really started by Sayyid Ahmad of Rae Bareilly (1786-1831) 
who came under the influence of ‘Abdul Aziz, son of Shah Wallullah, 
and was inspired by the views of Shah Wallullah. As a matter of 
fact, there was hardly any difference between Wallullah and ‘Abdul 
Wahhab as regards the ends in view—Pure Islam must be re¬ 
enacted and regenerated and the Muslim society in India which had 
been reduced to the lowest level, particularly in the political field, 
must again be mighty. But as compared with the views of ‘Abdul 
Wahhab, Waliullah’s Islam was more comprehensive, richer and more 
flexible and retained a marked Sufi colouring. In his Islam there 
was room not only for the Sunnis but also for the Shiahs who, quite 
contrary to the practice of the Wahhabis, follow various Imams. 

Shah Wallullah, like ‘Abdul Wahhab, fully realised the danger 
of religio-ethical disintegration of Islam and his main efforts were 
directed towards rehabilitating the theory and practice of orthodox 
Sunni belief. “To this end he relied much more on the Malikite 
than the Hanafi approach to the Sunnah, regarding it as the most 
distinguished among theological sciences and their sources, a histori¬ 
cally stable factor which could undergo no change.” 52 

The collapse of the Muslim power in India in a way helped 
Wallullah’s ideas of restoring the vitality of Islam in India. During 
the heyday of Muslim rule the Qazls played a dominant role in the 
administrative system, and apart from the power and position their 
offices were also lucrative from the economic point of view. So a 
great stress was laid on the study of fiqh for the proper training 
of the Qazis. But this economic stimulus declined with the decay 
of the Muslim rule. So Wallullah could successfully commend the 
subordination of Muslim jurisprudence to the discipline of hadith on 
the one hand and a total absorption of the remnants of various Sufi 
disciplines into the orthodox Islam on the other. He thus completed 
the work of Sayyid Ahmad Sirhindl of the 17th century by chan¬ 
nelling the streams of Sufi spiritual heritage into traditional Islam. 523 


729 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


It is not possible in a general work of history to deal with the 
views of Wallullah in greater detail. But enough has been said to 
indicate that he was perhaps the most forceful personality during 
the eighteenth century who gave a new trend to Islam in India which 
bore fruit in the nineteenth century. This is amply testified by the 
activities of the movements generally referred to as Wahhabi Move¬ 
ments in India and dealt with in Volume IX of this series. 

The Wahhabi Movement in India developed a militant political 
aspect, inspired by the dream of re-establishing Muslim rule in 
India by driving away the British. This has been dealt with in 
Volume IX, pp. 880 ff. 

Fusion of the Muslim Communities: 

The eighteenth century also witnessed the gradual fusion of the 
different groups or communities of Indian Muslims, known by the 
names of their original homes in Western and Central Asia (Iranis, 
Turanis, Afghans or Fathans) and the Hindu converts to Islam. 
They regarded themselves, and were regarded by others, as so many 
distinct classes or communities within the fold of Islam in India. 
The difference was akin to, but less rigid than, the different castes 
of the Hindu society. A brief reference may be made to the first 
three, but the fourth, who vastly outnumbered them, requires a 
somewhat prolonged discussion. 

(i) The Iranis or Persians occupied a special position on ac¬ 
count of their ancient culture. It has been said that the old cul¬ 
tural link between India and Iran was renewed by the advent of 
Islam. Their superior cultural heritage received due recognition and 
it has been well said that during the pre-Mughul period “the Turks 
and the Afghans were the muscles whereas the Persians supplied the 
brain of the Muslim aristocracy of India.” 53 

(ii) The Turanis were Turko-Mongol by race, “more to be 
commended for their valour than beauty; a square, stout, strong 
people, having flatter faces and flat noses. .. .” 54 They were far more 
numerous than any other foreign Muslim people who settled in 
India. They are described as follows by Aurangzlb in his last will 
and testament: 

“The Turani people have ever been soldiers. They are very ex¬ 
pert in making charges, raids, night-attacks and arrests. They feel 
no suspicion, despair or shame when commanded to make a retreat 
in the very midst of a fight,. . . and they are a hundred stages remote 
from the crass stupidity of the Hindustanis, who part with their 


730 


RELIGION 


heads but not leave their positions (in battle). In every way, you 
should confer favours on this race, because on many occasions these 
men can do the necessary service, when no other race can.” 55 

(iii ) The Afghans or Pathans never forgot that their ancestors 
were once the rulers of India and entertained the hope of again 
becoming the masters of the country. They had a ‘deep-seated 
hatred for the Mughuls and, generally speaking, the relations be¬ 
tween the two were never friendly.’ This spirit is reflected in some 
proverbs and games well known, at the beginning of this century, 
in Bengal where they found their last refuge. 56 

(iv) The Hindu converts to Islam were by far the largest in 
number, but at the same time the lowest in social position among 
the Indian Muslims. From the very beginning, i.e., the conquest of 
Sind in 712 A.D., up to the eighteenth century, the conversion of 
the Hindus to Islam went on, not in hundreds but in thousands, spe¬ 
cially in the Punjab and Bengal. The main instruments of this con¬ 
version on a massive scale were: 

(i) Sheer force or violence, 

(ii) Temptation of money and power, 

(iii) Missionary efforts. 

Each of these requires some elucidation. The first includes not 
merely actual violence and threats to violence but also the pros¬ 
pect of life that a Hindu had to face for refusal to accept Islam. 
This was clearly elucidated by a QazI of the Great Sultan Alauddin 
Khilji in the following words as recorded by a great Muslim historian: 

“They are called payers of tribute, and when the revenue 
officer demands silver from them, they should without question, and 
with all humility and respect, tender gold. If the officer throws 
dirt in their mouths, they must without reluctance open their mouths 
wide to receive it.To keep the Hindus in abasement is spe¬ 

cially a religious duty.” This is the best treatment that a Hindu 
could expect if he refused to accept Islam. For only the great 
doctor Hanifah allows the Hindus to live the life of a Zimmi as de¬ 
scribed above. The great historian clearly says that “doctors of 
other schools allow no other alternative but ‘Death or Islam.’ ” 57 

That such treatment was actually accorded to people and 
various temptations were held out by offers of money and other pri¬ 
vileges has been discussed in detail in Vol. Ill (p. 458), Vol. V 
(pp. 497-502), Vol. VI (pp. 24-25, 615-636) and Vol. VII (pp. 233- 


731 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


236) of this series. As a matter of fact, beginning from the con¬ 
quest of Sind (A.D. 712) up to the death of Aurangzlb (A.D. 
1707)—and in a few cases even beyond that—we hear too often of 
the massacre on a large scale of the Hindus and also forcible con¬ 
version on a mass scale caused by the fear of such a catastrophe. 
Titus remarks: “The slaughtering of ‘infidels’ seemed to be one thing 
that gave Mahmud (of Ghazni) particular pleasure”. 58 But this was 
true of many other Muslim invaders. Mahmud had good precedents. 
Muhammad ibn Qasim, the first successful Muslim invader of India, 
after conquering Debal, “forcibly circumcised the local Brahmins 
and when they objected to this treatment he put all the males over 
seventeen to death and the others, including women and children, 
were led into slavery.” No wonder, therefore, that “as he advanced 
and took their cities some people embraced Islam rather than die, 
and we may be sure that all who were made slaves were compelled 
to embrace the religion of the masters to whom they were allotted.” 59 
When Qutb-ud-din approached Koil, Hasan Nizami tells us, “those 
of the garrison who were wise and acute were converted to Islam, 
but others were slain with the sword.” 60 At Kalin jar fifty thousand 
were taken as slaves. Such sickening stories 61 may be added in any 
number. We may therefore conclude with one of the latest inci¬ 
dents that happened in the middle of the eighteenth century. 
Muhammad Aslam tells us very candidly that “after the crushing 
defeat of Hindu arms near Delhi by Ahmad Shah Abdall about 
ninety thousand persons, male and female, were taken prisoners, 
and obtained eternal happiness by embracing the Muslim faith.” 62 
We may be quite sure that these people were more anxious for 
their lives than “eternal happiness.” 

No one outside a lunatic asylum would seriously believe that 
in such mass scale conversions sincere faith in Islam or anything 
like it would count in the least. Yet this process must be regard¬ 
ed as the major cause for the enormous growth of the Muslim 
population in Bengal, and so far as the recorded evidence goes, this 
one factor seems to be responsible for at least three-fourths—if not 
more—of the conversion of the Hindus to Islam. 

As regards the last means of converting the Hindus to Islam, 
we have no definite information as to the extent of their success be¬ 
yond a very moderate scale. There is not the least doubt that one 
of the major causes of whatever success they achieved was the very 
degraded position of the lower classes in Hindu society. There is 
some truth in the following statement of W. W. Hunter: “To these 
poor people, fishermen, hunters, pirates and low-caste tillers of the 


732 



RELIGION 


soil {to which others may be added), Islam came as a revelation 
from on high. It was the creed of the ruling race; its missionaries 
were men of zeal, who brought the Gospel of the unity of God 
and the equality of men in His sight to a despised and neglected 
population/’ 63 But when we contrast the result of the activities pf 
the Christian missionaries in the 18th and 19 th centuries in a situa¬ 
tion not very dissimilar, we cannot help thinking that other factors, 
notably the active official support and other temptations, counted for 
much in the success of the Muslim missionaries. 

According to some writers the missionary efforts must be given 
the chief credit for the large number of conversions of Hindus to 
Islam. But this is a mere conjecture unsupported by facts recorded 
in history, as we have in the case of the first two means of con¬ 
version, namely force and violence accompanied by temptation. 

It is a well-known fact that the largest number of converted 
Hindus is to be found in East Bengal, now called Bangladesh. The 
following statement of Titus may be quoted in support of what has 
been stated above: “Generally speaking, Muslim missionaries have 
followed in the wake of conquering armies. This was the case in 
the north, and in Bengal especially. Muhammad Bakhtyar Khalji 
swept over Bengal and Bihar at the close of the twelfth century 
A.D., and founded a Muslim kingdom there with headquarters in 
Gaur. Under the protection of this Muslim sovereignty, missiona¬ 
ries of the faith found freedom for the exercise of their zeal; and, as 
a result pf certain social and religious causes, they were eminently 
successful. In eastern Bengal, Islam is not confined to the cities and 
centres of Government, as is largely the case in Northern India. 
Here, even under the admittedly severe measures of many of the 
Muslim rulers to spread the religion of Islam, but few, comparative¬ 
ly, of the village people embraced the religion of their conquerors. 
But in eastern Bengal we find it mostly in the villages; and judging 
from the manners and customs of the followers of the Prophet, their 
physical appearance, and the caste distinctions which they still re¬ 
tain, it seems clear that these converts were recruited from the 
original inhabitants of the soil. In this part of India, Hinduism was 
not nearly so well organized and consolidated as in the northern, 
western, and southern parts of the country. The inhabitants were 
under the influence of a crude form of Buddhism; and, despised as 
they were by their proud Aryan rulers, who held them in disdain, 
they apparently welcomed the Muslim missionaries gladly.” 64 

There is some truth in the above statement, but we have no 


733 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

reliable and positive evidence in support of the view that the mis¬ 
sionary efforts, pure and simple, should be counted as a very im¬ 
portant, far less dominant factor, not to speak of the major factor, 
in the conversion of Hindus to Islam in India, in general, and in 
Bengal in particular. It is difficult to believe that pure missionary 
efforts should be more successful in Bengal, the remotest region from 
the centre of Muslim culture and authority, than the neighbouring 
provinces, or provinces like Madras (Tamil Nadu) where the lowest 
classes of people—the Panchamas—were the most despised or ill- 
treated people in the whole of India. 


NOTES 

1- Forbes, James, Oriental Memoirs (1813), Vol. I, p. 62. 

2. Elphinstone, Mountstuart, History of India (1889 ed.), p. 94. 

3. Hari Rao, V. N., Vaisnavism in South India in the Modern Period, a paper 
included in the Studies in Social History (Modem India) Ed. O. P. Bhatnagar, 
pp. 120-121. 

4 . Asiatic Researches, Vol. II, p. 455. 

5. Ranade, M. G., Miscellaneous Writings, pp. 375-76. 

6- Thoothi, N. A., The Vaisnavas of Gujarat (1939). On p. 97, he calls the founder 
of the Ramasanehi sect as Shantidas, while Akshoy Kumar Datta, writing in 
1848 in the Tattva-Bodhini-patrika, No. 68, p. 209, states that his name was 
Ramcharan. 

7- Datta, Akshoy Kumar, Ibid. 

8- Thoothi, N. A., op. cit., p. 100. 

9. Parekh, Manilal C., Sri Swami Narayan (2nd ed.), p. 69. 

10 • JJl.A.S., 1882, p. 733 ff. 

11. Growse, F. S., The Sect of the Prannathis in J.A.S.B., 1879, pp. 171-180. 

1? Sen, Kshiti Mohan, The Mediaeval M]ystics of North India in the Cultural 
Heritage of India, Vol. IV, p. 387. 

13. Datta, Akshoy Kumar, Bharatvarshiya Upasaka Sampradaya (in Bengali) 
Vol. 1, (2nd ed. 1888), p. 250. 

14. Kamasakheji, Nritya-raghava-milan, pp. 17-18. 

15 . Brxhat-Kausala Khanda with the commentary of Ramavallabh Sharan Prema- 
nidhi of Ayodhya, Cantos II to V. 

16. Ibid, Cantos IX to XV. 

17- Narahari Chakravarti, Gaura-Charita-chintamani , p. 74. 

18. Datta, Akshoy Kumar, op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 186-197. 

19. Ibid, p. 195. 

20- Ghoshal, Jaya Narayan, Karuna-nidhana-vilasa, p. 322. 

21 Ward, Rev. W., A View of the Hindu Literature and Religion, Vol. I p. 223. 

22 Datta, Akshoy Kumar, op. cit., pp. 201-202. 

23. Ibid, p. 202. 

24. Ibid, p. 170-171. 

25. Ibid, Vol. H, p. 192. 

26. Birbhumi (ed. Kulada Prasad Mallick), Chaitra, 1927. 

27 • Sen, Ram Prasad, Vidyasundar . 

28. Ramestfivara, Shivayana, ed. by Panchanan Chakravarti (Sahitya Parishad 

Calcutta), p. 394. ’ 

29. Sahitya Parishad Patrika, Vol. IV and Vishvakosha, Vol. XVIII u 171 

30. Sahitya Parishad Patrika, Vol. LXIII, pp. 17-24. 

31 Chakravarti, Chintaharan, The Cult of Baro Bhaiya of Eastern Bengal J AS B 
1930, Vol. XXVI, pp. 379-88. g ’ 

32. Buchanan, Francis, Patna and Bihar, pp. 358-65. 


734 




RELIGION 


33- Wilson, H. H., Religious Sects of the Hindus, (Ed. E. R. Rost, 1958), p. 102 

34. Datta, Akshoy Kumar, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 298. 

35. Ibid, p. 223. 

36. Ibid, p. 240. 

37. Roy, Jyotirmony, History of Manipur, (Calcutta 1958), p. 42. 

38- Jhalajit Singh, R. K., A Short History of Manipur, p. 133. 

39. Ibid, p. 165. 

40 Gait, History of Assam (1906), p. 351. 

41. Sen, Sukumar, Banga Sahityer Itihasa, Vol. I, Pt. II (1963), pp. 492-94. 

42. Haraprasad, Sambardhana Lekhamala , Vol. I, pp. 230-58. 

43- Thompson, E. J. and Spencer, A. M., Bengali Religious Lyrics, Sakta, p. 42. 

44. V- K. Bhave, Peshwekalin Maharashtra, pp. 39-40. 

45. Peshwa Diaries, Brahmendra Swamiche Charitra f Grant Duff, op- cit., Vol. I, 
pp. 18-22, V. R. Natu, Mahadji Sindia, p. 268 etc. 

46. Chapekar, N G., Peshwaiche Savalit, Introduction pp. 46-53; also accounts 
of fort Raigarh, Sinhagarh, Purandar etc. in Peshwa Daftar; see also Abbe 
Dubois, Hindu Manners, Customs and Ceremonies (3rd Ed., 1943, reprint). 

47- Ranade, M. G., Rise of Maratha Power (1961 Ed.), pp. 66-76. 

* The opening page of the account of Hindu Religion and the concluding two 
pages of this section have been contributed by Dr. V. G. Dighe. 

48. Aziz Ahmad, Studies in Islamic Culture in the Indian Environment (1964), 

p. 201. 

49. Murray T- Titus, Islam in India and Pakistan (1959), pp. 186 ff. 

50. Ibid. 

51. Ibid. 

52. Aziz. Ahmad, op. cit., p. 202. 

52a. Ibid. 

53. Mohammad Yasin, A Social History of Islamic India, p. 5. 

54. Edward Terry, A Voyage to East India (London, 1777), p. 122. 

55. This is the eighth ‘Instruction’ in an alleged ‘will’ of Aurangzib given in the 
Ahkam-i-Alamgiri ascribed to Hamid-ud-din Khan Bahadur. Jadunath Sarkar, 
History of Aurangzib, VoL V, pp. 263, 265-66. 

56- The last ditch fight between the Mughuls and the Pathans took place in Orissa 
and Bengal. This was chosen by Bankim Chandra Chatterji, the greatest 
novelist in Bengali literature, as the theme of his first novel, Durgeshanandini. 

57- Zia-ud-din Barani (Translated by Elliot and Dowson in The History of India 
as told by Its Own Historians, Vol. Ill, p. 184). 

58. Titus, op. cit., p. 22. 

59 Ibid, p. 19. For other such cruel acts, cf. pp. 19 ff. 

60. Ibid, p. 32. 

61- For these, cf. Titus, pp. 21-35. 

62. Ibid, pp. 32-33. 

63- Arnold, The Preaching of Islam , p. 279. 

64. Titus, op. cit., pp. 44-45; Cf. also Sir H. H. Risley, The Tribes and Castes of 
Bengal. 


735 


CHAPTER XXI 

ECONOMIC & SOCIAL CONDITIONS IN INDIA 
IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 

I. Economic Condition: 

Changes in the social stratification: 

The economic stratification in the Mughul period resembled a 
pyramid with a very small but extremely rich and extravagant upper 
class on the top and poor agriculturists and artisans at the wide 
bottom. The older Mughul aristocracy gradually decayed due to the 
escheat system, extravagance, profligacy and maintenance of large 
harems, as well as diminution of family size caused by the wars. Mis¬ 
cegenation was also a major factor in the degeneration of the Turkish 
and Afghan nobility settled in India. With the consolidation of the 
Mughul empire, the Brahmins retired from Muslim Courts, and pur¬ 
sued their traditional learning and taught the various systems of 
Hindu philosophy in their regular tols in big villages and towns far 
away from the capital cities. In, each village the school teacher was 
usually the Brahmin or the priest, though of course, Kayastha or 
Baniya schoolmasters were sometimes met with. It was some sort 
of universal education that was attempted in the villages of India 
in the mediaeval period when teachers were often hereditary, enjoy¬ 
ed rent-free lands or received voluntary gifts from each household; 
again, in an annual festival held in their honour, collections were 
made for them. 

If the Brahmins fled from Muslim Courts, the latter found in 
the Kayasthas of Northern India capable and pliable instruments for 
the conduct of administration. The Kayasthas acquired the know¬ 
ledge of the Persian language and of accounts, and filled all offices 
from secretaries and clerkships in the administration and the 
army down to the lowest village stewards. As the Muslim conquest 
extended southward to the Deccan the Kayasthas accompanied their 
Muslim masters as revenue officers and accountants, the Qanungos 
of districts and Patwaris of villages, and today this c&ste represents 
at once the most ubiquitous and flexible of all Hindu castes in India, 
abjuring cultivation and menial labour and cherishing the vocation 
of writing and keeping accounts everywhere. During the Mughul 
period Another Hindu caste, the class of Shroffs and Sahukars, traders 
and merchants also grew in wealth and importance, especially in the 


736 


ECONOMIC & SOCIAL CONDITIONS IN INDIA IN 18TH CENTURY 
coastal regions of Bengal, Gujarat and the Coromandel. 

The Economic Condition of the Agriculturists and Artisans: 

Below this growing middle class, represented by the Kayasthas 
and the Baniyas who lived by service and trade respectively, were 
the mass of agriculturists. Even in Bengal which was a land of 
plenty they lived poorly. The Khulasat-ut-Tawarikh, written in 
1695, mentions that the staple food of the people of Bengal was rice 
and fish. 

“The people have not even the custom of eating bread. 
Having cooked brinjals, herbs and lemon together, they keep it 
in cold water and eat it the next day. It is very delicious 
when mixed with salt. They carry it to distant places and sell 
it at a high price.” 

Manrique, writing during 1629-1643, also gives the same picture: 

“Their daily meal consists of rice with which, if they have 
nothing else to add, they take salt and are satisfied. They also 
use a kind of herb which is usually called Xaga (i.e., shakha or 
greens); those better off use rhilk, ghee, and other lacteous pre¬ 
parations.” 1 

The Khulasat mentions that in Gujarat the principal food of the 
people comprised jawar and bajara. The rahi harvest was scanty. 
Both wheat and rice had to come from outside, wheat from Malwa 
and Ajmer and rice from the Deccan. Ovington (1689), mention¬ 
ing that khichri was a very common food among the people, observ¬ 
ed that it was made of dal, i.e., a small round pea and rice boiled 
together. John Fryer (1633-1681), who travelled mostly on the 
Coromandel and Malabar coasts, mentions, “boiled rice, khichary, 
millet, and (in great scarcity) grass roots as the common food of 
the ordinary people; which with a pipe of tobacco contents them.” 2 
The mention of tobacco consumption by the general population is 
significant. 

The artisan class also did not live in prosperity even where the 
fabricated luxury goods were in constant demand in the provincial 
and imperial Courts. For these, state monopoly of some kind was 
established or the supply of products sought to be insured by the 
appointment of state overseers. Peter Mundy (1630-1632) records 
that the sale of skein silk in Patna seems to have been a mono¬ 
poly of the Governor. All silk yarn had to be bought through the 
Kotwal of the city at rates 25 to 37 per cent higher than what the 

737 


M S -47 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


latter paid to the dealers. Similarly a Daroga i of the king’s weavers 
was appointed for Bengal for the regular supply of muslin to the 
imperial Court. Sometimes the interference of the administration 
went to the extent of monopolising looms to secure special trading 
privileges for officials, or a ban was imposed on the use, purchase, 
and sale of certain luxuries. 3 Or again, the Governors made mono¬ 
polies of important articles of food and clothing. Therefore, prices 
of articles depended not only on the annual rainfall but also on 
monopolistic conditions and cost of carriage. Only costly articles 
like indigo, cotton and silk piece-goods, spices, pearls and rubies 
could bear the high cost of carriage. For foodgrains, there could be 
only local markets. 

In the eighteenth century when the calicoes, muslins and silks 
from the innumerable weaving centres of India were pouring into 
the Asiatic, African and European markets, the Dutch and the English 
factors and merchants contacted the weavers through Indian con¬ 
tractors and brokers ( dalals ) who had to reduce the prices of cloth 
(and hence the weavers’ earnings) at the behest of the European 
merchants as it was the latter who solely monopolised the entire 
overseas trade. Later on, the European merchants employed their 
own salaried servants— gumastas^ Mutchulcahs, jachandars —who 
exploited the artisans even more. They obtained advances some¬ 
times from different rival European Companies and distributed the 
capital among the groups of weavers, clandestinely trading on their 
own account, and keeping the weaving population under their 
strong grip. 

Formerly, as Bolts mentions, “it was a common practice for 
reputable families of the tanty or weavers caste to employ their 
own capitals in manufacturing goods, which they sold freely on their 
own accounts. Thus an English merchant in the older days could 
secure 800 pieces of muslin one morning at Dacca without the inter¬ 
ference of any dealers, pykars , or gumastas.” 4 

But as the Company came to employ their own servants or 
gumastas to deal with weavers and artisans and armed them with its 
dustuck, they bought and sold duty-free, and the ‘inland trade of 
Bengal’, as Verelst observed, “soon grew into a vast monopoly in the 
hands of the servants of the Company and their gumastas. In every 
district, village and factory they brought and sold salt, betel-nut, ghee 
rice, straw, bamboo, fish,, ginger, tobacco, opium, and other com¬ 
modities. They forcibly took away the goods of ryots and mer¬ 
chants for a fourth part of their value, and obliged the ryots to 

738 


ECONOMIC & SOCIAL CONDITIONS IN INDIA IN 18TH CENTURY 

give five rupees for articles which were not worth one.” 5 Similarly 
the gumastas took advantage of the Company’s monopoly in the 
cloth trade in exploiting, overawing and oppressing the wea¬ 
vers. Fines, imprisonments, floggings, forcing bonds from the wea¬ 
vers etc., were described by Bolts as the common method adopted 
by the Company’s agents and gumastas, as the result of which the 
number of weavers greatly decreased and the manufacture became 
dear and debased. 6 

Dacca was one of the most important weaving centres in the 
18th century. According to Abbe Raynal who wrote in 1785, even 
here the position of the weavers became precarious. He observed: 7 

“Till of late, Delhi and Murshidabad were furnished from 
thence with the cotton wanted for their own consumption. They 
each of them maintained an agent on the spot to superintend the 
manufacture, who had authority, independent of the magistrate, 
over all the workmen, whose business had any relation to the 
object of his commission. It was a misfortune to them to ap¬ 
pear too dexterous, because they were then forced to work only 
for the Government which paid them ill, and kept them in a 
sort of captivity. When the caprices of tyranny were satisfied, 
Europeans, other strangers, and natives were allowed to begin 
their purchases, but still, they were obliged to employ brokers 
established by the ministry, and as corrupt as they were. 
These restraints and rigours put an end to industry, the child 
of necessity, but the companion of liberty.” 

The Ru\n of the Indigenous'Shroffs and Mercantile Houses: 

When the European factors and merchants first came, they bor¬ 
rowed capital freely from the Indian bankers or shroffs who had 
their Kothis interspersed throughout India from Dacca to Lahore 
and from Multan to Masulipatam. It is well known hov^ in the 
middle of the 18th century the Jagat Seths grew into great political 
importance in Bengal. It was they who were the financiers of the 
court of Murshidabad remitting the tribute of the province to the 
Delhi exchequer. The English Company also had to deal with the 
Jagat Seths. It was through them that they paid Rs. 12 lakhs to the 
Nawab of Bengal when he blockaded the Kasimbazar factory in 
1749. Their wealth is thus described in Siyar-ul-Mutakheriii. 
‘Their riches were so great, that no such bankers were even seen 
in Hindostan or Deccan, nor was there any banker or merchant that 
could stand comparison with them all over India. It is even cer¬ 
tain that all the bankers of their time in Bengal were either their 


739 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


factors, or some of their family.” Without the conspiracy of the 
Jagat Seths and another Hindu millionaire Umi Chand (who be¬ 
came the principal contractor of the English Company) with the 
English, Bengal could not have been conquered by them. A year 
after the battle of Plassey, when the Jagat Seths refused to provide a 
large loan to the English, Holwell wrote to Hastings, “A time may 
come when they may stand in need of the Company’s protection in 
which case they may be assured they shall be left to Satan to be 
buffeted.” 

In Madras the English Company also sought and obtained the 
assistance of the Chetties, some of whom became the Company’s 
merchants and bankers supplying them with cash or bills of ex¬ 
change on other Indian towns and cities. Similarly, in Gujarat the 
Nathjis became the shroffs of the Company assisting it in difficult 
financial times. It was the Nathjis ’ loan of 30 lakhs to the English 
in Bombay which supported Lord Lake’s expedition in 1804. Simi¬ 
larly, the Nepal War was financed by them in 1814.- 8 As the English 
Company established their monopoly in the inland trade of salt, 
cloth, betel-nut, tobacco, and other business, the big mercantile 
houses of the past gradually lost their importance, not to speak of 
their political influence. The price of salt doubled about 1765, and 
Awadh, Allahabad and Malwa, instead of importing salt from 
Bengal, began to consume rock salt that was produced in the domi¬ 
nions of the Rohillas. Similarly the trade in betel-nut and tobacco, 
two other necessaries of life, was monopolised in 1768 by the Com¬ 
pany. All the merchants, including its own, were forbidden to 
carry these beyond the limits of Bengal. 9 When the European mer¬ 
chants first arrived, the Indian traders served as their brokers and 
cashiers lending or procuring them money upon bottomry or at in¬ 
terest. This interest which was usually 9% at least* was higher 
when the English Company was under the necessity of borrowing 
from the Seths. But the rich Armenian, Greek, Bengali, 
‘Moorish’ and up-country merchants were gradually ruined due to 
the monopoly established by the English Company in the ordinary 
trade of the country. Bolts writes that the English Company ven¬ 
tured to assert that they had a right to trade in India and directed 
certain merchants, inhabitants of Calcutta, not to trade. 10 Many 
persons belonging to the merchant class now gave up trade, and 
thanks to the land reform introduced by Lord Cornwallis, acquired 
large and small estates. 

The Kasimbazar estate was founded at the time of Warren 
Hastings by a gift to a silk merchant, Kantu Nandi, who once help- 

740 


ECONOMIC & SOCIAL CONDITIONS IN INDIA IN 18TH CENTURY 

• J 

ed Hastings to escape from his enemies at Varanasi. Similarly, Hast¬ 
ings’ Munshi, Nabakishen, became the founder of the Sovabazar 
estate and the chief zaminddr of Calcutta. The Chait Singh spolia¬ 
tion episode at Varanasi also created another zaminddri, that of the 
banker, Kashmiri Mai. In this manner, the accumulated capital 
which could no longer be adequately employed due to the ruin of 
trade and industry, began to be invested in land. 

The Disruption of Village Communities and Peasant Rights: 

Village communities began to disintegrate in the eighteenth 
century as the result of the increasing vogue of farming of govern¬ 
ment revenues. The farmer or contractor exercised some powers 
of sovereignty within the allotted district and owed allegiance to 
a superior chief or ruler according to his relative military strength 
or hold upon the rural population. The disorganisation of village 
communities was speeded up by Maratha invasions and by the crea¬ 
tion of the new landlords by the British, side by side with the old 
farmers or assignees, chaudhuris, talukdars, jagirdars and other ren¬ 
tiers and superintendents. The Maratha overlords farmed out their 
pargdnas to bankers and Sahukars. All these intermediaries now 
dealt individually with the peasants or with the older headmen 
(now transformed into superior dealers), hardly invested capital in 
the land, and made the most of their temporary and insecure pos¬ 
session of the estates. When the East India Company assumed the 
Diwdni, about one-sixth part of Bengal according to Dow, was found 
by them in possession of the favourites and adherents of the princes, 
jagirdars, zammdars, farmers of revenue, etc. Many of these estates 
came into the Company’s possession due to the failure of heirs and 
non-transferability. At this stage Lord Cornwallis created another 
fresh class of zamindars. 

This caused an obliteration of many cherished customary rights 
and privileges of the peasantry. The cultivators gradually lost 
several important rights. For instance* in Bengal the ryot held his 
land by a kind of lease or pattd that was irrevocable, and could not 
be dispossessed until after a failure in rent payments for a year. 
Such a right was extinguished. The cultivator also received con¬ 
siderable tagavi advances from Government for the purchase of 
cattle and for constructing necessary reservoirs and canals for irri¬ 
gation. 11 Buchanan mentions (1808-1815) that in most parts of 
Dinajpur district leases were granted in perpetuity to the ryots and 
in some places they “pretend to a right of perpetual possession at 
the usual rate of rent, if they have occupied a farm for 10 years.” 


741 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


This fixity of rents (that was later on to be restored through the 
creation of occupancy tenancy in Bengal) was done away with as 
a result of the Permanent Settlement. The “natural rent” at the 
beginning of the 19th century did not exceed one-fourth of the pro¬ 
duce of the holding in Bengal. 

Further, as new classes intervened between the actual tillers of 
the soil and the State, the profits of agriculture could not go back 
to the land, but were intercepted by the increasing group of inter¬ 
mediaries. A class, not altogether new to India, the landless pro¬ 
letariat comprised of serfs and farm-hands, also multiplied and was 
soon to come into great prominence in the economic life of the 
country. 

The Vogue of Slavery: 

It appears that slavery became wide-spread in India in the 18th 
century. Manrique stated that the governors of the provinces 
seized the wives and children of those cultivators who could 
not pay the revenue, made them into slaves and sold them by 
auction. Hamilton also mentioned that he was himself empower¬ 
ed to sell up the families of his debtors in Tatta without going to 
court. 12 Famine, epidemic, and eviction from the land were respon¬ 
sible for a considerable amount of slavery that was in existence 
throughout the country. 

The Portuguese carried on throughout the 16th and 17th cen¬ 
turies a profitable trade in slaves, captured especially from Bengal, 
including “men, women, children and even babies at the breast who 
were carried off and sold at the slave market at Hughli.” With the 
expulsion of the Portuguese from Hughli, Akra and Budge-Budge, 
lower down the Bhagirathi, were infested by slave ships even as late 
as 1760. In 1717 the Maghs carried off from the southern part of 
Bengal 1,800 men, women and children, and sold them off at Rs. 20 
to Rs. 70 each for work inland in Arakan. It was estimated that 
three-fourths of the inhabitants of Arakan were natives of Bengal 
or their descendants. 

Slaves were also used to be exported abroad normally from 
Bengal in the 17th century and were also included among the ex¬ 
ports of the Dutch and English traders at Surat, Madras and Masuli- 
patam! 3 In a Bengali document (1729), we read that a person sold 
himself for Rs. 11/- only with his wife, children and descendants 
for generations to come. In 1752 we find slaves being regularly 
purchased and registered in the kacheri or court-house of Calcutta, 


742 


ECONOMIC & SOCIAL CONDITIONS IN INDIA IN 18TH CENTURY 

each slave paying a duty of Rs. 4/- to the East India Company for 
such registration. Coffrees or Abyssinians were frequently employ¬ 
ed as domestic slaves by the Europeans in Madras, Calcutta and Surat. 
Some of the rich Indian merchants of Surat had also Abyssinian 
slaves, but in their households they were brought up as children of 
the family, trained in business and even allowed to dispose of their 
income in favour of their descendants. 14 As late as 1785 Sir 
William Jones eloquently exposed before the Grand Jury at Calcutta 
the evils of slavery: 

“Hardly a man or a woman exists in a corner of this popu¬ 
lous town who hath not at least one slave child either pur¬ 
chased at a trifling price or saved perhaps from a death that 
might have been fortunate for a life that seldom fails of being 
miserable. Many of you, I presume, have seen large boats fill¬ 
ed with children, coming down the river for open sale at Cal- 
« cutta. Now can you be ignorant that most of them were stolen 
from their parents, or bought perhaps for a measure of rice in 
a time of scarcity?” 

By a proclamation in 1789, the traffic in slaves was abolished in 
India. 

But rural slavery still continued to flourish in large parts of 
India. Buchanan’s elaborate social and economic survey of North 
Bihar and North Bengal undertaken in the first decade of the 19th 
century showed that domestic slavery was prevalent, especially in 
the households of landlords, or wherever the nobility was repre¬ 
sented by the Muslims, and the Mohammedan law prevailed. 

Slaves were more commonly employed as farm hands. These 
serfs cultivated for their masters, who had small estates or rented 
lands, and received an allowance of grain and coarse cloth for sub¬ 
sistence. The allowance usually given was a piece of coarse cloth 
and about 15 maunds of grain. The slaves generally belonged to the 
depressed castes like the Dhcmuks 9 Chamars, and Rawaries who sold 
their children. The prices of slaves mentioned by Buchanan were: 

An adult slave Rs. 15 to Rs. 20 

A lad of 16 years Rs. 12 to Rs. 20 

A girl of 8 to 10 years Rs. 5 to Rs. 15 

Or, again, for each year of his age until he: reached 20, the slave 
fetched a rupee more. In Purnea, Gaya, Shahabad, Bhagalpur and 
some other districts slaves were freely bought and sold. “The Assa¬ 
mese”, observes Buchanan, “sell a good many slaves and the people 


743 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


of Bihar are willing to carry on the same trade.” In 1812, it was 

estimated that one-sixth of the population of Sylhet consisted of 

slaves, mostly descendants of insolvent debtors; in Kamrup 12,000 

slaves were released after its cession to the British. 15 

• 

During his tour of social and economic investigation which be¬ 
gan earlier (1800) in South India, Buchanan found slavery wide¬ 
spread also there. Land was largely owned by the Brahmins who 
almost entirely filled the different offices for the collection of re¬ 
venue and administration of justice; they were also exclusively em¬ 
ployed as messengers and inn-keepers. But the cultivation was, for 
the most part, left to the slaves of the inferior or depressed castes— 
the parriar, the haluan, the shekliar, the tati , the vullam, the kana - 
kum, and the eirlay. Even the few Muslim cultivators employed 
slaves. The slaves were the absolute property of their lords. They 
were not attached to the soil but could be hired, or sold or mortgaged. 
Only the husbands and wives could not be sold separately. A young 
man with his wife could be sold for 250 to 300 phanams-, two or 
three children would add 100 phanams. The annual hire for a slave 
was 8 phanams for a man, and half as much for a woman. A good 
slave would sell for about 4 guineas but an ordinary slave sold 
from 20 to 60 phanams (9 S. 6Jd- to 28s.8d.) The average price of 
a slave was much lower than in Bihar and Bengal. The master was 
considered bound to give the slave a certain subsistence allowance and 
also requisite clothing. But when there was no work in the fields, the 
slaves were asked to eke out their subsistence in whatever manner 
they could. Buchanan naively compares slavery in Malabar and in 
the West Indies as follows: 

“There can be no comparison between their condition and that of 
the slaves in the West Indies Islands, except that in Malabar 
there are a sufficient number of females, who are allowed to 
marry any person of the same caste with themselves, and whose 
labour is always exacted by their husband’s master, the master 
of the girl having no authority over her so long as she lives with 
another man’s slave. This is a custom that ought to be recom¬ 
mended to our West Indies Planters, and if adopted would induce 
the Negro women to breed.” 16 

In Central India Malcolm also found in the beginning of the 
19th century numerous slaves in the households of the Rajput chiefs 
and Brahmins. Many of them became slaves during a famine or 
scarcity when men sold their children for bread, and others were 
stolen from their parents by ban jar as > or grain-carriers. Female 


744 


ECONOMIC & SOCIAL CONDITIONS IN INDIA IN 18TH CENTURY 

slaves were sold from Rs. 40 and Rs. 50 according to appearance 
and were not permitted to marry, a shameless traffic being 
carried in Malwa, Rajputana and Gujarat with the Deccan. Some 
times they were cruelly treated, but not generally. A great num¬ 
ber of the slaves of Central India were from Marwar and Gujarat 
where maratha raids and distress compelled many to part with 
their children. Malcolm mentions that in the famine of 1813-1814 
Amir Khan formed in Marwar a battalion of slave children and 
youths 1200 strong. Female slaves were still maintained here and 
there in the families of Rajput chiefs and zamlndars in Central 
India, but male slaves were not common and were generally treated 
more like adopted children than menials. 17 

Agrestic serfdom continued in India until the middle of the 19th 
century especially in the Punjab, Eastern U.P., North Bihar, North 
Bengal, Assam, Orissa, Central India, Central Provinces and the 
South-Eastern coast of India. 

The Trend of Real Wages: 

We shall now consider the trends of wages and prices in India 
with reference to the standard of living of the common man in the 
18th century. At the beginning of the 18th century wages for ordi¬ 
nary workmen in Calcutta ranged from 8 as. to 12 as. per mensem. 
By the 70s, wages of the coolies rose from Rs. 3 to Rs. 3-8-0 per 
mensem. 

The 18th century saw a complete revolution in the price struc¬ 
ture of India. One of the causes of the downfall of the Mughul em¬ 
pire was the intolerable increase of the burden of revenue of the 
agriculturists due to the depreciation of the value of silver in terms 
of copper, from 40 to 30 dams, for the revenue demand was assessed 
in dam (copper) but was actually paid mainly in silver. By the 17th 
century, the copper mines of Rajputana and Central India were ex¬ 
hausted and India had to depend upon the Dutch for the fluctuating 
and precarious import of that metal from Japan. This led to the ap¬ 
preciation of copper dam which was equivalent to a general fall of the 
prices of agricultural produce, and diminution of agricultural income 
measured in terms of dam. As the revenue demand reckoned in dam 
remained fixed, the peasantry had to part with a larger share of their 
produce not only to meet the State demand but also for payment of 
interest to their creditors. So the grinding poverty of the bulk of the 
population was rendered more severe. The Mughul practice of assig¬ 
ning jaglrs to a host of civil and military officials, instead of giving 
them fixed salaries in rupees, also resulted in greater exploitation of 


745 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

the peasantry due to the fall in the value of silver, while the official 
class would not permit any reduction of their official expenses and 
their standard of living and status as well as the cost of the troops 
and horses which they were bound to maintain. Sayyid Ghulam 
Husain Khan (1783) observes that the dam was really equal to a 
40th to 48th part of a rupee, but in the Chamber of Accounts 40 
dams always made a rupee. 18 The weight of the dam was by this 
time reduced by one-third. 

The lighter copper coin, the ‘little' pice, as contrasted with the 
greater (double) pice introduced by Aurangzlb, continued to be cur¬ 
rent in India later on in the times of Bahadur Shah and Farrukh- 
siyar. Such currency debasement led to steady diminution of the 
real wages in the 18th century. The trend of prices in Bengal in 
the mid-18th century is briefly shown below: 


Rate per rupee 


Commodities 

1729 

1738 

1751 1754 1760 1776 

Mds. 

Srs. 

Mds. Srs. 

Mds. Srs. Mds. Srs. Mds. Srs. Mds. 

■ • ' • / 

Srs. 

Coarse Rice 

3 

80 

3 0 

118 0 • 40 0 25 1 

10 

Wheat 

... 3 

30 

— — 

1 18 — — — — 0 

35 

Barley 

... 8 

00 



13 


The decline of real wages in the 18th century would be appa¬ 
rent from the following table: 

1600 Base Year 


1600 

100.00 

1650 

184.51 

1729 

62.04 

1807 

69.82 


1807 was the year in which Buchanan undertook statistical in¬ 
vestigation in North Bihar and Bengal and recorded that the wages 
of the agricultural workers ranged from 3 pies to one anna per diem, 
while a rupee could buy three maunds of rice and 70 seers of wheat 
or barley. 

The Maratha Bargir was paid Rs. 5 to Rs. 10 per month and 
ordinary labour Rs. 2 to Rs. 4 per month. 

Currency Debasement by the East India Company: 

The East India Company also took advantage of the currency 
confusion to debase the coinage leading to a great loss for the popu- 


746 












ECONOMIC & SOCIAL CONDITIONS IN INDIA IN 18TH CENTURY 

lation. Thus we gather from the account of Abbe Raynal that the 
Company struck gold rupees to the amount of about 15 millions 
nominal value but which represented in fact only 9 millions, so 
that four-tenths or something more was alloy. In the treasury at 
Calcutta, the creditors received for each gold rupee not ten rupees 
and a half of silver which it was worth but the equivalent of six 
rupees of silver. Raynal adds that an oppression so general and 
contrary to the principles of trade and public faith must necessarily 
be attended with violence; and consequently it has been necessary 
several times to have recourse to force of arms to carry into execu¬ 
tion the orders of the Council at Calcutta. 19 

Bolts also refers to the over-rating of the gold ‘mohurs’ issued 
by the Company to the extent of about 38 per cent above the 
current market rate. Similarly the silver vaziry rupee issued at 
the mints of Varanasi and Allahabad was also a debased coin “almost 
10 per cent less than Arcots”. 

Throughout Northern India gold almost vanished in the 18th 
century and the currency consisted of silver, copper, and cowries. 
Cowries were specially used in Bengal, Bihar and Orissa until the 
second decade of the 19th century; 3 cowries made one dam, while 
25 dams made a pice. Later on 300 cowries made an anna or four 
pice. 20 In 1781 the East India Company first issued copper coins. 
The experiment was not successful as copper pice came back to the 
treasury due to the over-valuation cf the copper. The Company 
thus after the conquest of Bengal systematically tried to debase the 
value of both silver and copper and this contributed not a little 
towards the reduction of real wages in the country since the wage 
rates could not readily be adjusted to currency and to economic 
conditions generally. 

Krishnaji Anant Sabhasad writing at the end of the 17th cen¬ 
tury mentions no less than 26 sorts of Hons current in south India. 
“On Shahu’s return to Satara he set up a mint at Satara from which 
gold, silver and copper coins were issued. The Kolhapur Raja esta¬ 
blished a mint at Panhala. Peshwa BalajI Rao granted licenses to 
private persons to coin money in consideration of a small fee to the 
State.” 21 

Comparisons of the Standards of Living.: 

As compared with the period of Akbar, real wages in India, 
measured in terms of the principal foodgrains, were only three-fifths 
after the British conquest of Bengal. The trend of decline of real 


747 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

wages in India that was marked since the 17th century has continued 
till modern times. The deterioration of the standard of living of the 
people is especially marked in the diminution-of consumption of ghee, 
oil, salt and sugar that were cheap formerly relatively to both money 
and cereals. 

Sugar was available for the masses of the population in the pre- 
British period under 5 pice per lb. In respect of salt, the monopoly 
of the servants of the East India Company and, later on, the govern¬ 
mental monopoly pushed up salt prices. At the close of the 18th cen¬ 
tury, a maund of Bengal salt was sold at Patna for Rs. 3/- while the 
worst quality of rice was sold at 72J seers per rupee. In terms of 
rice, salt had more than twelve times its present price. For South 
India, a comparison of Buchanan’s price schedules at the beginning of 
the 19th century and of present relative prices of commodities indi¬ 
cates that cloth, salt and sugar have now become many times cheaper 
in terms of rice. 21a The exchange ratio of salt was 10 times in terms of 
rice, of cloth 9 times, and of sugar 5 times, as compared to the present 
parity. At least sugar and salt were much cheaper relatively to both 
money and foodgrains in Mughul India than in the beginning of the 
19th century,—sugar selling at only 2d. per lb. or under about 5 pice 
according to Terry and salt at 67 seers per rupee according to Abu-’l 
Fazl. 

Buchanan estimates (1808-1815) that in North Bihar a family 
could be supported on a minimum of Rs. 5/- per mensem and that the 
wages of agricultural labourers ranged from Rs. 2 to Rs. 3 monthly 
when food and land were not given. The poorer people wore coarse 
linen made of jute and used blankets and woollen goods in the rains 
and winter, now no longer available for them. Cotton spinning 
was the leisure-time occupation of all the women of the higher rank 
and of the greater part of the agriculturists’ wives who thus added 
to the family income. Women also worked on the looms or did 
embroidery or chikan work. One ox and Rs. 5 of capital would 
enable a grain-dealer to start his trade that could yield a profit of 
Rs. 50 per mensem. 

Famines: 

The major famines in the 17th and 18th centuries are listed 
below: 


748 


ECONOMIC & SOCIAL CONDITIONS IN INDIA IN 18TH CENTURY 


Year 


Area affected 


1595—1598 
1614—1615 
1618—1619 
1630—1682 
1638—1634 
1635 

1642—1643 

1645—1646 

1647 

1648 
z 1650 

1659 

1661 

1670—1671 

1705—1708 

1709—1711 

1717—1718 

1722 

1728 

1731—1734 

1737 

1747 

1751 

1769—1770 

1782 

1783—1784 

1788 

-1790—1792 

1799—1801 


.. Whole of India. 

.. Punjab as far east as Delhi. 

.. Coromandel Coast and Vijayanagar. 

.. Vijayanagar, Deccan, Gujarat and Sind. 

.. Deccan and Gujarat. 

.. Surat and Golconda. 

.. Orissa and Bengal. 

.. Coromandel Coast, Southern Section. 

.. Raj pu tana. 

.. Coromandel Coast. 

.. Awadh, Gujarat and almost the whole of India. 

.. Sind and Gujarat. 

.. All parts of India. 

.. Bihar. 

.. Deccan. 

.. Madras and Bengal. 

.. Coast and Bay districts, Ahmadabad and Surat. 

.. Bombay. 

.. Madras and Bombay. 

.. Madras. 

.. Madras. 

.. Bombay, Surat, Ahmadabad and Aurangabad. 

.. Bengal. 

.. Bengal and Bihar. 

.. Bombay, Mysore and Madras. 

.. Northern India from Multan to Murshidabad. 

.. Bengal. 

.. Hyderabad, Deccan, Gujarat and Northern Madras. 
.. Northern India to Hyderabad. 


Each famine in the past resulted in appalling mortality from 
starvation, slavery and cannibalism. -It is interesting to record the 
evidence of the French writer, Abbe Raynal, that in the Bengal 
famine of 1770-1771, the chief agents of the East India Company 
and the Council of Calcutta “kept locked up in their magazine a part 
of the harvest, and carried on the most odious and the most crimi¬ 
nal of all monopolies.” There were of course a complete failure of 
harvest in 1769 and a partial failure in 1770, but the Council of 
Calcutta, in order to gain a few millions of rupees, “devoted to 
destruction several millions, in Bengal due to their cruel monopoly.” 
Thus the famine of 1770-1771 which still haunts the people of 
Bengal like a nightmare was as much man-made as the most recent 
famine of 1943 in this province. 


II. Social Condition: 

From different points of view the eighteenth century is an in¬ 
glorious period in the history of India. Gradual disintegration and 
ultimate collapse of Mughul imperial authority and debased cha¬ 
racter of the nobility marred in that period all progressive forces 
and subjected the country to\dreadful political turmoils, social dis- 


749 










THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


order and confusion and a grievous economic decline. 

Religion: 

But even in this debased atmosphere some of the traditionally 
good features continued in the spheres of religion, culture and 
society. Hinduism was still characterised by an attitude of tolera¬ 
tion towards other faiths and adaptation to new environments and 
conditions. Grose observed in the mid-eighteenth century: “As to 
that spirit of toleration in religion, for which the Gentoos (Hindus) 
are so singularly distinguished, it is doubtless owing to their funda j 
mental tenet of it, of which the purpose is that the diversity of 
modes of worship is apparently agreeable to the God of the Uni¬ 
verse; that all prayers put to Him from man, are all equally accep¬ 
table and sanctified to him/’ 22 The Dutch traveller Stavorinus, who 
visited India between 1768 and 1771, wrote: “These three distinct 
nations, the Moors (Muslims), the Gentoos (Hindus) and the Par- 
sees, whose religions are wholly different from each other, exercise 
the greatest toleration and indulgence in this respect, towards one 
another; no one is molested on account of his religion.” 23 William 
Henry Tone, employed in a regiment of infantry under the Pesln- 
wds, remarked about Poona in 1799: “In Poonah, which is the 
metropolis of the (Maratha) Empire, and the seat of Brahminised 
authority, there are many mosques and one Christian Church, 
where the votaries of both religions may offer their devotions with¬ 
out any hindrance or molestations.” 24 

The general body of the Hindu population were followers of 
the old forms and practices of religious worship. There were many 
worshippers of Shakti, “the power or energy of the divine Mother 
in action”. Worship of the mother-goddess, Durga, Kali, Tara, Ma- 
nasa was widely prevalent in Bengal and in the eastern districts of 
Bihar. 25 Tantrism was practised in Mithila, Bengal and Assam and 
some works on Tantra were written in Mithila and Bengal during 
this period. There were many followers of the cults of Shiva and 
Vishnu and of their sub-cults which had appeared in course of time 
and spread in different parts of the country. There were a large 
number of followers of §rl Chaitanya in Bengal, Orissa and some in 
Bihar. Adherents of sects like the Ramanujis, the Ramanandis, the 
Kablrpanthls, the Nanakpanthls, the Radhaballavis, etc. were 
scattered in different areas. Many in Bengal and Bihar worshipped 
the Sun God and they were known as Saurapatyas, or Sauras. 
There were worshippers of Ganesha called Gdnapatyas. 

Besides the old religious sects some new ones appeared during 


750 


ECONOMIC & SOCIAL CONDITIONS IN INDIA IN 18TH CENTURY 

the eighteenth century. A few of the latter were either of an eclec¬ 
tic or monotheistic nature, and the rest were Vaishnava sects. The 
founders of these sects were mostly of the non-Brahminical castes, 
and Guru worship was a common feature of all of them. 

All these new sects raised voices of protest against certain 
prevailing abuses which had crept into the religious system in course 
of centuries. There had been growth of popular belief in magic 
and witchcraft, emphasis on rituals and ceremonies and undue in¬ 
fluence of priesthood which were responsible for some undesirable 
practices even in places of worship, particularly at centres of pil¬ 
grimage. 

But it is not possible to agree with the prejudiced views of some 
contemporary English writers like Grant 26 or Martyn 27 and biased 
opinions of some Christian missionaries about Indian religion and 
morals. One of them made the monstrous observation: “All your 
Gods are nothing but demons. You will go to hell to expatiate in 
eternal flames the crime of your idolatry .” 28 Ward observed wrong¬ 
ly: “Here everything that assumes the appearance of religion ends 
(if you could forget its impurity) in an unmeaning ceremony and 
leaves the heart as cold as death to every moral principle .” 29 

Some contemporary European writers were justly impressed by 
the good features of Indian religion. Abbe de Guyon remarks that 
by virtue the Indians understood “a certain greatness of soul which 
despises dangers and death, and has glory for its object; which 
tramples under foot ease and the pleasures of life; which seeks after 
the esteem of mankind ”. 30 “Their rules of morality”, observes 
Craufurd, “are most benevolent; and'hospitality and charity are not 
jonly strongly inculcated but I believe nowhere more universally 
practised than amongst Hindus .” 31 Orme refers to “humane and 
gentle manners” of the Hindus who were “charitable even to reliev¬ 
ing the necessities of strangers .” 32 Forbes mentions the influence 
of religion “in elevating people to display human instances of self- 
denial, of laborious and painful exertion, which almost exceed be¬ 
lief .” 33 

Education: 

The educational system of a country has considerable influence 
in moulding its society. In the sphere of education the old univer¬ 
sities or centres of learning of international reputation, had dis¬ 
appeared in course of time under the influence of some adverse forces. 
But in other ways the traditional features prevailed. “The English 


751 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


found in India”, wrote Thomas in the closing years of the nineteenth 
century, “a widespread system of elementary education and higher 
education, of which the former was mainly practical, the latter main¬ 
ly literary, philosophical and religious.” 34 There was no system of 
education organized by the State. Education was patronised by some 
local rulers and members of the aristocracy and supported by con¬ 
tributions of some persons of benevolent disposition belonging to 
other sections of the population. 

The celebrated lady-ruler Rani BhavanI of Natore and Raja 
Krishnachandra of Nadia were great patrons of learning in their 
respective jurisdictions and the Raja of Darbhanga was a patron 
cf it in Mithila. The Peshwds greatly encouraged traditional edu¬ 
cation. They paid donations and rewards to Brahmins, “whose 
proficiency in science and mythology, entitled them to distinc¬ 
tion”, and “rewards were conferred in proportion to the acquirements, 
moral conduct and sanctity”. 35 In 1823 in the Madras Presidency 
12,498 schools were “supported partly by the endowment of native 
Princes, but chiefly by the voluntary contributions of the people”. 36 

The institutions for higher Sanskrit learning, known as Chatus- 
pathis or Tols in Bengal £nd Bihar, existed also in other parts of the 
country, such as Dravida (South India), KasI (Benaras), Tirhut 
(MithilA) and Utkala (Orissa). A writer described Nadia in 1782 
as “the Oxford of the province”. 37 He further observed that Nadia 
was “the focus of intellectual development, the land of the Naiydyikas, 
who reasoned and argued on every conceivable topic, the abode of 
astronomers whose panjikds and almanacs still regulate the festivals 
and pujas and the daily domestic concerns of the Hindus”. In 1787, 
Sir William Jones expressed feelings of joy for “spending three 
months every year near an ancient University of Brahmins 
(Nadia) with whom he began to converse fluently”. 38 He consi¬ 
dered Sanskrit language to be “of wonderful structure, more perfect 
than Greek, more copious than the Latin and more exquisitely 
refined than either”. 39 

Benaras, described by Bernier in the 17th century as “the Athens 
of India”, continued to hold a premier position as a centre of Sanskrit 
learning in India. Some Europeans who came to India in the 
eighteenth century were highly impressed with the high standard 
of Sanskrit education at Benaras and also with the astronomical 
observatory built there by Raja Jay Singh II of Jaipur. 40 Regard¬ 
ing the institutions for higher Sanskrit learning in India, Forbes 
remarked: “We contemplate the Hindoo colleges and Brahminical 
seminaries, at Benaras and different parts of Hindustan, with plea- 


752 


ECONOMIC & SOCIAL CONDITIONS IN INDIA IN 18TH CENTURY 

sure; they are useful institutions; and however limited in their bene¬ 
fits to particular castes and descriptions of people, they are.the 
nurses of literature, medicine and science as far as deemed neces¬ 
sary among the Hindoos”. 41 

With the patronage of Muslim rulers and nobles, Persian educa¬ 
tion was then in a flourishing condition. For the Muslim popula¬ 
tion Persian was the most important medium of higher education, 
and many Hindus learnt it as a matter of practical necessity in view 
of its importance as official language for many years. The famous, 
mid-eighteenth century Bengali poet Bharatchandra, had a good 
knowledge of Persian, and Raja Navakrishna of Sobhabazar (in 
Calcutta) was Persian tutor to Warren Hastings in 1750. 42 Many 
Persian schools had Hindu students. Azimabad (Patna) was a 
premier centre of Persian education in Bengal and Bihar. Ghulam 
Husain, author of the important contemporary work Siyar-uU 
Mutakherin, writes that there “were in those tim'es at Azimabad 
a number of persons who loved science and learning and employed 
themselves in teaching and in being taught; and I remember to have 
seen in that city and its environs nine or ten Professors of repute 
and three or four hundred students and disciples from whence may 
be conjectured the number of those that must have been in the 
great towns or the neighbouring districts.” In the mid-eighteenth cen¬ 
tury some scholars, well-versed in Persian, came to India from Iran 
and settled particularly in Patna and Bihar province. Madrasahs 
were maintained at different places for higher education in Arabic 
and Persian. 

There were some famous poets in Orissa during the eighteenth 
century. They were Upendra Bhanja, Ramadas, Krishna Sinha, Sada- 
nanda Kavisuryabrahma, Abhimanyu Samanta Sinha and Brajanath 
Barajena. Some of them knew other provincial vernaculars besides 
Oriya. Upendra Bhanja had some knowledge of Sanskrit. Abhi¬ 
manyu Samanta Sinha “was a man of good education and knew 
Sanskrit, Marathi, Hindi and Bengali”. 43 His “famous work, 
Vidagdha Chintamani was modelled after the Sanskrit work Vidag- 
dha Madhava, of the Neo-Vaishnavite School”. 44 

Elementary education was widespread. There were institu¬ 
tions for it in urban as well as rural areas, and it was encouraged in 
almost every stratum of society. Edward Ives, who came to Bengal 
in the mid-eighteenth century, 45 observed regarding this province 
that “there were many schoolsr for the education of children . 
Craufurd 46 observed a few years later that “there were schools in 
all the towns and principal villages”. About Central India, Mal- 

753 


I.S.—4* 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


colm 47 wrote in the early years of the nineteenth century: “Though 
there is not one public place of instruction endowed or supported 
by any State in this country, yet private schools, both in the towns 
and villages, are very numerous”. As he estimated, every village 
having above one hundred houses had a school-master, who taught 
“the children of the Banias or shop-keepers, and those of such culti¬ 
vators as choose”. Elphinstone 48 gives the following account about 
schools in the territories conquered by the British from the Peshivd: 
“There are already schools in all towns and in many villages, but 
reading is confined to Brahmins, Banyas, and such of the agricul¬ 
tural classes as have to do with accounts”. As noted by Forbes , 49 
there were “in all towns numerous schools for the education of 
other boys; they are generally in the open air, on the shady side of 
the house. The scholars sit on mats, or cowdung floors, and are 
taught as much of religion as their caste admits of, as well as read¬ 
ing, writing and arithmetic”. 

There was a maktab or Persian school attached to every 
mosque and such schools functioned at other places too. “Elegant 
penmanship” was “considered a great accomplishment”. 

Generally in the institutions for primary education, teachers 
were appointed and students were admitted irrespective of caste or 
creed. In Bengal some of the so-called depressed classes worked as 
teachers in such schools and at some places there were Muslim tea¬ 
chers for Hindu boys. 

The general features of elementary education were similar in 
different parts of India, with some differences in details. In the vil¬ 
lage schools which were accommodated in simple thatched houses or 
in parts of buildings meant for other purposes, the students were 
taught to write in four successive stages of instruction, on the 
ground, palm leaf, plantain leaf and paper. They learnt the rules 
of arithmetic and accounts (agricultural and commercial) and 
some of the rudiments of physical and natural sciences. Thus they 
became acquainted with such matters as were needed for a common 
civic life, not so complex as that of today, and higher virtues of 
life were also inculcated into their minds. 

General Social Life: 

For study of general social life in the eighteenth century our 
main sources are contemporary historical works, accounts of foreign 
writers and of the Christian missionaries and contemporary verna¬ 
cular literature. In spite of anarchy and confusion of the eighteenth 


754 


ECONOMIC & SOCIAL CONDITIONS IN INDIA IN 18TH CENTURY 

century which were affecting the general conditions of life in the 
country, society in India retained most of the traditional features 
with some changes under new environments. But it would not be fair 
to condemn the entire social life and to agree with the prejudiced and 
uncritical views of some of the foreign writers or the Christian mis¬ 
sionaries. Some of the European writers of the eighteenth century 
or early nineteenth century, who were connected with Indian 
administration of the English East India Company, have recorded 
comparatively favourable opinions about the Indian society of the 
time. Thus Malcolm observed in his Notes of Instructions to Officers 
and Assistants working under him: “I do not know the example of 
any great population, in such circumstances, preserving, through 
such a period of changes and tyrannical rule, so much of virtue and 
so many good qualities as are to be found in a great proportion of 
the inhabitants of this country. This is to be accounted for, in some 
degree, by the institutions of the Hindus, particularly, that of caste, 
which appears to have raised them to their present rank in human 
society, at a very remote period; but it has certainly tended to keep 
them stationary at that point of civil order to which they were thus 
early advanced. With a just admiration of the effects of many of 
their institutions, particularly those parts of them which cause in 
vast cases not merely an absence of the common vices of theft, 
drunkenness and violence, but preserve all the virtuous ties of family 
and kindred relations, we must all deplore some of their usages and 
weak superstitions; but what individuals or races of men are without 
great manifold errors and imperfections, and what mind that is not 
fortified with ignorance or pride can, on such grounds, come to a severe 
judgment against a people like that of India ”. 50 “Having lived twenty- 
three years in India, and passed much of that time in intimate inter¬ 
course with various nations”, R. Rickards wrote, “I have constantly 
seen, in their acts and conduct, the practice of the most amiable vir¬ 
tues. I have experienced, from many, the most grateful attachment. I 
believe them capable of all the qualities that can adorn the human 
mind; and although I allow many of their imputed faults (where is 
the individual or the nation without them?) I must still ascribe 
those faults more to the rigour of the despotisms under which they 
have so long groaned, and which unhappily we have but slenderly 
alleviated, than to natural depravity of disposition, or to any insti¬ 
tutions peculiar to themselves”. 

The most striking feature of Hindu society was the institution 
of caste; and caste rules were strictly observed in matters of mar¬ 
riage, diet, inter-dining, etc. the caste rules had various defects. 


755 


THE MAKATHA SUPREMACY 


But these helped specialisation in vocational professions. “In gene¬ 
ral, it is remarked”, notes Edward Ives, “that whatever be the trade 
of the father the same is that of the son; so that the families of 
boatmen, fishermen, etc. are boatmen and fishermen to all genera¬ 
tions”. 51 But on account of the economic and administrative 
changes in India since the middle of the eighteenth century, there 
was some laxity in professional specialisations on caste basis. 
Referring to this Buchanan 52 observes: “All proper Hindus regret 
that in these days no caste adheres to its proper duties, but many 
persons, in order to procure a subsistence, betake themselves to pro¬ 
fessions for which they were not ordinarily intended”. He notes 
that of the entire Brahmin population of Mithila only 10 per cent 
devoted themselves to literary works instead of accepting service; 
about 68 per cent were proprietors of land; about 10 per cent were 
employed in various zamiiiddris or carried on business; and the rest 
engaged themselves in the profession of priests or copied manu¬ 
scripts of religious books for sale. 

There was something like caste polity to look after proper ob¬ 
servance of caste rules. Caste matters were decided by caste 
councils or caste chiefs. Excepting capital punishment various 
punishments like fines, penances, excommunications, etc. could be 
inflicted by them on defaulters of caste rules. 

Family system was mainly patriarchal in character, except in 
Malabar and among some primitive communities in comparatively 
backward areas. So the senior most member of a family was its head 
and the women were normally “subject to the will of their master”. 
In a joint family the mistress of the house had a dignified position 
and she had the authority in regulating its affairs. 

Piety, charity, modesty and affection were considered to be 
essential qualities of a Hindu wife. Some contemporary European 
writers like Forbes^ 53 Orme and Abbe Dubois, have highly praised 
these qualities of Hindu women. “Segregated from the company 
of other sex”, writes Orme, “and strangers to the ideas of attracting 
attention, they are the only handsomer for this ignorance; as we 
see in them beauty in the noble simplicity of nature”. 54 “What we 
call love-making”, *iotes the Christian Missionary Abbe Dubois, “is 
utterly unknown among the Hindus”. He further writes: “What¬ 
ever may be said to the contrary, Hindu women are naturally 
chaste. To cite a few examples of unseemly conduct, a few lapses 
attributable to human frailty is no proof of their want of chastity 
as a body; I would even go so far as to say that Hindu women are 
more virtuous than any of many other civilized countries.” 55 


756 


ECONOMIC & SOCIAL CONDITIONS IN INDIA IN 18TH CENTURY 

Society in general had feelings of reverence for its womenfolk. 
“Women are so sacred in India”, remarks Alexander Dow 56 signi¬ 
ficantly, “that even the soldiery leave them unmolested in the midst 
of slaughter and devastation. The harem is a sanctuary against 
all the licentiousness of victory; and ruffians covered with the blood 
of a husband, shrink back with confusion from the secret apart¬ 
ments of his wife”. “A Hindu woman can go anywhere alone”, 
writes Dubois, “even in the most crowded places, and she need never 
fear the impertinent looks or jokes of idle loungers. A house in¬ 
habited solely by women is a sanctuary which the most shameless 
libertine would not dream of violating.” 563 This noble feature has 
been referred to by some other contemporary European writers like 
Forster 57 and Buchanan. 58 

Purdah or seclusion of women in houses was observed in Hindu 
and Muslim families. It was in practice among the Moplahs of 
Malabar. 59 Women of poor families who had to go out to work 
for their livelihood, could not observe it. Regarding South India, 
Dubois noted that it was not practised there. 

Marriage was a universal social practice except on the part of 
those who observed celibacy on religious grounds. To arrange for 
marriages of sons and daughters was considered to be a duty of the 
parents. In Hindu society, marriage was an indissoluble and sacred 
bond for a happy conjugal life and not a contractual relation for 
material comforts. It was celebrated with solemnity by offering 
prayers and invocations to gods. A duly married wife could not 
be discarded except on the charge of adultery. Marriages of both 
boys and girls were celebrated at an early age, although consumma¬ 
tion did not take place till they attained maturity. 

Good women served as “ministering angels” at home. But if 
necessary some of them could stand by the side of men “in the 
world’s broad field” and “in the bivouac of life”. With much expe¬ 
rience of the affairs of Maharashtra in the eighteenth century Mal¬ 
colm remarked about the women there: “The females both of 
Brahmin and Sudra Mahrattas have, generally speaking, when their 
husbands are princes or chiefs, great influence, and mix, not only 
by their power over individuals but sometimes ... personally in the 
affairs of the State. If married to men of rank, they have usually 
a distinct provision and estate of their own; enjoy as much liberty 
as they can desire; seldom, if ever, wear a veil and give feasts and 
entertainments to their friends on births and marriages and on 
particular anniversaries”. Two highly significant illustrations of 


757 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


such a role on the part of women in the eighteenth century are those 
of Rani Bhavaru of Natore and Shri Devi Ahalya Bai, who ruled 
over Indore from 1766 to 1795. Rani Bhavahl was guided by deep 
religious convictions with considerable capacity for administration 
and wide-spread charity for pious objects, which have immortalised 
her memory. Beveridge has described her as a ‘‘heroine among the 
Bengalees”. Ahalya Bai was inspired by higher virtues of noble 
idealism and piety. Her charity was extensive and her skill and 
capacity in matters of administration were highly commendable. 
Her manifold qualities have been highly praised by Malcolm. 60 “In 
the most sober view that can be taken of her character, she certainly 
appears, within her limited sphere, to have been one of the purest 
and most exemplary rulers that ever existed; and she affords a strik¬ 
ing example of the practical benefits a mind receives from perform¬ 
ing worldly duties under a deep sense of responsibility to its creator.” 

Some of the Muslim ladies also participated in political affairs. 
Thus, Dardanah Begum, wife of Murshid Qull, Governor of Orissa, 
exhorted her husband to fight against ‘All VardI when the latter pro¬ 
ceeded to subjugate Orissa. Zebunnisa, Begum of Nawab Shuja-ud- 
din, assisted her husband in matters of administration. ‘AH Vardi’s 
Begum also extended co-operation to her husband in administrative 
affairs and encouraged him in fighting against the Maratha invaders of 
Bengal. Hoi well thus writes about her: “A woman whose wisdom, 
magnanimity, benevolence and every amiable quality, reflected high 
honour on her sex and status; she much influenced the usurper’s (‘All 
Vardl’s) councils and was consulted by him in every material move¬ 
ment in the State except when sanguinary and treacherous mea¬ 
sures were judged necessary, which he knew she would oppose as 
she ever condemned them when perpetrated, however successful, pre¬ 
dicting always that such policies would end in the ruin of his 
family.” 61 

There was ordinarily no polygamy. Ward observes: “All the 
Hindus acknowledge that it is a great mistake for a man to have 
two wives; especially if both live in one house”.* 2 Dubois notes 
significantly: “Polygamy is tolerated amongst persons of high 
rank such as Rajahs, Princes, statesmen and others. None the less 
plurality of wives amongst the great is looked upon as an infraction 
of law and custom, in fact, as an abuse ... I know only of one 
case iii which a man can legally marry a second wife, his first wife 
being still alive; and that is when, after he has lived for a long time 
with his wife, she is certified to be barren, or if she has borne only 
female children. . . .But even in this ca§e, before a man con- 


758 


ECONOMIC & SOCIAL CONDITIONS IN INDIA IN 18TH CENTURY 


tracts a second marriage it is necessary that he should obtain the 
consent of the first; and she is always regarded as the chief 
wife and retains all her prerogatives”. 63 

But polygamy had become a regular and notorious practice 
among those who were regarded as KuVms in Bengal and among 
some of the Brahmins of Mithila. Highly shocking abuses which 
Kulmism produced have been graphically described by some con¬ 
temporary European travellers, and in contemporary literature. 
Among the Kullns family pedigree was like a marketable commo¬ 
dity. Claiming high lineage they sold it and amassed wealth by 
marriages with a large number of women quite regardless of age or 
marital adjustment. Sometimes out of financial considerations a 
girl of full-blown youth was married to a boy of 12 or 13 and a young 
girl was married to an old man. The Kullns seldom lived with their 
wives who spent their days in acute mental agony in their father’s 
or brother’s houses, which were occasionally visited by their 
husbands for exacting money. “A Parhi Kulin Brahmin”, remarks 
Buchanan, “may marry as many wives as he pleases, and some have 
60; but in general they cannot procure above 8 or 10. They visit 
them alternately and give themselves no sort of trouble about the 
maintenance of either the mothers or children.” 64 Referring to 
Mithila, he writes: “A man of high rank is often hired when tooth¬ 
less or even moribund, to marry a low child who is afterwards left a 
widow, incapable of marriage, for the sake of raising her father’s 
family and rendering her brothers more easily marriageable”. In the 
year 1805, the Raja of Darbhanga, who was acknowledged as the un¬ 
disputed head of the Mithila Brahmins, “prohibited any man on his 
estate from taking more than five wives; formerly it was usual for 
men to take a good many.” 65 

Dowry system was not compulsory or prevalent among those who 
were not Kullns. Raja Ram Mohan Roy, the first fearless champion 
of women’s rights in modem India, made a strong protest against 
“horrible polygamy” and wrote against Kulmism and polygamy. 

Polyandry was exceptionally practised in Indian society. 
Buchanan writes that polyandry prevailed among the Tiyahs in Mala¬ 
bar. 66 Though the Nair women had the “privilege of changing their 
husbands they did not entertain more than one husband at a time”. 67 

Remarriage of widows in high Hindu families was not permis¬ 
sible. But in 1756 Raja Rajballabh of Dacca tried to remarry his 
widowed daughter and referred the matter to the learned Pandits of 
Dravida, Telanga, Benaras, Mithila and of some other places. They 


759 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


expressed an unanimous opinion: “Women are at liberty to marry 
again if their husbands be not heard of, die, retire from the world, 
prove to be eunuchs or become out castes”. Raja Rajballabh’s efforts 
did not succeed owing to the opposition of Raja Krishnachandra of 
Nadia and the Panfats of that place. 

But remarriage of widows was permitted at some places outside 
Bengal. The Peshwas collected a tax called patdam on the remar¬ 
riage of widows. The famous Maratha General Parashuram Bhau, 
moved by the widowhood of his daughter at a very tender age, thought 
of her remarriage. The Pandits of Benaras gave an opinion in favour 
of it, but it was not possible to have this remarriage as Parashuram 
Bhau’s wife was not of the same view. 68 Widow remarriage was 
widely prevalent among the non-Brahmins of Maharashtra. There 
were two forms of remarriage —Pat and Muhurta. The Pat seems 
to have been more informal. The Mon Bhunyas of Malwa and the 
Maroo or the Jaudhpurl Brahmins “introduced this happy change in 
their social system”. 69 Raja Jay Singh II of Jaipur, Raja Zalim Singh 
of Kota and some others “rendered their names famous in the cause 
of humanity by their laudable exertions in the furtherance of that 
object.” 70 

One shocking practice rampant in certain parts of India was Sati, 
that is, women burning themselves on the funeral pyres of their hus¬ 
bands. The efforts of some of the Mughul rulers to abolish it proved 
to be fruitless. During the eighteenth century it was more widely 
prevalent in some parts of northern India on the banks of the Ganga 
and in Rajasthan 71 than in the south. Dubois writes: “In the 
southern parts of the Peninsula of India Suttees are seldom seen. I 
am convinced that in the Madras Presidency which numbers about 
thirty millions of inhabitants, not thirty widows allow themselves to 
be thus burnt alive during a year.” 72 Regarding Central India, Mal¬ 
colm notes: “The practice of Suttee or self-immolation of widows 
was found very common in Central India. .. .This usage prevailed 
most when the Rajpoots had power and influence . .. the Mahrattas, 
since they acquired paramount power in this country, have, by wise 
neglect and indifference, which neither encouraged by approval nor 
provoked by prohibition, rendered this practice very rare. In the 
whole of Central India there have not been, as far as can be learnt, 
above three or four Suttees annually for the last twenty years”. 73 In 
the south-west of India the practice was not probably so much pre¬ 
valent as in Bengal. 74 

Even regarding Bengal, Scrafton observed about the mid-eigh¬ 
teenth century that the practice was “far from common and was not 


760 


ECONOMIC & SOCIAL CONDITIONS IN INDIA IN 18TH CENTURY 

complied with by those of illustrious families”, 75 and Stavorinus wrote 
just after a few years that it was in practice amiong “some castes”. 76 
Sati was not universally prevalent among all castes. But its number 
increased considerably during the closing years of the eighteenth 
century and the early years of the nineteenth century. In the year 
1799 twenty-two wives of a Kulin Brahmin burnt themselves with 
his dead body at Nadia. About the same time many wives of a KuVin 
Brahmin offered themselves as Sati on the funeral pyre of their hus¬ 
bands at Sukchara, three miles east of Serampore. About three 
hundred women burnt themselves with their husbands within forty 
miles round Calcutta in the year 1804. 

Compulsion may have been used in some cases by priests and 
relations to force women to offer themselves as Satis . But it often 
was the result of conjugal fidelity. Bolts writes in this connection: 
“Even those very women, who live sequestered from the world, and 
of course are inexperienced in such difficulties and misfortunes as 
will render life irksome and impel to desperation, often manifest much 
fortitude as amazes Europeans but to hear of, in the deaths which 
they voluntarily brave of burning alive with the dead bodies of 
their husbands in funeral pyres”. 77 Another contemporary writer 
Scrafton observes: “Another circumstance that contributes to 
form their general character, is their marrying when infants, and 
yet no women are more remarkable for the custom of burning with 
their husbands. Many authors ascribe this to have been instituted 
to prevent their wives poisoning themselves; but I am persuaded that 
they submit to it by a nice sense of honour and conjugal affection.” 78 
“Such is the influence of customs and sense of shame”, writes Crau- 
furd, “that women of highest birth will undergo this awful sacrifice 
with as much fortitude and compassion as ever were exhibited by 
any philosopher of antiquity.” 79 The Dutch traveller Stavorinus, 
who witnessed a ScCti case at Chinsura on 25 November, 1770, men¬ 
tions that the woman “underwent everything with the greatest irn 
trepidity and her countenance seemed at times to be animated with 
pleasure, even at the moment when she was ascending the funeral 
pile”. 80 

New forces which appeared in the first three decades of the 
nineteenth century as a result of the spread of western education, 
the growth of an enlightened public opinion under the leadership 
of Raja Ram Mohan Roy and consciousness on the part of some offi¬ 
cers of the Company’s Government, some influence of Christian mis¬ 
sionaries, helped the Government of Lord William Bentinck to pass 

761 


THE MABATHA SUPREMACY 


the Regulation XVII, dated 4 December, 1829, abolishing the Sati 
practice. 

Slavery was another common social evil. From the medieval 
period “slaves formed a familiar feature of every respectable Muslim 
home”. 81 Slavery was widely prevalent in India during the eigh¬ 
teenth century. There were two types of slavery in India,—domes¬ 
tic slavery and feudal servitude. In the latter the serfs attached to 
lands were considered to be property of their masters, and when lands 
were transferred from one master to another they had also to change 
masters. This practice prevailed both in the north and south of 
India. Referring to the Pariahs of Malabar, Dubois writes: “All the 
Pariahs bom in the country are serfs for life, from father to son, 
and are part and parcel of the land on which they are born. The 
landowner can sell them along with the soil and can dispose of them 
when and how he pleases.” 82 But the landowners sold their slaves 
only “in cases of great emergency” and not ordinarily. During his sur¬ 
vey of South India from 1800-1806, 83 Buchanan saw many slaves 
there. 

Circumstances which forced persons to sell themselves as slaves 
are mentioned in some slavery documents of the 18th century and 
the early nineteenth century. 84 It is mentioned in these how a poor 
and needy man sold himself under perpetual bondage to a rich man 
of his locality and also how one sold his children (males or females) 
as slaves or servants in lieu of money. Persons sold theipselves or 
their children as slaves on account of distress caused by natural cala¬ 
mities like famines, 85 floods, etc. Mr. Day, Collector of Dacca, wrote 
to the Committee of Revenue in Calcutta on 2 March, 1785: 
“The long continued distress this district has laboured under from 
general scarcity of grain, and the failure of crops in consequence of 
the last deluge, has reduced its inhabitants to the lowest pitch of misery 
and distress; the poor and the lowest class of people, to secure them¬ 
selves a subsistence are reduced to a sale of their children and many 
hundred have been purchased.” Referring to the districts of Patna 
and Bihar, Buchanan writes: “Kurmis and Dhanuks born free occa¬ 
sionally give themselves up as slaves when they fall into distress.” 86 
About Central India, Malcolm notes: “Numbers date their condition 
from a famine or scarcity, when men sold their children to those 
who were able to support them, with a natural view of preserving 
the lives of their offspring, at the same time that they obtained means 
of protecting their own.” 87 As it has been pointed out by Malcolm, 
“Slavery in Malwa, and adjoining provinces, is chiefly limited to 
Sondees; but there is, perhaps, no part of India where there are so 


762 


ECONOMIC & SOCIAL CONDITIONS IN INDIA IN 18TH CENTURY 


many slaves of this sex. The dancing-girls are all purchased when 
young, by the Naikins, or heads of the different sets or companies, 
who often lay out large sums in these speculations. Female children 
and grown-up young women are bought up by all ranks. Among the 
Rajpoot chiefs these slaves are very numerous, as also in the houses 
of the principal Brahmins. The usage, however, descends to the 
lowest classes, and few merchants or cultivators are without mis¬ 
tresses or. servants of this description: male slaves are rare, and. never 
seen but with men of some rank and property, with whom they are 
usually the confidential servants.” 88 Malcolm refers to the “mixed 
progeny of these unfortunate women” (female slaves). Buchanan 
holds that in northern India, the Rajputs, Khatris and Kayasthas 
openly kept “women slaves of any pure tribe, and the off-springs of 
such connections were classed in one group for marriage.”* 9 Rich 
Muslim families in Bihar maintained large number of male slaves 
called Nafars and female slaves called Lc&undis. 90 They also kept a 
distinct class of slaves known as Moldzddds. 91 

In Indian families slaves were not ordinarily subject to harsh 
treatment. The Committee of Circuit rightly observed in June, 1972: 
“The ideas of slavery borrowed from our American colonies, will 
make every modification of it appear in the eyes of our countrymen 
in England a horrible evil. But it is far from otherwise in this 
country; here slaves are treated as the children of the families to 
which they belong and often appear in a much happier state by their 
slavery than they could have hoped by the enjoyment of liberty.” 92 
In the opinion of Malcolm slaves were “generally treated more like 
adopted children than menials.” 93 Tod notes that the slaves of Mewar 
received good treatment. We get the following account of slavery 
prevalent in Peninsular India in a Report by William Chaplin, print¬ 
ed under the authority of the Commissioner in the Deccan: “It is 
however a very mild and mitigated servitude rather than absolute 
slavery. ... Slaves are treated by the Hindoos with great indul¬ 
gence, and if they conduct themselves well are considered rather as 
hereditary servants of the family than as menials. They become 
domesticated in the houses of the upper classes, who treat them with 
affection and allow them to intermarry with the female slaves, and 
offsprings of their connection, though deemed base born, if males, are 
often considered free; but if females, they remain slaves. Marriage 
however is equivalent almost to emancipation, because when married, 
slaves become rather an encumbrance to their owners.” 938 

Compared to this the condition of the slaves in European, Eura¬ 
sian and Portuguese families, particularly in Calcutta, was hard. 


763 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


They were subject to various indignities and even corporal punish¬ 
ments for trivial offences. Sir William Jones observed in his charge 
to the Grand Jury in Calcutta in 1783: “I am assured from evidence 
which, though not all judicially taken, has the strongest hold on my 
belief that the condition of slaves within our jurisdiction is, beyond 
imagination, deplorable, and that cruelties are daily practised on 
them, chiefly on those of the tender age and the weaker sex.” 94 

The French and the English Companies, the Portuguese and the 
Maghs of Arakan carried on traffic in slaves, and there was a slave 
market in Calcutta in the eighteenth century. Slaves were carried 
from one part of India to another and were also imported into Bombay 
and Calcutta from Africa and some areas round the Persian Gulf, 
America mid Mauritius. Coffree (African) boys and girls were sold 
as slaves in Calcutta. The Portuguese and traders of some other 
European countries transported Indian slaves to St. Helena, the 
French islands in the Indian Ocean, and to Ceylon. Against the un¬ 
lawful selling of Indian slaves in St. Helena the Govemor-General-in- 
Council of Fort William (Bengal) issued a proclamation on 5 
August 1794, that “criminal prosecutions for the public offence and 
civil actions for the private injury arising from the unlawful sale or 
giving away of any person as a slave at St. Helena or elsewhere... 
will be instituted here against such persons as are amenable to the 
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of Judicature, and against whom 
sufficient evidence can be obtained to support the same; and more¬ 
over, that in future all persons in whose service natives shall embark 
from Bengal to England, will be required to give good and sufficient 
security against such natives being sold or given away as slaves at 
St. Helena or any other .place or settlement during the voyage to 
Europe.” 

Under the influence of humanitarian forces during the first half 
of the nineteenth century, slavery was abolished and the India Act 
of 1843 removed legal recognition of slavery. 

NOTES 

1. Travels of Sebastian Manrique, Ed. by Luard & Hosten, Haklayt Society, Vol. I, 
pp. 64-65. 

2. Cited by Mukerjee, R. K., Economic History of India, (1600-1800), p. 57. 

3. Mukerjee, R. K.., op. cit., p. 82. 

4. Bolts, William, Considerations on Indian Affairs (1772), p. 194.. 

5. Verelst, Henry, Narrative of the Transactions in Bengal from 176(1-64. 

6. Bolts, W., op. cit., p. 74. 

7. Abbe Raynal, History of the Settlements and Trade of Europeans in the East, 
etc., Vol. II, p. 149. 

8. Sinha, S. C., Indo-British Economy of Hundred Years Ago. 

9. Dow, History of Hindustan; Vol. HI, p. LXI. 

10. Bolts, W, op. cit., p.. 73. 

11. Ibid, p. 19. 


764 


ECONOMIC & SOCIAL CONDITIONS IN INDIA IN 18TH CENTURY 


12. Martin, Eastern India, p. 19. 

13- Madras Consultation Books, quoted in Wheeler’s Early Records of British India, 

pp. 81-86. 

14. Abbe Raynal, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 147. 

15. Martin, op. cit., Vol. Ill, p. 289- 

16- Buchanan, Francis, Journey from Madras to Mysore , Canara and Malabar, Vol. I, 
p. 371. 

17. Malcolm, John, Memoir of Central India (1880 edition), Vol. I, pp. 164-65. 

18. Siyar-ul-Mutakherin, p. 277. 

19. Abbe Raynal, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 185. 

20. Khan, Shafat Ahmad, John Marshall in India, p. 416. 

21. ‘Ranade, M- G., Miscellaneous Writings, pp. 334-35. 

21a. Buchanan, Francis, op. cit., Vol- I, p. 195. 

22. Grose, Voyage to the East Indies, Vol. I, p. 183. 

23. Stavorinus, Voyage to the East Indies, Vol. HI, p. 60. 

24. Asiatic Annual Register, 1799, Miscellaneous Tracts, p. 125. 

25 Martin, Eastern India, Vol III, pp. 167-168 and 452-454. 

26 • Sir Charies Grant served in the commercial branch of the Company^ between 

1773-1793, and became subsequently a Director of the Company. In 1792 he 
prepared a prejudiced Report about Indian religion and society, which he sub¬ 
mitted to the Court of Directors in 1797. 

27. Smith, Life of Henry Martyn, p. 163. 

28. Dubois, Letters on the State of Christianity, p. 16. 

29. Ward, A View of the History, Literature and Religion of the Hindoos, Vol II, 

Introduction, LX-LXHI. 

30. Abbe de Guyon, A New History of the East Indies, Vol. I, p. 53. 

31- Craufurd, Sketches chiefly relating to the History , Religion, etc. of the Hindus, 
Vol. I. 

32. Orme, Historical Fragments of the Mughal Empire, ?tc., p. 431. 

33. Forbes, Oriental Memoirs, Vol. I, p. 139. 

34. F. W. Thomas, The History and Prospects of British Education in India , (London, 
1891), p. 148. 

35. Grant Duff, History of the Mahrattas, Vol. II (1921 ed.), p. 532. 

36- Munro's Minute on Native Education, dated 10th March, 1826 (Gleig, Life of 

Sir Thomas Munro , Vol. II, Appendix XII). 

37. Calcutta Review, 1872, Vol. IV, p. 97. 

38 Calcutta Review, Vol. VI, p. 405, footnote. 

39. Calcutta Review, 1885, p. 264. 

40. George Forster, Journey from Surat to England, Vol. I, p. 49. 

41. Forbes, op. cit., Vol. II (1813), pp. 233-234. 

42. K. K. Datta, Bengal Subah, VoL I, pp. 17-19. 

43 • Introduction to the Typical Selections from Oriya Literature, Vol. II, p. xxvi., 

44. Ibid. 

45. Ives, Voyage to India, p. 29. 

46 Craufurd, op. cit., Vol. II, pp. 12-13. 

47. Malcolm, Memoir of Central India, Vol. II (1880 ed.) p. 157. 

48. Elphinstone, Report on the Territories lately conquered from the Peshwa (1822), 
p. 751. 

49. Forbes, op. cit., Vol. II. (1813), pp. 505-506 

50. Malcolm, op. cit., Vol. II, (1880 ed.), pp- 362-63. 

51. Ives, Voyage, p. 26 

52. Martin, Eastern India, Vol. I, p. 152 and pp. 198-206; Vol. II, pp. 487-490; Vol III, 
p. 176. Also Wilson, A Sketch of the Religious Sects of the Hindus, Vol. I, 
pp. 31-33. 

53. Forbes, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 74; Vol. Ill, p. 327. 

54. Orme, op. cit., p. 465- 

55. Dubois, Hindu Manners, Customs and Ceremonies, (3rd edition, 1943), p. 313. 
56 Dow, History of Hindostan, Vol. I, p. LXXV. 

56a. Dubois, Abbe J. A., op. cit., p. 340- 
57. Forster, A Journey, etc., Vol. H, p. 57. 

58- Buchanan, Patna-Gaya Report, Vol. I, pp. 269-270. 

59- Forbes, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 391. 

60- Malcolm, op. cit., Vol. I, (1880 ed.), pp- 147-60. 

61. Holwell, Interesting Historical Events , pp. 170-171. 

765 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


62. Ward, History etc., of the Hindoos, Vol. I, p. 133. 

63. DUbois, op. cit., pp 207-208. 

64. Cited by Martin, Eastern India, Vol II, p. 271- 

65. Buchanan, Pumea Report, p. 260. 

66. Buchanan, A Journey from Madras, etc., Vol. II, p. 416. 

67. Dubois, op. cit., p. 16, footnote 2. 

68- S. N. Sen, Administrative System of the Marathas, 2nd edition, p. 406. 

69. The Bengal Spectator, April, 1842. 

70. Ibid. 

71. Tod, Annals and.Antiquities of Rajasthan (Crooke’s edition), Vol. n, pp. 737-739. 

72. Dubois, op. cit., p. 357, footnote 

73- Malcolm, op. cit., Vol II; pp 170-171. 

74. Forbes, Oriental Memoirs , Vol. n, p. 373. 

75. Scrafton, Reflections on the Government of Indostan, p. 11. 

76. Stavorinus, Voyage to East India, Vol. I, p. 441. 

77. Bolts, Considerations on India Affairs, p. 7. 

78. Scrafton, Reflections on the Government of Indostan, pp. 110-111. 

79. Craufurd, op. cit., Vol. II, pp. 15-16. 

80. Stavorinus, Voyage, etc., p. 448. 

81. Kunwar Muhammad Ashraf, Life and Conditions of the People of Hindustan 
(1200-1500 A.D.), pp. 188-189. 

82. Dubois, op. cit., p. 56. 

83. Ibid. 

84. K. K. Datta, Bengal Subah, Vol. I, pp. 492-494. 

85. Bengal famine of 1770; famine in Bombay in 1790; famine in the Deccan in 1803. 
Banaji, Slavery in British India, p. 4. 

86. Buchanan, PatnarGaya Report, VoL I, p. 288. Buchanan surveyed the Bihar 
districts from 1809 to 1811. 

87. Malcolm, op. cit., Vol. II, (1880 ed.), p. 165. 

88. Ibid, pp. 164-5. 

89. Buchanan, PatnarGaya Report, Vol. I, p. 357. 

90. Ibid, p. 287. 

91. Ibid, p. 288. 

92. O’Malley, History of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, p. 359. 

93- Malcolm, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 167. 

93a. Chaplin, William, Report of the Fiscal and Judicial System of Administration 
etc. in the Deccan, 1824. 

94. Carey, The Good Old Days of the Honourable John Company, Vol. I, p. 369. 


766 



CHAPTER XXII 


TRADE AND INDUSTRY 

India lived in her villages and agriculture was the very backbone 
of her economic life. The Indian village was a self-sufficient unit. 
In times of normal rainfall it produced sufficient foodgrains for its 
subsistence. Other needs of the people living in it were few and 
they were met by the village artisans. The agricultural sur¬ 
plus went to the King in the form of land revenue, and the peasant, 
after paying the government, had little surplus left with him for 
purchasing the goods of urban industry. What remained went to 
meet his needs of salt, spices and clothing. In the circumstances, 
there could be little exchange of goods between the village and 
town. 

Besides meagreness of demand, another factor restricting 
exchange of goods between the rural communes and towns was 
lack of good roadways. Before the nineteenth century, no pukka 
roads, with bridges spanning waterways, existed and merchandise 
had to be transported by pack-animals. Banjaras driving thou¬ 
sands of loaded bullocks were no uncommon sight. But the 
bullocks themselves consumed a lot. This raised the cost of haul¬ 
ing goods, restricting trade to commodities of luxury, display and 
high value, which only rulers and their retinue—the feudal nobility 
and court officials, could afford to purchase. 

The second restricting factor to the enlargement of trade in 
the middle ages down to the end of the 18th century was the cus¬ 
toms duties ( zokat ) and tolls levied on goods in transportation from 
the place of production to its final destination. The injunctions of 
the Nitis that merchants were ornaments of the kingdom remained 
in the book. The reality was otherwise. Endless levies on goods 
brought to the market or in transit by state officials and zamindars 
were a source of perpetual harassment to the producers and carriers 
of goods. The Peshwd Diaries, Chapekar and Chaplin, list over fifty 
Pattis or levies on goods bought or sold or in transit. 1 

Khafi Khan’s comments on the subject are worth reproducing: 

“The rahdari in particular is condemned by righteous and 

just men as a most vexatious impost and oppressive to travellers.. 


767 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


but a large sum is raised by it. In most parts of the Imperial 
territories the faujddrs and jagirddrs by force and tyranny, now 
exact more than ever from the traders and poor and necessitous 
travellers. The zaminddrs also, seeing that no inquiries are 
made, extort more on roads under royal officers. By degrees 
matters have come to such a pass that between the time of leav¬ 
ing the factory or port and reaching their destination, goods and 
merchandise pay double their cost price in tolls. Through the 
villainy and oppression of the toll-collectors and zaminddrs , 
the property, the honour, and the lives of thousands of travellers 
and peaceful wayfarers are frittered away.” 2 

This is not to sa^ that trade and industry did not exist in the 
country. The imperial court, its nobility and its retinue, its feuda¬ 
tories and provincial officials with their establishments, though 
small in number compared to the general mass of people, formed a 
considerable class; they liked to eat, dress and live well and created 
a great demand for articles of luxury and display. The poor man 
contented himself with the rough cloth woven in the village, but the 
rich decked themselves with fine Bengal muslins, Benaras silk, 
Dacca calicoes and Kinkhabs of Ahmadabad (silk cloth) shot with 
gold thread; their wives were loaded with jewellery in gold 
and diamonds, rubies and pearls; their drawing rooms were covered 
with fine carpets and contained beautiful furniture and objects of 
art. It was these things that attracted the foreign traders. Between 
the rich class and the foreign companies they created a demand not 
only for spices, but for cotton and silk piece-goods, Kinkhabs, indigo, 
saltpetre, etc. 

The organisation of industry for supplying the needs of the rural 
community was primitive. The artisans formed part of the village 
community, worked for the villagers part-time and were allotted a 
share in the produce of the farms fixed by custom and rarely by the 
market forces of demand and supply. They often worked on small 
farms of their own. 

The producers of high quality luxury goods worked either in 
their homes or the State Kdrkhands (workshops) in the towns. 
Such village artisans who acquired special skills in their crafts, also 
made their contribution to the supply of these luxury goods. Nor¬ 
mally the elder craftsmen trained their children in their hereditary 
occupation. As most of the craftsmen were poor, they worked for 
merchants who advanced them money for raw materials and their 
Wages. Till the stipulated quantity of goods was produced for the 
merchant, the craftsmen were bound to work for them. The finish- 


768 


TRADE AND INDUSTRY 


ed products were placed on the market by the merchant himself or 
the foreign company’s agents. 

Quite often the rulers and nobles had direct dealings with the 
artisans. They organised Karkhanas at their capitals. Bernier des¬ 
cribes large halls occupied by different craftsmen under the direction 
of daroghas who controlled them. The rulers sometimes showed 
interest in their work and encouraged promising craftsmen by spe¬ 
cial rewards. 3 

There was no home market for luxury goods. The foreign com¬ 
panies could offer in return woollens, lead and tin for which there 
was a small market. So most of what the foreign companies pur¬ 
chased had to be paid for in specie. India thus became a sink of 
precious metals throughout the 16th and 17th centuries. 

India in these centuries was the magnet of the world’s precious 
metals, her commercial activity far surpassing European commerce. 
The European merchants of Venice, Genoa and Lisbon acted as inter¬ 
mediaries of traffic in the precious goods that found their way to 
Europe through the Levantine and Egyptian 'ports or by the newly 
opened sea-route via the Cape of Good Hope. In 1600, neither Por¬ 
tugal nor Holland nor England produced much that could be export¬ 
ed to India and the East Indies in exchange for spices and pepper of 
the southern Islands and cotton and silk goods, pepper, indigo and 
saltpetre of India that were in world-wide demand. Only broad 
cloth, gold and silver embroidery and a few other luxuries for the 
n bility, coral, tin, and lead were imported in India from Europe, 
that therefore had to pay chiefly in bullion or specie for the increas¬ 
ing value of Indian exports. It was India that was the hub of this 
world commerce prior to the period of the Industrial Revolution. 

By the end of the 18th century, however, trade, both internal 
and foreign, suffered a decline. There were many causes that 
brought about the decline; but the chief one was lack of peace in the 
land. The Mughul empire was in decline and it could no longer keep 
peace in the country. In the first place, the Mughul armies were 
exhausted by Aurangzib’s long-drawn Deccan war; the wars of suc¬ 
cession between his sons and grandsons drained the empire of finan¬ 
cial and human resources and weakened the imperial fabric; foreign 
adventurers began swooping down the land from the north-west 
plundering imperial treasure; governors of provinces affected in¬ 
dependence and were challenged by other officers of the empire; 
there were risings of local populations like those of the Rajputs, the 
Sikhs, the Jats, the Bundelas and the Marathas. All this affected 

769 


M.S.—48 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


the tranquillity of the land which, in India, was the first requisite of 
a prosperous agriculture, a thriving trade and a flourishing maritime 
commerce. 

The rise of Maratha power and its expansion in the 18th cen¬ 
tury was another factor which ultimately affected adversely the 
general production of wealth and its distribution through trade and 
commerce. In the earlier half of the century, the Marathas appear¬ 
ed to carry everything before them and evolve a new order to re¬ 
place the old. But their imperial design was frustrated by a com¬ 
bination of local Muslim chiefs and the Abdali Shah of Afghanistan 
in 1761 at the battle of Panipat. After this, the Indian empire of 
the Mughuls dissolved into a number of competing Subahdaris and 
Zamindaris and warring Hindu kingdoms, and the country suffered 
the worst anarchy it had ever witnessed. 

The Maratha system of exercising their supremacy over con¬ 
quered provinces by demand of tribute ( chauth ), without organis¬ 
ing proper administration, was wasteful and expensive. Their 
armies overran territories, destroying everything which they could 
not take away and impoverishing the rulers and the subjects who 
were supposed to provide extra funds for meeting Maratha demands. 
In their hurry to grasp the much-needed cash, their demands of tri¬ 
bute were often sold to bankers at a discount and districts were 
placed at the mercy of rapacious money-lenders. Many old cities 
like Lahore, Delhi, Agra, Ahmadabad, Cambay which were great 
trading centres, lay in ruins. Nana Phadnis who tried to obtain art 
objects from Hindustan, was informed by his agent that skilled arti¬ 
sans were no longer to be found in Delhi or Agra, because there was 
no demand for the products of their crafts. 4 James Forbes travel¬ 
ling in India in 1785 lamented: “The country through which we tra¬ 
velled for several days past has presented a melancholy picture occa¬ 
sioned by a dreadful famine which had sadly diminished population 
and left the survivors in a state of misery. At Gwalior whole 
suburbs were strewn with skeletons; from thence to Agra the villa¬ 
ges were generally uninhabited and the land become a wilderness 
from want of cultivation. In Agra on all sides there were objects 
of fallen grandeur; mosques, palaces, gardens, caravanserais and 
mausoleums mingled in one general ruin. The country between 
Muttra and Delhi had been completely depopulated by famine. 
Ruins of sarais, mosques, mausoleums and other magnificent struc¬ 
tures surround the city of Delhi.” 5 

Besides, Indian shipping was ruined first by the Portuguese 
then by Dutch and English rivalry in the Asiatic seas, and Indian 


770 


TRADE AND INDUSTRY 


trade by differential trade monopoly and extraordinary privileges at 
home in favour of the European factors and merchants who obtained 
special privileges from the Indian rulers and misused them. While 
\ the Indian cotton industry was also hard hit by the loss of the 
English market due to the prohibition since the beginning of the 
18th century of the import of Indian calicoes and silk, by the dis¬ 
couragement by the East India Company of the manufacture of 
cloth goods of high counts and silk fabrics in India, it also suffered 
by the loss of her old markets in the Indian Archipelago, Persia and 
Africa, with the dwindling of the Indian mercantile marine. 

Another factor in the declining trade was, as pointed out by Dr. 
Satish Chandra, the deepening crisis of the jagirdari system which 
reduced the available social surplus. The number of government 
officials increased while the price of silver declined, which led to a 
rise in the cost of administration. The Mughul emperors lived in 
great style, luxury and pomp and were imitated by their nobles and 
subdhdars. This, no doubt, gave employment to artists and artisans, 
but did not solve the problem of agricultural production. Agricul¬ 
tural production, then as now, formed the mainstay of the Indian 
economy and a growth In the national income could proceed only 
from a rise in the volume and value of agricultural produce. A rise 
in the requirements of the ruling class without a corresponding rise 
in agricultural production resulted directly or indirectly in the 
growth of economic pressure on the producing classes. During the 
early part of the Mughul period (1530-1627) there is evidence of a 
continuous expansion of the cultivated area. But the limit was 
reached and Shah Jahan had to scale down the salaries of his noble¬ 
men. The financial crisis could not be solved by reduction in sala¬ 
ries. Aurangzib launched the Deccan War which exhausted the im¬ 
perial resources. What was required was the rapid expansion of 
trade and industry and increased agricultural production. But the 
barriers of the existing social order and the general disturbed poli¬ 
tical situation encompassed trade and industry. 6 Hen6e any im¬ 
provement in the situation was not possible. The Indian economy 
was a shrinking economy. 

Indian Inland Trade and Transport: 

A large inland trade was maintained efficiently by organised 
caravan and river-borne traffic, a network of banking and wholesale 
mercantile establishments in all the trade and industrial centres of 
India with branches abroad and the system of payment by hundis. 
Caravans and Cafilas travelled long distances, as for instance from 
Chittagong, Hughli and Kasimbazar to Agra via Patna, Benaras and 


771 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Allahabad; from Agra to Multan and Lahore and thence to Kabul 
and Kandahar; and from Agra to Surat via Burhanpur or via Ajmer 
and from Agra to Sakkar and Lahari Bandar, on the Indus river. 

Travel from Surat to Agra occupied about 35 to 40 days and cost 
about Rs. 40 to Rs. 45 on a bullock cart with two oxen. The journey 
from Agra to Lahore took 15 to 21 days. From Agra to Benaras, 
Patna, Hughli, Dacca and Chittagong in Bengal the river boats called 
‘patellas’ plied regularly on the Jamuna and the Ganga or the Padma 
bringing salt, opium, king (asafoetida), lead and carpets from Nor¬ 
thern India. From the industrial centres of Kasimbazar, Dacca 
Malda, Patna, Baikunthpur and Benaras the far-famed silks and 
muslins went via Agra to Lahore and thence to Persia, Turkey and 
Khorasan. Plain calicoes from Bengal went to Masulipatam in order 
to be dyed or printed there and silks to Patna, Agra, Ahmadabad and 
Surat to be fabricated into superior fabrics. Saltpetre and sugar 
similarly moved out to the ports. From far-off Bengal, sugar came 
regularly to Surat for supply to Golkonda and Karnatak and export 
to Arabia, Mesopotamia and Persia. From Surat about 7,000 to 8,000 
bales of raw cotton were carried down the Ganga to Bengal and bar¬ 
tered there for Kasimbazar silks, brought thence to Surat. The sur¬ 
plus cotton of Gujarat was also disposed of to China, Persia and 
Arabia. Bengal indigo came to Masulipatam. Indigo from Bayana 
and Ahmadabad went to the West through the port of Surat. The 
inferior indigo from other places went to Kabul and Kashgar. Gra¬ 
dually the trade shifted to Bengal which became the chief source of 
supply at the beginning of the 19th century. The far-famed red 
cloth of Masulipatam went to Persia both by the land route via Gol¬ 
konda and Surat or by the sea-route. Awadh calicoes, especially the 
Derriabads, went to Europe through Surat after being dyed and 
finished at Agra and Ahmadabad. Hence these were sometimes 
called Agra clothing. ‘Agra clothing’, which had an exceedingly 
profitable market in Persia, the Red Sea coast and the Indian Archi¬ 
pelago, included North Indian cloth made in Awadh or the Punjab, 
but bleached and transformed in Surat, Broach, Ahmadabad apd 
neighbouring English factories. Some of these calicoes, after bleach¬ 
ing, found also a suitable market in England . Similarly, large quan¬ 
tities of silk came, as Tavernier tells us, from Bengal to Ahmadabad 
and Surat, where they were woven into fabrics. 7 

Saltpetre from the Patna region used to come all the way from 
Bihar to Surat. It was estimated by Abbe Raynal that the Euro¬ 
peans exported about ten million pounds for the use of theif settle¬ 
ments in Asia or for their home consumption in their respective 


772 


TRADE AND INDUSTRY 

countries where it was sold for about four times the price on the 
spot. The inland trade in salt produced in the Punjab, Sambhar 
Lake and elsewhere, was also very important. 

The Decline of Trade: 

The inland trade in foodgrains was in the hands of the Banjaras 
who moved from one part of the country to another in bullock con¬ 
voys and also catered to the requirements of armies on the march. 
European armies in the 18th century also depended upon them for 
their supplies. With the breakdown of the Mughul authority the 
system of policing the roads and customs disintegrated. In large 
parts of Central India, subject to MarathS invasions and Pindari 
raids, inland traffic was much impeded and subjected to vexatious 
imposts of Rajput princes and petty chiefs. 

The period of anarchy developed, however, its characteristic 
trade and insurance organisation. This is vividly described by John 
Malcolm: 


“Every trader had his party of armed men, formed connec¬ 
tions with ministers and commanders of armies, contracted 
engagements with plundering chieftains and robbers and had 
his goods, whether exported or imported, guarded like the bag¬ 
gage of an army. The insurance companies at Ujjain, Indore and 
Mandasor, kept a small corps, which were supported by the high 
premiums charged on all articles that were exported or imported 
between Malwa, Gujarat, the Deccan and Hindustan. These 
companies were compelled to bribe the most powerful plunde¬ 
rers of the day, who in their demands upon them and the mer¬ 
chants, had no other standard than their own temporary inte¬ 
rests.” 8 

Yet in spite of sporadic disturbances the smooth movement of trade 
from one part of the sub-continent to another continued, maintained 
by a considerable traffic in Hundis. At the beginning of the 19th 
century Malcolm notes: 

“The provinces of Central India send rich produce to 
Deccan and Gujarat; but export few articles to Hindustan; and 
to Mirzapore and Benares, from whence a great proportion of 
their imports are received, hardly any goods whatever are sent; 
add to this* that the bankers and agents of Ujjain and Indore 
are often the medium of the Gujarat payments for the merchan¬ 
dise from the Bengal provinces, and we shall account for a great 
proportion of the remittances that are made.” 9 


773 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


In 1817 Malcolm notes that the exchange was five per cent premium 
for bills on Farrukhabad, Benaras, Delhi, etc., which was about the 
same rate as formerly when the country was in prosperity. 

In Bengal the inland trade and prosperity of artisans and mer¬ 
chants suffered a serious set-back due to the innumerable ways of 
violence and transgression of the East India Company’s agents, 
gomastas “erecting themselves’*, in the words of Warren Hastings, 
“into the lords and' oppressors of the country instead of confining 
themselves in honest and fair trade”. The Nawab Mir Qasim com¬ 
plained without avail to the English Governor in 1762: 

“From the factory of Calcutta to Kasimbazar, Patna and 
Dacca, all the English chiefs with their Gomastas, officers and 
Agents, in every district of the Government, act as collectors, 
renters, zamindars, and Talookdars, and setting up the Com¬ 
pany’s colours, allow no power to my officers. And besides this, 
the gomastas and other servants in every district, in every 
gunge, perganah and village, carry on a trade in oil, fish, straw, 
bamboos, rice, paddy, betel-nuts and other things; and every 
man with a Company’s Dustuck in his hand regards himself as 
not less than the Company.” 

This, the Nawab averred, went on with impunity “in every pargana, 
in every village and in every factory”. 10 

And this resulted in the abandonment of several prosperous 
towns, markets and aurangs. The Collector of Dacca reported to 
the English Governor: “Many hauts, gauts and parganas have been 
ruined”. Similarly, in South India the oppressions of the East India 
Company were responsible for the decline of the trade and industry 
in Madras. Thus R. & J. Dodsley observe: 

“The trade of Madras was some time ago thought to be upon 
the decline through the oppression of the servants of the Com¬ 
pany which has caused many merchants to withdraw. The 
Moors, Hindus and Armenians have got possession of the trade 
they were wont to carry on to Pegu, the English being now 
chiefly employed in ship-building.” 

Nor was the weaving population inconsiderable in numbers. 
It is estimated that in South India the East India Company engaged 
approximately 50,000 workers on 40,000 looms and that the total 
number of weavers of South India was probably about half a million. 
Bengal, it may be estimated, had in the middle of the 18th century 
about a million weavers. But the famine of 1770 killed off probably 


774 


TRADE AND INDUSTRY 


half of the weaving population, dealing a severe blow to the de¬ 
clining industry. This famine swept away one-third to one-half 
of the whole population of Bengal, and, coming as it did on the top 
of the miseries and oppressions of that strange masterful foreigner 
—the Company Sahib Bahadur, which squeezed the land, still exer¬ 
cises a profound influence on the imagination of the Bengalis. A 
profound sense of disappointment and tragedy dominated the mindp 
of the people. 

The contemporary historian, Syed Ghulam Husain, wrote in 
1780: 


“Life is become disgustful to most. Comparing the present 
with the past, one is apt to think that the earth is overwhelmed 
with an everlasting darkness.” 11 

In the religious lyrics of the contemporary poet Ramprasad Sen (c. 
1720-81) who lived through the manvantara (famine) catastrophe, 
we encounter a sombre, tragic attitude towards life and poignant re¬ 
cognition of the contrasts between the rich, who lived in palaces and 
owned elephants, horses and chariots, and the have-nots who did 
field work, ate rice and salt and bore on their shoulders the palan¬ 
quins of the former. “Are the Haves, Divine Mother,” he asked in 
agony, “your grandfathers and we only your discarded children?” 12 

Stages in India's Economic Decline: 

The economic decline of India may be said to have begun from 
the middle of the 17th century when the English (1652) and the 
Dutch (1665) obtained from Shah Jahan exemption from all tolls 
from Surat to all inland centres and from Hughli or Pipli to Agra 
. and Delhi and reduction of customs duties, along with other privi¬ 
leges that the Indians did not enjoy (whose inland trade thus gra¬ 
dually passed into their hands), and at the same time enforced, like 
the Portuguese, a system of cartasses or passes for Indian ships en 
route. The year 1716 saw an extraordinary reduction of customs 
duties for the English at Surat and in Bengal by a farman from Far- 
rukh-siyar, such preferential treatment greatly aiding the transfer 
of foreign and inland trade from both Indian and Dutch to English 
hands. The year 1700, exactly a century after the establishment of 
the English and Dutch companies, saw the prohibition of the use of 
Asiatic silks and printed and dyed calicoes, though these could yet 
be imported for re-exportation. This was followed up in 1720 by 
the prohibition, with certain exceptions, of the wear and use of cali¬ 
coes dyed or printed in England. 


775 


THE MAKATHA SUPREMACY 


Protective duties for the English weaving industry against 
Indian products were gradually raised to about 80 per cent in the 
subsequent decades. The next significant event was the grant of 
the Diwdni of Bengal to the English. The assumption of the Diwdni 
by the East India Company in 1765 gave it not only the whole reve¬ 
nues of the eastern provinces but also tremendous political and eco¬ 
nomic power that was at once utilised for the discouragement of 
handicrafts and the ousting of Indian, Dutch, French and Danish 
factories and merchants from trading in salt, betel-nut, tobacco and 
foodgrains. A group of zaminddrs mustered courage to submit to 
the Members of the Council in 1765 a complaint against the mono¬ 
polies and oppression of the Company’s servants, among whom there 
was a general rush towards the interior trade of the three Provinces 
due to their meagre salaries: 

“The factories of English gentlemen are many and their 
Gomastas are in all places and in every village almost through 
out the province of Bengal; tobacco, turmeric, oil, rice, Jiem^>, 
gunnies, in short in all kinds of grains, linen and whatever 
other commodities are produced in the country; that in order to 
purchase these articles, they force their money on the ryots, 
and having by these oppressive means bought their goods at a 
low rate, they oblige the inhabitants and shopkeepers to take 
them at a high price, exceeding what is paid in the markets; 
that they do not pay the customs due to the Sircar, but are 
guilty of all manner of seditious and injurious acts. There is 
now scarce any thing of worth left in the country.” 

Only four years after the Diwdni (1769) an arbitrary order was 
passed by the East India Company for the prohibition of home work 
of the silk weavers and their forced labour in the English Company’s 
factories. In that very year the French Company which found 
their trade reduced to insignificant proportions was abolished. 
Chevalier complained from Chandernagore that the English Com¬ 
pany imposed customs duties from which the French had always 
been exempted, abolished old privileges, invalidated their passports, 
and even insulted their colours. The French historian, Abbe Raynal. 
also points out that the English Company monopolised the sale of 
salt, betel and tobacco, augmented the customs and at last caused an 
edict to be published which forbade every European except the 
English from trading in the interior parts of Bengal. Besides, 
weavers were forbidden to work for others until the English Com¬ 
pany’s orders were completed. The weavers consequently were for¬ 
ced to deliver their goods at any price that the Company’s agents 


776 


TRADE AND INDUSTRY 


fixed for them. On the proposal of the Dutch Company “for a parti¬ 
cipation with the weavers” the President of the Council at Calcutta 
wrote to the Directors in 1767 remonstrating that this would be 
tantamount “to throw off the mask and counteract the endeavours 
we use of seeming to act from the Nabob’s authority only.” 

Thus the English thenceforward had no European rivals in 
trade and industry. The Dutch finding their trade in Bengal serious¬ 
ly in jeopardy and the oppression of both the English Company’s 
agents and the Nawab’s officials intolerable, challenged the English 
by a naval expedition up the Hughli, but suffered a decisive defeat 
(1759). 

The Dutch trade, formerly very profitable, now ceased to be so. 
Within a few years the province of Bengal was held in complete 
economic grip by the English Company and its servants and agents 
through a system of monopoly, coercion and exaction that sucked 
the people dry. The system was described by a contemporary Eng¬ 
lish merchant, Bolts, as follows: 

“It may with truth be now said that the whole inland trade 
of the country, as at present conducted, and that of the Com¬ 
pany’s investment for Europe in a more peculiar degree, has 
been one continued scene of oppression, the baneful effects of 
which are severely felt by every weaver and manufacturer in 
the country, every article produced being made a monopoly in 
which the English with their Banyans and black Gomastas arbi¬ 
trarily decide what quantities of goods each manufacturer shall 
deliver, and the prices he shall receive for them.” 13 

Such a system of monopoly and coercion in which “the most 
sacred laws of society were atrociously violated” virtually continued 
till 1784, when Pitt’s India Bill placed the administration of the Com¬ 
pany under the Crown and compelled some reforms. In a minute 
of 1789 it was stated that one-third of the Company’s territory in 
x Hindustan was a jungle inhabited only by wild beasts. Lord Corn¬ 
wallis who came to India to effect a change in the administration by 
his system of land reform, created the zamindars of Hindustan on 
the analogy of the landlords of Great Britain out of a class that was 
deemed by the contemporary Indian chronicler, Ghulam Husain 
Khan, as “refractory, untrustworthy, incorrigible and accustomed to 
infest the highways, torment the subjects, ruin the revenue and dis¬ 
tress the Government.” This new landed aristocracy was built up 
as allies of the Company’s Raj by obscuring and obliterating the custo¬ 
mary rights of ryots in the cultivated land, in the pasture land and 


777 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


uncultivated waste and in irrigation, thus depressing the economic 
status of the majority of the agrarian population. Since 1793 the 
economic condition of the agriculturists of Bengal greatly deteriorat¬ 
ed, while land became the chief source of investment and social 
prestige in the country where a phonomenal decline in handicrafts 
and trade was taking place and causing serious overcrowding in 
agriculture and chronic unemployment. During this period Indian 
calicoes and silks could sell in Great Britain at a price 50 to 60 per 
cent lower than the price of the British fabrics; and the annual 
import of Indian piece goods was valued on an average at £ 2.8 
millions, representing about 33 per cent of the value of the aggre¬ 
gate imports from India. Riots and tumults among the British 
weavers in London and elsewhere, however, led to drastic protec¬ 
tion of the woollen and silk manufacturers by Acts of Parliament 
1813 was the year in which the Parliament, in order to protect the 
British manufacturers, raised the duties against the Indian piece- 
goods at their highest—78 1/3 per cent ad valorem duty on calicoes 
and 31 1/3 per cent on muslins. 

Before this year Indian silk manufactures and piece-goods made 
of cotton and silk intermixed were altogether excluded from the 
British market. At the same time the advantages of the use of 
machinery in large-scale factory production were showing theii 
effects not merely in the displacement of the Indian by the British 
goods in the home market, aided by protection, but also in the Bri¬ 
tish goods ousting the Indian goods from the Asiatic, including the 
Indian markets. In 1813 Great Britain sent out to ports east of the 
Cape of Good Hope, mainly to India, cotton goods worth £ 108,824. 
On the one hand, the manufacture and export of cloth goods quick¬ 
ly dwindled, and on the other hand, the import of British cloth 
goods into India began quickly to rise from about 1813. 

In the same year the Charter Act of 1813 was passed terminat¬ 
ing the monopoly of the East India Company and permitting private 
traders or free merchants to trade under special license. Three 
years later (1816) Abbe Dubois, who spent many years as a mis¬ 
sionary in South India, wrote: 

“This revolution (the invention of industrial development 
in England) threatens to ruin India completely. Just before re¬ 
turning to Europe I travelled through some of the manufactur¬ 
ing districts and nothing could equal the state of desolation pre¬ 
vailing in them. All the work-rooms were closed and hundreds 
of thousands of the inhabitants composing the weaver caste, 
were dying of hunger; for through the prejudices of the coun- 


778 


TRADE AND INDUSTRY 


try they could not adopt another profession without dishonour¬ 
ing themselves.” 14 

In North Bihar and Bengal, however, Buchanan’s contemporary 
survey (1808-1815) showed that the destruction of the handloom in¬ 
dustry was not so sudden and immediate as in South India as it 
appears from the account of Dubois. “Buchanan counted 6,114 
looms in Gorakhpur, 7,950 in Shahabad, 13,500 looms in Pumea 
and 4,800 looms in Malda with lakhs of women finding employment 
in cotton spinning.” 

The Charter Act of 1813 was followed up later on by the Char¬ 
ter Act of 1833 which abolished altogether the mercantile character 
of the East India Company, that had closed most of their factories 
by this time, and also considerably reduced its trade operations. 
The way was now prepared for private British capital and enterprise 
to exploit unhindered, without the license system, the resources of 
India that was already “reduced from the state of manufacturing 
to that of an agricultural country.” 

British interest in India was now focussed towards the improve¬ 
ment any export of Indian raw materials, such as cotton, silk, hides, 
oil seeds, dye stuffs and jute which were essential for the progress 
of British manufactures. 

The year 1813 saw the final conversion of India from the indus¬ 
trial workshop of the world to its richest raw material country. This 
year saw also the imposition of various discriminatory import 
duties against non-British Indian ships visiting the ports of England 
that was most injurious to Indian shipping and ship-building. Next 
year, in 1814, the British Parliament enacted that no ship, even 
though British, can enter London that has not on board 3/5 of crew 
of British mariners. In the beginning of the 19th century,. Calcutta, 
Daman, Surat, Bombay and Pegu were the major ship-building cen¬ 
tres. Between 1781 and 1813, 181 vessels were built on the Hughli 
alone and their tonnage amounted to 83,246. 15 But the industry 
declined as a result of discriminating legislation. 

Economic Factors in the British Conquest of India: 

Three important changes in the economic relations between 
England and India, which had far-reaching consequences, took place 
at the beginning of the eighteenth century. First, it was in the early 
years of the eighteenth century that English interest in trade was 
transferred definitely from the Archipelago of the East Indies to 
India. 


779 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Secondly, it was in the first decades of the eighteenth century 
that the English, anticipating the approaching disintegration of the 
Mughul empire, definitely changed the strategy of their trade. The 
year 1702 saw the union of two companies in England with one 
Charter. The United East India Company now emerged as a power¬ 
ful and adventurous corporation, backed by the Government, to 
whom they made liberal advances, and invested with the authority 
to make war and peace in India. In the past they had followed a 
cautious policy of “quiet trading” believing that the “keeping of 
soldiers beggars a nation”. But now following the policy of the 
“wise Dutch” the English began to run their factories in a manner 
that these could pay their own expenses and defend themselves 
against aggression, with fortifications and acquisition of adjacent 
hinterland. Thus the Company started on the road to become, in the 
words of Caraccioli, “the most formidable commercial republic 
known in the world since the demolition of Carthage”. 16 The French 
also had this pre-vision, for Francois Martin wrote home in 1700, 
“prosperous settlements and a few well fortified places will give (the 
Company) a great position among these people,” and fortified Pondv 
cherry. But the English did not draw the line between defence, 
aggression and piracy in India. Fifteen years earlier (1685), the 
English Company obtained permission of James II to fit out and send 
one fleet to cruise off Surat and take, plunder and destroy all Indian 
ships and vessels; and another fleet with troops to Bengal to act 
vigorously in that quarter. 

Thus piracy was openly practised by the English on both coasts 
of the Indian Peninsula. Bolts describes the result: 

“The fleet on the Malabar Coast made immense booty at sea 
from indiscriminately plundering all Indian merchant ships; 
whilst the troops in^ Bengal, under the command of Mr. Job 
Charnock, the Company chief factor at Hooghly, experienced 
many changes of fortune.” 17 

Sir John Child, the Company’s Governor at Bombay, who is des- 
scribed by Hamilton as being “guilty of every species of tyranny, 
oppression, injustice and plunder alike toward the natives and his 
own fellow subjects”, prolonged this ‘war’ until 1690. It is true that 
both the earlier piracy and Sir John Child’s imprudent aggression 
in Surat that was supported at home by his masterful Chairman 
kinsman Sir Joshiah, came to grief. Aurangzib’s seizure of the 
English factory at Surat led to the complete forfeiture of all trade 
privileges and loss of prestige of the English in India. From Bengal 
they were also expelled by Aurangzib’s viceroy in 1688. Thus the 


780 


TRADE AND INDUSTRY 


theory of the mailed fist had to be abandoned for the time being by 
the English. But terms were soon settled between the two sides 
both in Western India and Bengal. Child’s removal of the seat of 
government (1687) in the course of the Mughul war, from Surat to 
Bombay, that was directed to be made* “as strong as money and art 
could make it,” was a part of the English total plan of defence and 
cffence. 

Thus Was founded the English gateway to the East. 

Three years later (1690) in Bengal Job Charnock acquired by 
negotiation SutanatT, Govindptir and Kalikatta on a strategic site on 
the eastern bank of the Hughli most helpful to the English to ward 
off the Marathas and at the same time to fight their European rivals 
as well as the Nawab of Bengal. Here was built later on, the second 
city of the British empire, as the English after a decade (1700) re¬ 
sorted more ‘to the use of the military’ than bribery and presents 
for successfully rejecting the demands of the native officials and 
even the Nawab. On the Western Coast Mughul arms and prestige 
were dealt a severe blow by Shivaji whom the English looked up¬ 
on with fear and respect. But the feebleness of ShivajI’s succes¬ 
sors and the disorder following the death of Aurangzib were incen¬ 
tives to the English to resort to force. Surat greatly declined in 
trade and prosperity at this time, and the English were induced by 
the people of the city, fed up with local dissensions, to take over 
the possession of the castle, the government and the fleet from the 
Siddi in 1759. Though the Marathas did not interfere, the English 
in their turn recognised the strategic importance of this possession. 
“Surat which has ever been considered as the emporium of this side 
of India, admirably well suited for a general mart connecting the 
produce and wants of Hindustan, Deccan, Arabia, Persia, Europe 
and China, is besides the only check to the absolute dominion of the 
Mahrattas in these parts. 

Thirdly, the opening of the eighteenth century also saw the ac¬ 
quisition by the English of extraordinary trade privileges that en¬ 
abled them to oust native traders and merchants from both inland 
and overseas trade. In 1692 the East India Company got their cus¬ 
toms duties, transit duties and other charges commuted into an 
annual lump sum of Rs. 3,000 only. Port duties, town customs, pre¬ 
sents and other charges were, however, continued to be levied from 
the general body of native merchants. The Dutch merchants were 
at that time paying no transit tolls, but a 4 per cent duty at Hughli, 
and 5 per cent at Pipli and Balasore. At Surat they were paying 
2 1/2 per cent duty in lieu of which the English paid a sum of 


781 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Rs. 10)000 only per annum according to the terms of a farman they 
secured from Farrukh-siyar. That the native traders in particular 
were unfairly treated was recognised even by the foreigners them¬ 
selves. Thus the English Company wrote in 1698: 

“The Company have by grants, firmans and mutual stipula¬ 
tions obtained very great privileges and immunities in most 
parts of India, not only beyond any other natiops trading 
thither, but even beyond the natives themselves.” 18 

European Piracy in the Indian waters: 

The unequal struggle between the European and Indian mer¬ 
chants due to the exemption of inland dues and duties was rendered 
all the more difficult because of the danger to Indian shipping in 
the Asiatic seas from the European pirates against whom no pro¬ 
tection was forthcoming from the native administration. Through¬ 
out the 17th and 18th centuries, Indian vessels manned by Indian 
navigators and lascars moved in the Asiatic waters from Jeddah 
and Mocha on the Red sea to Malacca and Bantam in the East. 
Indian ships have been described by many European navigators and 
merchants as much bigger than the contemporary European vessels. 
It appears that the Indian vessels, intended largely for peaceful 
trade, were strongly and capaciously built, but lacked manoeuvera- 
bility and fell an easy prey to the European pirates. In certain 
ports of India there assembled as many as 500 Indian vessels. The 
Gujaratis, Canarians and the Bengalis of the eastern Bengal won 
reputation as lascars and captains. Raynal records in 1752: 

“With regards to their (Indian) sailors commonly called las¬ 
cars, the Europeans have found them serviceable in their 
voyages from one part of India to the other. They have been 
employed successfully in bringing home into our stormy lati¬ 
tudes such ships as had lost their crews.” 19 

Various kinds of ships mostly of 1,000 to 1,200 tons were built in 
numerous ship-building centres of India, the most important of 
which, in the 18th century, were Bassein, Goa, Surat, Masulipatam, 
Hughli, Dacca and Chittagong. Indian vessels used to proceed to 
the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf in the month of January, return¬ 
ing in September or October, while the voyages to the Indian Archi¬ 
pelago were undertaken in September, the ships returning in April. 
Evidently the stormy monsoon months were avoided by the Indian 
navigators and merchants in the Asiatic seas. It took .nearly three 


782 


TRADE AND INDUSTRY 


or four months to reach the African coast and the Red Sea ports; 
while the voyage to Canton on the Chinese coast via Malacca, Patani 
and Siam also took about four months. In the Archipelago Indian 
and Chinese junks moved about in large numbers. European piracy 
began in the Indian waters with the Portuguese who were especial¬ 
ly notorious on the coasts of Gujarat and Malabar and also in Bengal 
where, according to Finch, they ‘lived in no forms of subjection to 
God or Man’. Both the Dutch and the English Companies follow¬ 
ed their example, not to speak of the high-handed adventures of the 
private merchants and interlopers. That piracy was a ruthless 
weapon employed by both the Dutch and the English for ousting 
Indian vessels from trade with the Archipelago is clearly indicated 
in two English letters from Surat. In 1647 a letter was addressed 
from here to the East India Company recording the publication of 
“resolutions” by the Dutch at Surat, “at the coast and other places, 
to intercept all such shipping as they shall encounter bound thither 
(Achin. 5).” In 1658 a letter addressed from Surat to Madras con¬ 
tains the following: 

“In a postscript dealing with a Madras letter just received 
it was laid down that for the future none but the Company’s 
ships were to be allowed to trade to Achin, Bantam, or else¬ 
where. You suffering no private man’s ships of our nation 
whatsoever to voyage to and fro, neither to the ports the Honor¬ 
able Company trade not unto, as well as where they do; nay, 
not suffer Banias or Moors (vessels) (except the king’s) to trade 
at the ports the Company does, to their prejudice. The Dutch 
do not any, why we? It is our practice here, and it will be the 
better for our Master’s profit that you do it there also.” 20 

* 

Such piracy and seizure of Indian vessels at sea continued unabat¬ 
ed. The abuse became so intolerable in Bengal that in 1748 Nawab 
All Vardi Khan admonished the East India Company’s Governor 
Barwell in a parwandh as follows: 

“The Syads (Arabs), Moghuls, Armenians etc., merchants 
of Hooghly have complained that lacs of goods have been seized 
and plundered, and I am informed from foreign parts that ships 
bound to Hooghly you seize under pretence of their belonging 
to the French. The ships belonging to Antony (an Armenian) 
with lacs on board from Mocha and several curiosities sent me 
by the Sheriff of the place, you have also seized and plunder¬ 
ed.... As you were not permitted to commit piracies I write to 


783 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

you that on receipt of this you deliver up all the merchants* 
goods and effects to them.** 21 

This warning went unheeded compelling the Nawab to take re¬ 
sort to various repressive measures against the English traders in 
their different factories. But a weak ruler could not but submit 
to foreign high-handedness, backed by sea power that gradually 
drove the mercantile marine of the Indians as well as of the Arme¬ 
nians and the Turks out of the Asiatic seas. As the traffic in Indian 
merchandise was gradually transferred to the European mercantile 
marine due to European naval supremacy, the Indian merchants had 
to pay heavy freight charges while the Europeans paid nominal or no 
charges in the vessels of their own Companies. Gradually the Eng¬ 
lish Company ousted not only the Indian but also the Dutch and 
French merchants from the carrying and maritime trades. 


Indian Export of Cotton Goods: 

We would now review briefly the trend of India’s foreign 
trade in the eighteenth century. India’s articles of export were 
calicoes, raw silk and raw cotton, indigo, pepper and various drugs 
and salt-petre. The most important item was, of course, calicoes— 
the products of Gujarat, Sind, Agra, Awadh, Bihar, Bengal and the 
Coromandel Coast that were sold in England and other countries 
in Europe, the Guinea Coast and East Africa, Burma, Pegu, Siam, 
the Indian Archipelago and Japan, Persia and Western Asia. The 
total annual export of Indian handloom products by sea in the 17th 
century has been estimated by Moreland at about 50 million sq. 
yards; 15,000 bales of cotton goods were exported by the English 
merchants, and 10,000 bales by the Dutch to Europe, making a total 
of 25,000 bales or 32 millions of sq. yards for Europe excluding the 
trade of the French, the Portuguese and Danes. Markets in the Far 
East, the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf supplied by the Europeans 
as well as by Indian, Javanese, and Siamese merchants, absorbed, 
it is roughly computed, another 18 million sq. yards of cloth. One 
and a half to three million sq. yards more represented the cloth ex¬ 
port to Persia and Central Asia up to the borders of the Caspian sea 
by the land route. 22 Thus the total annual export of cotton goods 
by sea was between 50 and 60 million sq. yards, to which should be 
added 3 million sq. yards representing the export trade by thet north¬ 
western land routes. Tavernier estimates that the Dutch took from 
Bengal 6,000 to 7,000 bales of silk annually, and the merchants of 
Tartary took another 6,000 to 7,000 bales. 


784 



TRADE AND INDUSTRY 

Reckoning a bale to consist of about 1400 sq. yards, the Bengal 
silk trade alone may be taken as somewhere about 19.6 millions of 
sq. yards at this period. Stavorinus also estimated that 3,00,000, to 
4,00,000 lbs. of unwrought silk from Kasimbazar were consumed in 
the European manufactories. This excludes the silk fabrics export¬ 
ed to Europe from that centre. 

Up till the beginning of the nineteenth century vast quantities 
of cotton piece-goods from Bengal, the Coromandel Coast, Gujarat 
and other parts of India were exported by the English and French 
merchants to Europe in spite of various restrictions imposed on this 
trade. Thus, while the value of export of Indian cloth goods re¬ 
presented £ 200,000 to £ 300,000 per annum between 1677-80 and to 
£ 1 million between 1697-1702, it was about £ 1.4 millions per annum 
between the years 1786-1790. And the export of Indian cotton and 
silk goods to England at the opening of the nineteenth century 
amounted to £ 2.5 millions. France was also importing annually at 
this time (the figure is that of 1791) £ 1.2 millions worth of Indian 
cotton piece-goods; while a considerable quantity of these was also 
exported in American vessels (valued at Rs. 5,600,000 in 1816-1817). 

Export Specialities and Centres of Handloom Production: 

A very large number of handloom weaving centres existed in 
India throughout the 17th and 18th centuries. 

Calicoes (from Calicut) was the general name adopted by the 
East India Company for Indian cloth goods exported to England, 
but there were two hundred distinct trade names of Indian cloth 
goods recorded in the correspondence of the English, Dutch, and 
French factors and directors. Such names are derived both from 
the centres of production in India and from the foreign consuming 
markets. A few names of such handloom products selling in Euro¬ 
pean, Asiatic and African markets are adduced below: Semianoes 
(cloths made at Samana in Patiala), Derriabdds, Kerriabads and 
Eckbarrys (from Daryabad, Kairabad, Akabarpore or Akabarpur 
respectively in Awadh); Gelalpores (from Jalalpur in Fyzabad); 
Mercooleces (from Nygome or Nayagon in the district of Harodi); 
Ambertees (from Patna, Benaras, Lechore or Lakhawar, 30 miles 
south of Patna); Fotas, Ginghams, Hummums, Sanoes, Sologesses, 
Elaches, Mulmuls and Cassas (from Bengal); Serribaffs (from the 
Deccan); Buritungeers (from Sind); Salempores, Moorees and Per - 
calles (from Gujarat) were the goods commonly met with in foreign 
trade. 

785 

M.S.—50 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


In the middle of the eighteenth century the Indian cloth goods 
sought mostly in different countries in Europe were Garas, Rumals , 
Ghtgfoams, Cassas and Mulmuls from Bengal, napkins, Salempores 
and Beiilles from the Coromandel Coast, Derriabads from Awadh 
and Baftds from Gujarat. White and blue Guineas were also still 
being exported by the European merchants for the Guinea coast in 
Africa where these were worn by slaves. Coarse dutties from 
Gujarat went to Persia, Arabia, Abyssinia and the east coast of 
Africa; the Chintz of Cambay were used in Arabia and Turkey as 
mantles; the Baftds and Gauzes were used for summer wear in 
Turkey and Persia; the famous printed calicoes of Ahmadabad went 
to Europe and to Persia, Turkey and the Indian Archipelago; and 
the shawls made in Kashmir and Surat were used for the winter 
covering in India, Persia and Turkey. 23 A large variety of cotton 
and silk goods, especially from Malda, Kasimbazar and Dacca, went 
from Bengal not only to Europe, Persia, Turkey and Egypt but also 
to Ceylon, Pegu, Siam, the Indian Archipelago and Japan. 

This is a list of the export specialities included in the mer¬ 
chandise brought by seven French ships to Europe in 1742. 24 As 
many as 51,710 pieces of white Gar a from Bengal, 58,325 pieces of 
Guinea from the Coromandel Coast and 71,096 pieces of napkins 
(Rumals) from Bengal, Masulipatam, Pondicherry, Tranquebar and 
Pulicat went in these French ships. This volume of the French 
trade in Indian calicoes is significant since French political influence 
was destroyed in another two decades. 

India’s eastern customers of cotton goods included Japan with 
whom the Dutch merchants built up an appreciable business after 
about 1625 and Siam, Indo-China, the Moluccas, Ceram, Banda, Am- 
boyna, Macassar, Borneo,j Sumatra and Java. Across the Indian 
ocean in the west, South and East Africa, and Abyssinia furnished 
limited markets. But West Africa, Egypt, and the adjacent parts of 
North Africa, and the West of Arabia were important consuming 
regions. Persia, Central Asia, Russia and Turkey were supplied 
through the overland route via Lahore and Kandahar by caravans 
carrying there the specialised cotton fabrics of Dacca and Bengal. 
Turkey, Muscovy, and Poland preferred, according to Tavernier, the 
printed cloth goods from the Deccan, but Western Europe imported 
silk fabrics and cheap calicoes from various textile centres, special¬ 
ly Gujarat, the Coromandel Coast and Bengal. The export trade of 
Indian cotton goods in the 17th and 18th centuries bore ample testi¬ 
mony to the adaptation of fabrics by Indian weavers of quality and 
prices to the various requirements, fashions and tastes of peoples 


786 


TRADE AND INDUSTRY 


representing different cultures and stages of development from 
savages and slaves to kings, noblemen and common people in diffe¬ 
rent lands. 

Throughout the 17th century Indian calico was used as house¬ 
hold linen in Europe and America. All classes of people in England 
“from the greatest gallants to the meanest cook maids” used both 
plain calico and chintz , (or printed cloth goods). The English 
flannel and broadcloth were given up in favour of light and elegant 
apparel. 

Gradually the prints and the fine muslins captured the entire 
European market replacing the British and French stuffs. England 
developed, however, her own calico printing industry at the begin¬ 
ning of the 18th century in Surrey, Kent and other southern coun¬ 
tries, imitating Indian methods of production and printing calicoes. 
The Dutch, however, were the first to introduce the Indian process 
of cloth printing into Europe which , was later on learnt by the 
French and the English. Even the Indian designs and motifs were 
reproduced in the European printed calicoes in order to satisfy the 
customers. England now imported plain calicoes from India in 
larger quantities, sending out the finished products to the colo¬ 
nies and elsewhere, as well as meeting the needs of home consu¬ 
mers, in spite of the agitation carried on against this new industry 
on capitalistic lines by the domestic woollen and silk weaving indus¬ 
tries. The English calico printing industry thus throve on the im¬ 
port of Indian plain calicoes throughout the 18th century; it was 
only in 1799 that the prohibitive import duty of £ 67-10-0 per cent 
was imposed on ‘plain white calicoes’. 

Raw silk and wrought silk fabrics also greatly increased in 
value among the items of Indian exports to England since the end 
of the 17th and the beginning of the 18th century, to the great de¬ 
triment of silk and woollen manufactures in England and the loss 
and chagrin of the English merchants trading with Turkey. Silk 
goods thus came under the schedule of prohibitory import duties 
in the first decades of the 19th century. It was the English who 
“first set the Indians on that vast increase of silk works” in Kasim- 
bazar, where the production increased from 4,000 bales to 22,000 
bales of silk per year due to the high prices offered by the com¬ 
peting Dutch, English and French factors and exporters. 

The major centres of silk production in India in the 17th and 
18th centuries were Kasimbazar, Murshidabad, Saidabad, Malda, 
Satgaon and Sherpur-^-all in Bengal, and Patna and Baikunthpur in 


787 


THE MAHATHA SUPREMACY 


Bihar and Balasore in Orissa. It appears that the Bengal silk came 
into great favour not only in Europe but also in Japan and became 
a successful competitor of Persian and Chinese silk in overseas 
markets. Large quantities of silk also used to come from Bengal 
to Ahmadabad and Surat, where they were woven into silk fabrics 
for export to Europe. Silk rumals or handkerchiefs and taffaties 
used to sell most in the European markets. From the first decade 
of the 19th century all manufactures of silk and taffaties were pro¬ 
hibited for import to England—for silk and mixed cotton replaced 
ntany kinds of Norwich and London stuffs made of English silk and 
wool. This aroused English opposition and was responsible for the 
enactment of the various prohibitory and sumptuary laws in England 
between 1700-1730. Milburn observes in this connection: 

“The use of printed Indian calicoes, both in apparel and 
household furniture, became at this time so universal as to be 
a great detriment and obstruction to the woollen and silk manu¬ 
factures of the kingdom. This had occasioned several riots and 
tumults of the weavers in London, etc. It was, therefore, found 
necessary to redress the grievance, wherein so many^were in¬ 
terested. An Act of Parliament was in consequence passed, to 
preserve and encourage the woollen and silk manufactures, etc., 
which absolutely prohibited the wear thereof under the penal¬ 
ties of £ 5 for each offence on the wearer and of £ 20 on the 
seller. 25 

As a result of the total prohibition of import of Indian silks 
and printed calicoes to England in 1720, these were re-exported by 
the East India Company to some countries in Europe, whence again 
these were gradually excluded as they, in their turn, developed 
their own industries. 

The following schedule of tariffs obtained in England at the 
beginning of the 19th century (1812). Muslins paid on importation 
to England 10 per cent and £ 27-6-8 per cent for home consumption. 
Calicoes paid £ 3-6-8 per cent on importation and £ 68-6-8 per cent for 
home consumption. 

- ' \ 

Prohibited coloured cotton goods paid a duty of £ 8-6-8 per cent 
on importation and were not allowed to be used in England. All 
silk manufactures and piece-goods made of silk and cotton ( taffaties) 
were prohibited. 

The consequences were described by Tucker in 1823, i.e., a de¬ 
cade after a Parliamentary enquiry in regard to the protective 
tariff was instituted: 


788 


TRADE AND INDUSTRY 


“The silk manufactures and piece-goods made of silk and 
cotton intermixed have long since been excluded altogether 
from our markets; and of late, partly in consequence of the ope¬ 
ration of a duty of 67 per cent, but chiefly from the effect of 
superior machinery, the cotton fabrics, which hitherto consti¬ 
tuted the staples of India, have not only been displaced in this 
country, but we actually export our cotton manufactures to 
supply a part of the consumption of our Asiatic possessions.” 

India was thus reduced from the state of a manufacturing to that 
of a raw-material-producing country. In order to safeguard first 
of all her calico-printing industry in the South and then the power- 
loom textile industry in the North, England not only prohibited the 
wear of printed calico and gradually increased the duties on im¬ 
ported Indian cloth goods rising up to 80 per cent ad valorem, but 
she also forbade the export of tools and machinery and even migra¬ 
tion beyond the seas of artificers and workmen employed in print¬ 
ing calicoes, cottons, muslins, and linens. Thus the only country 
from which India could obtain her apprenticeship in large-scale 
manufacturing production, denied her this opportunity. 

Meanwhile the Industrial Revolution progressed in England in¬ 
troducing undreamt of economies in the methods of production of 
cotton goods. The Industrial Revolution and the progress of mecha¬ 
nisation which first completely transformed the textile industry in 
England were almost contemporaneous with the assumption of the 
Diwani in Bengal by the British in 1765. Hargreaves invented the 
spinning jenny two years later and Arkwright his water-frame 
about the same time, although the third of the great trio of the 
spinning inventions had to wait till 1779. Four years after the 
Diwani (1769) the following order of the Directors of the East India 
Company was communicated: 

“Manufacture of raw silk should be encouraged in Bengal 
and that of manufactured silk fabrics should be discouraged and 
silk winders should be forced to work in the Company’s factories 
and prohibited from working in their houses under severe penal¬ 
ties by the authority of the Government.” 

This may be contrasted with the beneficent efforts of the East India 
Company in the 17th century who “first set the Indians on tha$ 
vast increase of silk-worms” in Kasimbazar where the production 
vncreased from 4,000 bales to 22,000 bales of silk per year due to 
the high prices offered by the competing Dutch, English and French 
exporters. The English East India Company’s training of Indian 


789 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

workers by sending out from England dyers and throwsters also 
contributed towards the development of the Bengal silk industry 
and expansion of the silk export trade. Thus the way was surely 
and steadily prepared for the supplanting of the Eastern textile 
workshop of the world by the Westerners. 

i 

Effects of the East India Company's Monopoly and Coercion on the 

Cotton Industry: 

From the inside there were also forces of disintegration of orga¬ 
nisation of handicrafts at play introduced by foreign trade, mono¬ 
poly and coercion. At the time of the opening of the foreign 
markets for the Indian handlaom industry in the 17th century the 
weavers worked in their own cottages or under master artisans and 
entrepreneurs in kdrkhdnas. European and Indian merchants as 
well as agents of governments would often give the artisans ad¬ 
vances in order to obtain their products. For over a century the 
European merchants preferred to employ contractors, called ( dadani y 
merchants, who made contracts with handloom weavers and gave 
them advances of money for obtaining the finished cloths. Such con¬ 
tractors could be distrained by the English East India Company, if 
necessary. These Indian contractors were entirely under the thumb 
of the European merchants, because without the intervention of the 
latter the wholesale market would be closed for them. “Were the 
present substantial merchants to be laid aside, it would be their 
ruin.” 26 Thus the Indian merchants had to reduce their profits 
while contracting in order to secure the custom of the European 
companies" and this meant reduction of the prices of cloth and the 
earnings of the weavers. Gradually the Indian merchants found it 
to their interest to become gumastas, the salaried servants of the 
Companies, instead of independent traders participating in the risks 
of business with the weaving population. The gumastas, however, 
in the new industrial organisation, became more oppressive than the 
merchants, and, having distributed the funds of the Companies 
among the weavers, often speculated on their own account, and sold 
off cloths to other traders. 27 

By the middle of the 18th century, the English East India 
Company gave up the contract system and appointed a large num¬ 
ber of gumastas who advanced money to the weavers, obtaining from 
them signed chits and exercising a monopolistic control over them 
so that the weavers were not permitted to work for others. Thus 
the weavers could not obtain a just price for their cloths. Bolts 


790 


TRADE AND INDUSTRY 


mentions that the English East India Company’s jachandars i in 
league with gumastas, fixed prices in all places at least 15 per cent, 
and in some even 40 per cent, lower than the cloths would sell in 
the public bazar or market on a free sale On the other hand, the 
weaver in order to obtain a fair price would attempt to sell his 
cloths secretly to others particularly to the gumastas of the com¬ 
peting French and Dutch companies who were always ready to 
receive them. This led to great invigilation on the part of the peons 
and gumastas and to corporal chastisement and oppression of all 
kinds. 

Bolts mentions that in the time of Mughul government and Nawab 

All VardI Khan, the weavers manufactured their goods freely, and 

* 

without oppression; and though there was no such thing at present, 
it was then a common practice for reputable families of the tanti 
or weaver craft, to employ their own capital in manufacturing 
goods, which they sold freely on their own account. With the in¬ 
troduction of monopoly, the entire weaving population as well as the 
merchants and intermediaries connected with the cloth trade were 
subjected to oppression and even “the most sacred laws of society 
were atrociously violated”. “Merchants from the upper parts of 
Hindustan were in fact expelled and those concerned with exports 
by sea discouraged”, thus wrote Lord Cornwallis in 1788. But the 
effect of coercion on the weaving community was even more far- 
reaching. 

Bolts (1772) describes the pernicious effects of the monopoly 
thus: 

“With every species of monopoly, every kind of oppression 
to manufacturers of all denominations throughout the whole 
country has daily increased, in so much that weavers, for daring 
to sell their goods, and dailais and pykdrs, for having contri¬ 
buted to or connived at such sales, have, by the Company’s agents 
been frequently seized and imprisoned, confined in irons, fined 
considerable sums of money, flogged, and deprived, in the most 
ignominious manner, of what they esteem most valuable, their 
crafts. Weavers also, upon their inability to perform such 
agreements as have been forced from them by the name of 
mutchulcahs, to make good the deficiency and the winders of 
raw silk called nagads have been treated also with such in-, 
justice, so that instances have been known of their cutting off 
their thumbs, to prevent their being forced to wind silk. 
This last kind of workmen were pursued with such vigour dur- 


791 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


ing Lord Clive’s late Government in Bengal, from a zeal for 
increasing the Company’s investment of raw silk, that the most 
sacred laws of society were atrociously violated, for it was a 
common thing for the Company’s sepoys to be sent by force of 
arms to break open the houses of the Armenian merchants 
established at Sayedabad (who have from times immemorial 
been largely concerned in the silk trade) and forcibly take the 
‘nagads’ from their work, and carry them away to the English 
Factories.” 28 

Whether the details of this oppression were true or not, the 
economic results were the wholesale abandonment of the occupation 
by the weavers, and the decline of the weaving industry in Bengal. 
Such was the direct consequence of the growth of the industrial 
monopoly by the English Company, and oppression exercised by the 
Company’s peons, sepoys and gumastas against weavers and inter¬ 
mediaries in the cloth trade, which came within their grip as the 
Company extended their factories in the interior of the Provinces. 

Verelst referred in 1767 to the unusual scarcity of weavers, a 
great many of whom had deserted their profession to seek subsis¬ 
tence from a less precarious calling. The Aurangs were not so well 
peopled as they were twenty years before, he observes, and yet the 
demand for cloth goods in Europe was then much greater than what 
the country could supply. 

There was yet another method by which the weaving industry 
was hit by the English East India Company in the 18th century. 
They established some kind of monopoly of Bombay and Surat raw 
cotton, and thus the prices of cotton in Bengal rose from Rs. 16-18 
per maund (about 80 lbs. weight) to Rs. 28 and Rs. 30. To coun¬ 
teract this, upcountry cotton began to be brought down the rivers 
Jamuna and Ganga, but the Company forced Muhammad Reza 
Khan to levy a new and extraordinary duty of about 30 per cent on 
the cotton, so as to prevent its entry into the Bengal Province. 
Abbe Raynal points out that the English Company obliged the 
Nawab of Bengal to establish in their favour a monopoly for the 
sale of cotton brought from any other province in order to raise it 
to an exorbitant price. 29 The gradual rise of the raw cotton prices 
towards the end of the 18th century deprived India of the advantage 
which she had formerly enjoyed in having cheap cotton. Since the 
17th century the price of raw cotton in India increased by almost 
one and half times, whereas in England by the first quarter of the 
19th century the price of cotton was reduced by one-third as com¬ 
pared with the price which prevailed down to 1780. 


792 


TRADE AND INDUSTRY 


This increase of cotton price was true not merely of Bengal but 
also of Gujarat and the Coromandel Coast. In the latter region* the 
increase was from 4d. per lb. in the 17th century to 6d. in the early 
years of the 19th century. In England, on the other hand, the 
price of cotton was reduced from Is. 8d. in the 18th century to 7d. 
per lb. by 1828 when the American and West Indies cotton began 
to be imported. This factor also placed the Indian handloom in¬ 
dustry at a disadvantage as compared with the British power-loom 
industry. Yet, India used to export raw cotton, especially from 
Gujarat, Madras and Bengal. As late as 1827 India exported 68 
million lbs. of cotton to England as compared with her American 
cotton import of 294 million lbs. 

Other Items of Indian Export Trade: 

Among other items of export of India in the 18th century be¬ 
sides cloth and raw cotton were raw silk, indigo and saltpetre. Raw. 
silk was the basic material of the English silk-weaving industry 
which gradually developed fabrics ousting the imported Chinese 
fabrics. Saltpetre was also an important Indian export to Europe. 
As an important ingredient for the making of gunpowder its demand 
in Europe fluctuated, being determined by wars and expectation of 
wars. 

In peace time saltpetre could hardly be sold. The great export 
trade to Europe of saltpetre was largely concentrated in the 18th 
century in Bihar and Bengal, where European Companies establish¬ 
ed factories for its production. In the year before the battle of 
Waterloo (1815) the East India Company exported 146,000 cwt. of 
saltpetre to England. After the Napoleonic wars the trade in salt¬ 
petre became unprofitable. 

Indigo had been an important Indian export in the 17th and 
18th centuries. Its centres of production were Gujarat, Agra, Sar- 
khej, Bayana, Bihar and Bengal. But the trade of indigo along with 
that of sugar was very unfavourably affected by the rise of the plan¬ 
tation system in the West Indies and the U.S.A., at the end of the 
17th century. The West Indies, however, after a few decades, 
changed from indigo to crops enabling the Indian export trade in 
indigo to re-establish itself. After the destruction of the indigo 
factories in St. Domingo, which supplied the bulk of the world with 
indigo, the indigo factories in Bihar and Bengal suddenly leaped in¬ 
to prosperity in the second decade of the 19th century. There were 
as many as 400 indigo factories under about a thousand Europeans 


793 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


in Bengal and Bihar, chiefly in Jessore, Nadia, Murshidabad and 
Tirhut, and indigo worth £ 3.6 million was exported to England. 
But indigo plantation led to a great oppression of the cultivating 
class leading to widespread agrarian discontent in Bengal that was 
immortalised in Dinabandhu Mitra’s piognant drama, Nila Darpan, 
The causes of this discontent, discussed by Buchanan, for the dis¬ 
trict of Dinajpur in Bengal were that the English indigo planter de¬ 
terred cultivators form the work of ordinary cultivation, cheated 
them both in the measure of their land and the crop and treated 
them as his slaves, beat and confined them whenever he was dis¬ 
satisfied. He, in fact, suggested that new licenses for indigo planta¬ 
tion should be refused, and also that the Europeans not responsible 
to the East India Company for their conduct, be restricted to a re¬ 
sidence in the principal towns and sea-ports. 

Throughout the 17th and the 18th centuries India maintained 
a favourable balance of trade. Her important commodities of im¬ 
port were gold, silver, lead, tin, woollen goods, horses, spices, 
tobacco and glassware. The creditor position of India was main¬ 
tained until even the first half of the 18th century. 

But the political subordination of India not only led to the 
strangulation of India’s European trade, but at home she was left 
completely at the mercy of England who forced upon her English 
cotton piece-goods without payment of any duty. The loss of Indian 
shipping and its displacement by- British shipping also led to the 
loss of her nearer markets in Africa, Arabia, Persia, Indian Archi¬ 
pelago and further East that had for centuries depended upon her 
handloom products. 

The Industrial Revolution in Great Britain hit Indian industry 
very hard. The handloom and other handicrafts, however cheap 
the labour, could not complete with the flood of goods pouring from 
factories using labour-saving machinery. 

The Indian practice of burying gold and silver in the ground 
had pernicious effects on trade and industry. In the 18th century 
India, a considerable body of the industrial and trading population 
was represented by the Hindus. The Hindu trader concealed much 
of his wealth for fear of being despoiled. The Muslim’s accumu¬ 
lated capital was escheated to the State on his death. The middle 
class consisting of traders, merchants and petty officials was not 
strong and enterprising enough for initiating industrial or commer¬ 
cial changes by investment of capital in new directions. The feudal 


794 


TRADE AND INDUSTRY 


aristocracy which controlled much wealth was extravagant and 
hardly used it for trade and productive purposes. 

The wide gulf between the intellectual and working classes not 
merely prevented any mechanical improvement in the arts and 
handicrafts of the country, but left the bulk of artisans and workers 
in the cold shade of social neglect and low status. Thus the in¬ 
tellectual, social, economic and political circumstances of India in 
the 18th century all conspired towards the loss of her industrial and 
commercial hegemony in the Orient. 


NOTES 

1. Chapekar, N. G., Peshwaichya Sdwalit, pp. 21-22; Chaplin, William, Report of 
Administration, etc. 9 (1824) Appendix, pp. 22-27. 

2. Khafi Khan, Muntakhab, etc., tr by Elliot and Dowson, History of India, Vol. 
VII, p. 248. 

3. Bernier, Francois, Travels in the Mughal Empire as cited by Mukerjee, R. K. # 
in Economic History of India, p. 82. 

4. Bhave, V. K., Peshwekdlin Maharashtra, p. 218. 

5 Forbes, James, Oriental Memoirs (1813), Vol. IV, pp. 38-40, p. 60 

6- Satish Chandra, Parties and Politics at the Mughal Court, 1707-1739, Introduction 
pp. 43-47. 

7- Mukerjee, R. K., op. cit., pp. 117-121, 190-92. 

8 Malcolm, Sir John, Memoir of Central India, Vol. II (1880 edition), p. 76. 

9. Ibid, p. 73. 

10. Mir Qasim’s letter, 26th March 1762 cited by P. Woodroff, The Mens who ruled 
India, Vol. I, p. 100. 

11. Siyar-ul-Mutakherin, Vol. Ill, p. 161. 

12 Cited by Thompson and Garrat in Rise and Fulfilment of British Rule, pp. 114. 

13 Bolts, W., Consideration on Indian Affairs (1772) pp. 191-94. 

14- Abbe Dubois, Hindu Manners, Customs and Ceremonies (1943, Oxford), pp. 94-95. 

15 Carey, Good Old Days of the John Company, Vol. II, 15. 

16 Caraccioli, Life of Clive , Vol. I, p. 106. 

17 Eolts, William, op. cit., pp. 58-59. 

18 Mukerjee, R. K., op. cit., pp. 142-47. 

19. Abbe Raynal, History of the Settlements and Trade of the Europeans in the East 
and West Indies (1788), Vol. II, p. 245- 
20 The English Factories , Vol. VIII, p. 183; also Vol. X, p 272 
21- Datta, K. K, Ali Vardi and His Times, pp. 147-48. 

22 Moreland, W. H., Indian Journal of Economics, Vol. V, No. Ill 

23 . 1 Abbe Raynal, op. cit./ pp. 259 60. 

24. Mukerjee, R. K., op. cit., pp. 159-61- 

35 Milburn, Oriental Commerce, cited by Mukerjee op. cit., p. 157. 

26 Dodwell, H. H., Calendar of Madras Despatches, p. 136. 

27. Monckton-Jones, Warren Hastings in Bengal, 1772-74, pp. 38-39. 

28 Bolts, William, op. cit., pp. 194-97. 

29 Abbe Raynal, op. cit., p. 182. 


795 


ERRATA 


Page 

line 

for 

read 

21 

19 from above 

make of his wits 

make use of his wits 

45 

1 -do- 

remain 

regain 

87 

20 -do- 

or 

on 

92 

2 -do- 

assailed 

assail 

93 

4 from bottom 

Persians 

Persian 

199 

note 1 

7 Sept. 1741 

12 May, 1741 
according to Khare 

234 

22 from above 

Jiya Bai 

Jija Bai 

264 

12 -do- 

but 

omit ‘but’ 

305 

25 -do- 

stronghold 

strongholds 

308 

Note 21 

Gooti 

Govt. 

337 

Note 17 

Spoys 

Sepoys 

340 

12 from above 

plates 

plate 

364 

18 

may 

might 

373 

last line 


omit ‘and Vansittart’ 

375 

5 from above 

Mills 

Mill 

393 

11 -do- 

complaint 

compliant 

394 

23 -do- 

Hindustan 

Hindustani 

409 

7 -do- 

showed 

shows 

440 

8 from bottom 

1972 

1792 

456 

10 -do- 

store 

stores 

481 

2 -do- 

detachments 

battalions 

496 

12 -do- 

eighty-three year 
old " 

eighty-three years 
old 

519 

Note 130 

p. 254 

1957 ed. 
p. 568 

519 

Note 132 

Prinsep III 

Prinsep II 

727 

last line 

on 

in 


SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 


(Marathi and other Indian Languages) 

Sources have been indicated at the end of each chapter. They 
are here listed language-wise. Original sources are shown under 
their titles, secondary works under authors names. 

MARATHI 
Original sources 
Published & unpublished 

Aitihdsik Lekha Sangraha, Vols. I-XIV, Ed. by V. Khare. 
Attihasik Patravyavahar Ed. by Sardesai, Kale, Kulkarni, etc. 
Ajnapatra (Moramkar, 1926 edn.). 

Bharat Varsha, Vols. I & II, Ed. by D. B. Parasnis. 

Chandrachud Daftar, Mss. 

Dilli Yethil Mardthydnchi Rdjkdrane, 2 Vols. Ed. by D. B. Parasnis. 
Hingne Daftar, Vol. I, Ed. by G. H. Khare. 

Historical Papers Relating to Mahadji Sindia (1937), Ed. by G. S. 
Sardesai. 

Holkarshdhichya Itihdsdchi Sadhane, Patravyavahar Purvardha 
Khand, I, II, Ed. by A. N. Bhagawat. 

Holkarshdhichya Itihdsdchi Sddhanen, Ed. by V. V. Thakur. 

Itihas Sangraha, Vols. I-VII, by D. B. Parasnis. 

Kdvyetihdsa Sangraha Patre Yadi Vagaire, Ed. by Sardesai, Kulkarni 
& Vakaskar. 

Maheshwar Darbdrchi Batamipatren t Ed. by D. B. Parasnis. 
Marathyanchya ItihasdcM Sddhanen, Ed. by V. K. Raj wade, Vols. I, 
II, III, IV, VI, XIII, XV, XIX (MIS). 

Nagpurkar Bhosle Letters, Ed. by Shejwalkar. 

Pdnipatchd Sangrdm (in Nana’s Words) Sangli publication (1965). 
Patra Sdr Samgraha. 

Peshwd Daftar: Satdrd Rdjg, & Peshwds’-Roznishi, Ed. by G. C. Vad. 
Purandare Daftar, Vols. I-III, Ed. by K. V. Purandare. 

Selections from Chandrachud Daftar, Ed. by D. V. Apte. 

Selections from Peshwd Daftar, Ed. by G. S. Sardesai (S.P.D.). 
Vols. 1-45. 

Shedgaonkar Bakhar, Shiv Charitra Pradeep f Ed. by D. V. Apte. 
Shiva Bharat, Ed. by S. M. Divekar. 

Waidya Da/tar. 

Bakhars, Kaifiyats, etc. 

Bhdu Sahebdnchi Bakhar (1959), Ed. by S. N. Joshi. 

Dabhdde Hakikat, Ed. by K. N. Sane. 

Dhaktd Ramarajdchi Bakhar. 

Holkaranchi Kaifiyat, Ed. by Y. N. Kelkar (1954, Edn.). 

Jadhav Gharanyachi Kaifiyat. 

91 Qalmi Bakhar, Ed. by V. S. Vakaskar. 

797 


THE* MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Peshwdichi Akher, Ed. by Govind Kashintth Chandorkar. 
Peshwydnchi Bakhar, by Krishnaji Sohani (Ed. by Sane). 

S ambhdji-Rajdram Charitra, Ed. by R. V. Herwadkar (1972 Edn..). 
Shiva Charitra Pradeep, Ed. by D. V. Apte. 

Shiva Chhatrapatiche Charitra (4th Edn. 1923) by Sabhasad (Ed. by 
Sane). 

Shivdji Maharajanche Saptaprakarndtmak Charitra, 1967, Ed. by 
R. V. Herwadkar. 

Thorle Shdhu Maharaja Charitra, by Chitnis, Ed. by K. N. Sane (3rd 
Edn., 1924). 


Bhave, V. K. 
Chapekar, N. G. 
Dhabu, D. G. 

Garge, S. M. 
Herwadkar, R. V. 
Joshi, S. N. 

Kale, Y. M. 
Kanitkar, Y. G. 
Kelkar, D. K. 
Kelkar, N C. 
Kelkar, Y. N. 
Kelkar, Y. N. 
Khare, G. H. 

Khare, V. V. 

Lele, K. K. 

Limaye, H. G. 

Naik, J . V. 

Mehendale 

Natu, V. R. 

Pagdi, Setu Madhav 
Rao 

Parasnis, D. B. 

Parasnis, D. B. . 

Pisurlencar, 

Panduranga 

Sardesai, G. S. 

Sardesai, G. S. 

Shejwalkar, T. S. 

-do- 


SECONDARY WORKS 

Peshwekdlin Maharashtra. 

Peshwdichya Sdwalit. 

Kulabkar Angre. 

Karweer Riydsat. 

Marathi Bakhar (1975). 

Arvdchin Mahdrashtretihds KalqXil 
Rdjya-Kdrbhdrdcha Itihds (1959). 

Nagpur Prdntdchd Itihds. 

Sakharam Bapu Yanche Charitra. 

Marathi Sahityache Sinhavalokan. 

Mardthe Va Ingraj. 

Aitihdsik Povade. 

Vasaichi Mohim. 

Niva^ak Lekha. 

Life of Ndna Phadnis. 

Dhar Sdmsthdncha Itihdsa. 

Life and Writings. 

Nature and Significance of the New Order 
Created by Shivdji. 

Pratinidhi Ghcvrdnydchd Itihds, Vol. IV. 

Life of Mahddji Sindia,. 1894. 

Marathe Va Nizam. 

Brahmendra Swdminche Charitra. 

Itihds Sangrahd (see under original sources). 

Mardthds and Portuguese. 

Peshwa Bdji Rao I. 

Mardthd Riyasat, Vols. I-VI. 

Shiva Chhatrapati. 

Nizdm-Peshwe. 


798 


SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Shejwalkar, T. S. 
Tikekar, S. R. 
Dutt, 

Akshoy Kumar 

Lai Kavi 

(Tr. Pogson) 


Gahlot, Jagdish 
Singh 
Ojha 

Suraj Mai Mishran 

Kavi Raj Shyamal 
Das 


Bayan-i-waqai 

Chahar Gulzar-i - 
Shujai 

Delhi Affairs 

Delhi Chronicle 

Gul-i-Rana 

Hadiqat-ul-Alam 

Ibrat Namah 

Ibrat-i-Arabab-i- 

Basar 

Ibrat Namah 

Imad-us-Sadat 

Iqbal Namah 

Jaipur Akhbars 

Janganamah 

Farrukh-siyar 

Khulasat al- 
Tawarikh 

Khafi Khan 

Khajana-e-Amira 

Khulasat al-Kaldm 


Panipat, 1761. 

Sardesai Commemoration Volume. 

Bharatavarshiya Updsaka Sampradaya (Ben¬ 
gal), Vol. I, 2nd Edn., 1888. 

Chhatraprakdsh. 

Jodhpur ki Khyat. 

Jodhpur Raj Kd Itihds, Vol. II. 

Rajputdna kd Itihds. 

Rajputdna kd Itihds. 

Vamsa Bhdskar. 

Vir Vinod. 

Bharat Itihds Samshodhak MandaVs Quarterly, 
Vols. I-XXVIII. 

Tritiya Sammelan Vritta (Marathi). 

PERSIAN 

by Khwaja Abdul Karim, 
by Harcharan Das. 

Persian Records of Mardtha History, Vol. I, 
by Jadunath Sarkar. 

(Anonymous Persian Mss.), Vol. II, (1921). 

• ’ V 

by Lakshmi Narayan Shafiq. 

by Mir Alam (1803) Litho (Hyderabad 
edition). 

Mss., Asiatic Society of Bengal, No. 178. 

_ ' T 

by Rai Balmukund. 

by Muhammad Qasim Lahauri. 

by Sayyid Ghulam ‘Ali Naqui, written in 1807. 

Probably by Shiv Das Lakhnawi. 

(unpublished). 

by Nimat Ali Khan. 

by Nimat Khan Ali, translated by W. Irvine. 

by Maharaja Kalyan Singh. 
see Muntakhab ul-Lubab. 
by Ghulam Ali Azad. 
by Nawab Ali Ibrahim Khan. 


799 


Khushwaqt Rae 
Majma ‘al-Akhbar 

Masir-i-Talibi fi 
bilad-i-Afranji 

Masir-ul-Umara 


Mirat-i-Ahmadi 

Mirat-i-Waridat 

Muntakhab-ul- 

Lubab 


Muzzaffarnamah 

Nishan-i-Haidari 

Nur-Sayyid Nur-ud- 
din Hasan’s Life 
of Najab-ud - 
daulah 

Nuskha-i - 
Dilkusha 

RaqaimA-Karam 

Ruznamcha 

Riyaz-us- S alatin 

Riyad-al - Salatin 

Siyar-ul - 
Mutakherin 


Shahnama-i - 
Munawwar al- 
Kalam 

Shahjahan Namd 

Tuzuk-i-Walajahi 
of Badruddin 

Tarikhi-i-Sadat- 

i-Jawxd 

Tarikh-i- Muham- 
madshahi 

Tarikh-i-All 
Ibrahim Khan 

Tuhfat al-Hind 

Tazkirdt-us- 

Salatin-i- 

Chughtai 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

by Harsukh Rai. 

by Mirza Abu Talib Khan. 

by Shahnawaz Khan, a biographical dictionary 
of the nobility of the Mughul Empire (1742- 
49), edited by Abdur Rahim & Ashraf Ali, 
(1912 Ed.). 

by Ali Muhammud Khan. 

by M. Shafi Warid Tehrani. 

by Khafi Khan, printed in Bibliotheca Indica 
(1869). Much of it has been translated in 
Elliot & Dowson’s History of India, Yol. VII. 

by Karam Ali. 


Translated by Jadunath Sarkar. 

by Bhimsen Saksena, translated by Jadunath 
Sarkar (Maharashtra State Archives, 1976). 

Aurangzib’s letters collected by Inayatulla. 

by Ghulam Husain Salim (Bibliotheca Indica). 
by Munshi Salimullah. 

by Sayyid Ghulam Husain Tabatabi, Printed 
in 1833 in Calcutta; also Panini press edition 
in English. 

by Shiv Das Lakhnawi 
by Bhagwan Das. 

Tr., by S. M. M. Nainar. 

by Harnam Singh. 

by Khushal Chand. 

by Nawab Ali Ibrahim Khan, 
by Lai Ram. 

by M. Hadi Kamwar Khan. 

i % 


800 


SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Tazkirat al-Ahwal 
T azkirah 

Tazkirah 

Tarikh-i - 
Muzaffari 

Tarikh-x-Kashmxr 

Tarikh-i-Hind 


Tarikh-i- Chaghtai 

Tarikh-i-Bangala 

Tarikh-i-Bangala- 

i-Mahabhatjangt 

Tarikh-i-Alamgvri 

Sani 

Tarikh-i-Ahmad 

Shdhi 

Tarikh-e-Panjab 

Tafdih-al- Ghafilin 

Tarabai Papers 

Umdal-ul- 

Tawarikh 

Waqai-Fath-i - 
Bangla 

Waqai-A lamgiri 

Waqai-i-Holkar 


by Shaikh Muhammad Ali Hazin. 

by Anand Ram Mukhlis (Tr. in Elliot & Dow- 
son’s History, Vol. VIII). 

by Iradat Khan. 

by Muhammad Ali Khan Ansari. 
by Narayan Kaul. 

by Rustam Ali (Tr. in Elliot & Dowson’s His¬ 
tory, Vol. VIII). 

by Muhammad Shafi Warid. 
by Salimullah. 

by Yusuf Ali Khan. 

(in Elliot & Dowson’s History, Vol. VIII). 

by an anonymous author. 

by Bute Shah, 

by Mirza Abu Talib Khan. 

(Persian-1971) Ed. by A. G. Pawar. 

Daftar, ii. 

by Muhammad Wafa, 
of Hamid-ud-Din. 
by Mohan Singh. 


ENGLISH AND OTHER EUROPEAN LANGUAGES 


Original sources, published and unpublished, are listed first, 
followed by secondary works. 


Baroda State 
Record Office 

Bengal State 
Archives 

British Museum 
Imperial Record 
Dept. 


Selections from Baroda State Records, Vol. II. 

Proceedings of the Committee of Circuit at 
Kasimbazar. 

Add. Mss. Nos. 13, 29, 209, 459 & 596. 

Calendar of Persian Correspondence, Vols. V & 
VI 


India Office Records 

London Home Misc. Series. 

Letters and despatches to Select Committee 
and Court of Directors and their replies. 


801 


M.S.—51 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


India Office Records 
London 

-do- 

Madras Record 
Office 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

Maharashtra State 
Archives 
-do- 
-do- 
-do- 

Nationai Archives 
of India 

-do- 

-do- 

National Library of 
Scotland Edin¬ 
burgh 

Public Record Office 


Minutes of Councils and Select Committees. 

Orme, Mss. India III. 

Early Records of British India (Madras Con¬ 
sultation Book, 1972). 

Fort St. George, Diary and Consultation Book- 
Military Department, 1972. 

Madras Military Consultations. 

Military Consultations, Vol. XXIV. 

(1) Public Dept. Diaries and (2) Secret and 
Pol. Dept., Diaries. 

Home Series, Vol. II, Ed. by G. W. Forrest. 

Mardthd Series, Ed. by G. W. Forrest. 

Poona Residency Correspondence, Ed. by G. S. 
Sardesai & Jadunath Sarkar. 

Foreign Department Political Consultations. 

(1) Foreign Dept. Secret Proceedings and (2) 
Foreign Dept. Miscellaneous. 

Select Committee Proceedings, Secret Pro¬ 
ceedings. 


Melville Papers. 
Chatham Papers. 


Acworth, Harry 
Arbuthnot 

Aitchison, C. U. 

Ananda Ranga 
Pillai 

Arnold, T. W. 
Ascoli, F. D. 

Ashraf, K. M. 


Athar All 
Auber, Peter 

Aziz Ahmad 
-do- 


SECONDARY WORKS 

Ballads of the Marathds (1894). 

Treaties, Engagements and Sanads. 

Diary , 12 Vols. (Ed. by Dodwell & Price). 
The Preaching of Islam. 

Early Revenue History of Bengal and the Fifth 
Report, 1812 (1918). 

Life and Conditions of the People of Hindustan 
(1200-1500 A.D.). 

Asiaitic Annual Register, 1799, 1800. 

Asiatic Researches, Vol. II. 

The Mughul Nobility under Aurangzlb. 

Rise and Progress of the British Power in India 
(1837). 

Treasury of the Mughals. 

Studies in Islamic Culture in the Indian Envi¬ 
ronment. 


802 


SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Balakrishna 

-do- 

Banaji, R. D. 
Banerjee, A. C. 
Barve 


Basu, B. D. 
Bhargava, K. D. 
Bhargava, U. S. 
Bhatnagar, O. P. 
Bidulph, John 
Blacker, V. 
Blakiston, Maj. J. 

Bolts, William 
Broome, A. 
Broughton, T. D. 

Buchanan, Francis 


-do- 

Buchanan 
Buckland, C. E. 
Busawan Lai 

Cambridge, R. O. 

Caraccioli, Charles 
Carey 

Chaplin, William 

Chatterji, N. L. 
Chesney 

Chopra and Garrat 

Colebrooke, Sir 
T. E. 

Commissariat, 

M. S. 


Commercial Relations between India and 
England. 

Shivaji, the Great } Pt. IV. 

Slavery in British India . 

Peshwd Madhav Rao I. 

Life of Malhar Rao Holkar. 

Bengal, Past and Present, Vols. X-XII, XLVI. 
Bareilly Gazetteer. 

Story of Satara. 

Browne Correspondence (1960). 

Mewar and the Mughul Emperors. 

Studies in Social History. 

Malabar Pirates. 

Marathd War . 

Twelve Years Military Adventure, 2 Vols. 
(1829). 

Considerations on Indian Affairs. 

History of the Bengal Army (1850). 

Letters written in a Mahratta camp in the year 
1809 (1892). 

Journey from Madras to Mysore, Canara and 
Malabar, Vol. I. 

Patna & Bihar. 

Purnea Report. 

Dictionary of Indian Biography (1906). 

Memoirs of Ameer Khan, tr. by H. T. Prinsep, 
1832. 

War on the Coast of Coromandel (1761). 
Cambridge History of India, Vols. .IV, V & VI. 
Life of Robert Clive. 

The Good Old Days of the Hon’ble John Com¬ 
pany, Vol. I. 

Report of the Fiscal and Judicial System of Ad¬ 
ministration etc. in the Deccan, 1824. 

Mir Qasim (1935). 

Indian Polity. 

Events at the Court of Ranjit Singh . 

Life of Mountstuart Elphinstone (London, 
1884). 

A History of Gujarat, Vols. I & II (1957). 


803 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Compton, H. 


Craufurd, Q. 
Cunningham, J. D. 

Danvers 

Dasgupta, A. P. 
-do- 

Datta, K. K 
-do- 

Davies, A. Mervyn 
Davies, C. C. 

De Guyon, Abbe 
Dighe, V. G. 
Dirom, Major 


Dodwell, H. H. 

-do- 

Dow 

Downing, Clement 

Dubois, Abbe, J.A. 
-do- 

Duff, James-Grant 


Elliot, F. A. H. 

Elliot, Sir H. M. & 
Dowson, J. 


Elphinstone, 

Mountstuart 

-do- 


Faruki, 

Zahiruddin 


A Particular Account of the European Military 
Adventurers of Hindustan (Fisher Union, 
1892). 

Sketches Chiefly relating to the History, Reli¬ 
gion etc. of the Hindus (1972). 

History of the Sikhs (2nd Edn. 1853). 

Cultural Heritage of India, Vol. IV. 

History of the Portuguese in India. 

Studies in the History of British India. 

The Central Authority in British India (1774- 
84). 

Ali Vardi and His Times (1939). 

Bengal Subah, Vol. I. 

Warran Hastings (1935). 

Warren Hastings and Oudh . 

A New History of the East Indies, Vol. I. 

Peshwa Baft Rao I & Mardtha Expansion (1944). 

A Narrative of the Campaign in India which 
terminated the war with Tipu Sultan in 1792 
(1794). 

Calendar of Madras Despatches. 

Dupleix and Clive. 

History of Hindustan, Vol. III. 

A History of the Indian Wars (Foster's Intro¬ 
duction). 

Hindu Manners, Customs and Ceremonies . 

Letters on the State of Christianity (1943 ed). 

A History of the McLhrattas (1921 Edn.), 2 Vols. 

Early Administrative System of the East India 
Company in Bengal, Vol. I. 

The Rulers of Baroda (1934). 

The History of India as told by its own Histo¬ 
rians (1877), Vols. VII & VIII. 

A letter written by Ahmad Shah Abdali to 
Madho Singh about the third battle of Panipat 
—published by J. N. Sarkar in Modern 
Review (May, 1946). 

History of India (7th edn., 1889). 

Report on Territories Conquered from the 
Peshwa (1822). 

Aurangzib and his Times. 

804 


SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Firminger, W. K. 

Forbes, James 
Forrest, G. W. 
-do- 
-do- 

Forrest, G. W. 

Forster, George 

Fortesque 
Foster, William 

Francklin, 

William 

Fryer, J. 

Furber, Holden 
Fullarton, Colonel 
Gait 

Gangaram 


Gense, J. H. & 
Banaji, D. R. 

-do- 

Gleig, The Rev. 
G. R. 

-do- 

Graham, D. G. 
Grose 

Gupta, P. C. 
Gurwood 
Hanw^y, J. 

Hart, Liddell 
Hastings, Lord 
Hatalkar, V. G. 
Heber, Reginald 

Hill, S. C. 


Fifth Report on East India Affairs (3 Vols., 
1917). 

Oriental Memoirs (1813), 4 Yols. 

Bengal and Madras Papers (1688-1757). 

Elphinstone’s Writings. 

Selections from Letters, Despatches in the Bom¬ 
bay Secretariat: Mardtha Series (1885). 

Selections from the State Papers of the Gover¬ 
nors General: Warren Hastings, 2 Vols. 
(1910). 

A Journey from Bengal to England through the 
Northern Part of India, etc. 2 Vols. (1808). 

History of the British Army, Vol. V. 

The English Factories, Vols. I-X. 

Shah Aulum (1798). 

A New Account of East India & Persia. 

John Company at Work (1921). 

A View of the English Interests in India. 

History of Assam. 

Maharashpra Purdna, Ed. by Gupta and 
Dimock. 

Gazetteers —Bombay, Poona, Thana, Kolaba, 
Ratnagiri (Old), Ratnagiri (New), Bharatpur 
and Sialkot Districts. 

The Third English Embassy to Poona (1934). 

Gaikwads of Baroda, Vols. I & II. 

The Life of Sir Thomas Munro. 

Memoirs of Warren Hastings, Vols. I & II. 

Statistical Report of the. Principality of Kolha¬ 
pur (1854). 

Voyage to the East Indies, Vol. I. 

Bdji Rdo II & The East India Company (1939). 

Wellington Despatches. 

Travels in Persia, Vol. IV (1752). 

The War in Outline. 

Private Journal (2 Vols.), 1858. 

The Mardthas and the French. 

Narrative of a Journey through the Upper Pro¬ 
vinces of India, 1824-25 (John Murray, 1829). 

Bengal in 1756-57. 

805 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Holwell 
Ilbert, C. P. 


Irfan, Habib 
Irvine, William 
Ives, Edward 
Jenkins, Richard 

Jhaljit Singh, R. K. 
Joshi, V. V. 
Kashiraj, Pandit 

Kaul, Gwasha Lai 
Kaye John William 
-do- 

Keith, Arthur 
Berriedale 

-do- 

Keith, Feiling 

Kulkarni, A. R. 

Lawrence, 

Walter, L. 

Lockhart, L. 

Low, C. R. 

Lyall, Sir Alfred 

Macaulay, Thomas 
Babington 

Macauliffe, M. A. 
Macdonald, A. 

Madan, Indar Nath 
Malcolm, Sir John 
-do- 
-do- 
-do- 

Malgoankar, M. 


History of Karnatak (in Telugu). 

History of the Karnatak, Mss., prepared 
by Paupaya, the interpreter, and preserved 
among Orme Mss. 

Interesting Historical Events. 

The Government of India. 

Indian Historical Records Commission — 
Reports. 

The Agrarian System of Mughul India. 

Letter Mughals, Vols. I & II. 

A Voyage from England to India. 

Report on the Territories of the Raja of Nagpur 
(1827). 

A Short History of Manipur. 

Clash of Three Empires (1941). 

Battle of Panipat, Ed. by Rawlinson (1926 
edn). 

Kashmir Through the Ages. 

Life of Sir John Malcolm, Vols. I & II. 

Life and Correspondence of Sir Charles 
Metcalfe. 

A Constitutional History of India (1936). 
Speechs & Documents on Indian Policy, Vol. I. 
Warren Hastings (1954). 

Maharashtra in the Age of Shivdji. 

The Valley of Kashmir. 

Nadir Shah (1938). 

History of the Indian Navy, Vol. I. 

The Rise and Expansion of the British Domi¬ 
nion in India (1905), 3rd Edn. 

Critical and Historical Essays (Dent & Com¬ 
pany, 1933). 

The Sikh Religion, 6 Vols. (1909). 

Memoir of Nana Farnavis (1851), 1927 

Edn.). 

Modern Hindu Literature (1930). 

Life of Clive. 

* 

Memoir of Central India, 2 Vols. (1880) Edn. 
Political History of India, 2 Vols. (1970 Edn.). 
Sketch of the Sikhs. 

Kanhoji Angrey. 


806 


SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Malleson, G. B. 
Manrique, S. 
Manucci, N. 

Martin, 

R. Montgomery 


Martin 

Mawji & Parasnis 
Mehta, M. S 
Milbume 
Mill, James 


-do- 

Mohibul Husain 
Khan 

Monckton-Jones, 
M. E. 

Montgomery, 
Field Marshal 

Moon, Penderel 

Moor, Edward 


Morley, John 
Muir, Ramsay 
Muirland 
Mukherji, P. 

Mukherjee, R. K. 
Munshi, K. M. 
Nijjar, Bakshis 
Singh 

O’Malley 
Orme, Robert 
-do- 

Owen, Sidney, J. 
-do- 

Pa^anjape, B. G. 


The Decisive Battles of India. 

Travels of Sebastian Manrique, Yol. I. 

Storia Do Mogor, Tr. by William Irvine (Four 
Vols.). 

Despatches, Minutes & Correspondence of the 
Marquess of Wellesley, 5 Vols. 

Mardtha History Seminar (Kolhapur, 1971). 

Eastern India , Vols. I-III. 

Treaties, Engagements & Sanads. 

Lord Hastings and the Indian States (1930). 

Oriental Commerce. 

The History of British India (with H. H. Wil¬ 
son’s continuation), 9 Vols. (London, 1840- 
46). 

Miscellaneous Tracts. 

History of Tipd Sultan. 

Warren Hastings in Bengal (1772-74), (1918). 

A History of Warfare (1968). 

Warren Hastings and British India (1947). 

Narrative of the Operations of Capt. Little’s 
Detachment and of the Marathd Army Com¬ 
manded by Purseram Bhow (1794). 

Burke. 

The Making of British India. 

Baillie-ki-Paltan (1759-1930). 

Indian Constitutional Documents (1600-1918), 
Vol. I. 

Economic History of India (1600-1800). 

Gujarat and its Literature. 

Punjab under the Great Mughuls. 

History of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa. 

Historical Fragments of the M.ughal Empire. 

Histoi'y of Military Transactions in Hindostan. 
Vols. I & II. 

A Selection from the Despatches of Duke of 
Wellington (1880). 

Papers Re: Pindary and Mahratta Wars. 

English Records on Shivdji. 

807 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Parikh, M. C. 
Parmu, R. K. 
Pearse, Col. Hugh 

Pester, John 
Philips, C. H. 

Pillai, Ananda 
Ranga 

Prinsep, H. T. 


Qanungo, K. R. 
Qanungo, S. N. 
Raghubir Sinh 
Ramsbotham 

Ranade, M. G. 
-do- 

Ranade, R. D. 
Ray, Jyotirmoy 
Raynal, Abbe 

Risley, H. H. 
Roberts, P. E. 
-do- 


Ross, Williamson 

Sardesai, G. S. & 
Sarkar, Jadunath 

Sardesai, G. S. 

-do- 

Sarkar, Jadunath 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 


Sri Swami Narayan (2nd Edn.). 

A History of Muslim Rule in Kashmir (1970). 

Memoir of the Life and Military Services of 
Viscount Lake (Blackwood 1908). 

War and Sport in India. 

The East India Company 1784-1834. 

Diary (12 Vols.) Ed. by Dodwell, etc. 

History of the Political and Military Trans¬ 
actions in India during the Administration 
of the Marquess of Hastings 1813-23 (Lon¬ 
don, 1925). 

History of the Jdts. 

Jaswant Rao Holkar. 

Malwa in Transition. 

Studies in the Land Revenue History of Bengal 
( 1769-1787 ). 

Miscellaneous Writings (1915). 

Rsie of the Maratha Power (1900). 

Pathway to God in Marathi Literature . 

History of Manipur. 

History of the Settlements and Trade of Euro¬ 
peans in the East, etc. 

The Tribes and Castes of Bengal. 

History of British India (1958). 

India under Wellesley. 

Report of the Committee on the Home Admi¬ 
nistration of Indian Affairs. 

The Correspondence of Lord Cornwallis (Lon¬ 
don, 1859). 

Poona Residency Correspondence Series, 14 
Vols. 

Salsette Chronicle. 

Main Currents of Mardthd History (1933). 

New History of the Marathds (1950), 3 Vols. 

Persian Records of Maratha History, Vols. I & 
II. 

Fall of the Mughul Empire f 4 Vols. 

History of Aurangzeb, 5 Vols. 

History of Bengal, Vol. I (1948), Vol. II. 

History of Jaipur (Mss.). 

Military History of India (1959). 


808 


SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Sarkar, Jadunath 
Satish Chandra 

Scrafton 

Sen, 

Dinesh Chandra 
Sen, S. P. 

Sen, Surendranath 

-do- 


-do- 

Shafat Ahamad 
Khan 

Shejwalkar, T. S. 

Shrivastavya, B. K. 

Sinha, N. K. 

-do- 

-do- 

Sinha, N. S. 

Smith, Vincent, A. 

Smith 

Spear, Percival 
-do- 
-do- 

Srinivasan, C. K. 

Srinivasachari, 

C. S. 

Srivastava, A L. 
-do- 

Stavorinus 

Strachey, Sir J. 


Sutherland, 

Lucy 

Temple, Sir Richard 
Terry, Edward 
Thomas, F. W. 

Thompson, Edward 
-do- 


Shivafi and His Times (1948, 4th Edn.). 

Parties & Politics at the Maghul Court, 1707 - 
39. 

Reflections on the Government of Indostan. 

History of Bengali Literature (1911). 

The French in India (1947). 

Administrative System of the Mardthds 
(1925). 

Early Career of Kanhoji Angria and other 
Papers. 

Military System of the Mardthds (1928). 

John Marshall in India. 

Pdnipat, 1761. 

The Angreys of Kolaba. 

Rise of the Sikh Power. 

Economic History of Bengal (2 Vols). 

Haidar AH (1941). 

Indo-British Economy of Hundred Years Ago. 

The Oxford History of India (Revised edition, 
1958). 

Life of Henry Martin. 

Master of Bengal (1975). 

India, a Modem History. 

Twilight of the Mughuls (1951). 

Peshwd Bdfi Rdo I. 

Ananda Rang a Pillai: The Pepys of French 
India (1940). 

Shuja-ufLdaulah (2 Vols). 

First Two Nawabs of Oudh (1933). 

Voyage to the East Indies, Vol. III. 

Hastings and the Rohilld War (1892). 

Surat Factory Records (cited by Gense & 
Banaji in Gaikwads of Baroda). 

East India Co. in 13th Century Politics. 

Oriental Experiences. 

A Voyage to East India (London, 1777). 

The History and Prospects of British Education 
in India (1891). 

Indian Princes in the Making (1943). 

The Life of Sir Charles Metcalfe. 

809 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Thompson, E. & 
Garrat, G. T. 

Thooti, N. A. 

Thom, Major 
'William 

Tikekar, S. R. 

Tikkiwal, H. C. 

Titus, M. T. 

Tod, James 

Tone, William 

Henry 

% 

Valentia, Lord 
Verelst, Henry 

Walter, Capt. 

Ward, Rev. J. 

Wellesley 

-do- 

Wilks, Lt. Col. 
Marks 

-do- 

Wilson, C. R. 
Wilson, H. H. 
Wilson, W. J. 

-do- 

Woodruff, P. 

Wylie 

Young, Desmond 
Yusuf Husain Khan 


Rise and Fulfilment of British Rule in India 
(1934). 

The Vaishnavas of Gujarat (1939). 

Memoir of the War in India, 1803-1806. 
Sardesai Commemoration Volume (1938). 
Jaipur and the Later Mughals. 

Islam in India & Pakistan (1959). 

Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan, 2 Vols. 
Some Institutions of the Marathd People. 

(Asiatic Annual Register, 1799). 

Voyages and Travels, Vol. II. 

Narrative of the Transactions in Bengal from 
1760-64. 

A Gazetteer of the Bhurtpore State. 

A View of Hindu Literature and Religion, 
2 Vols. 

A Vindication of the Late War. 

History of Events in India. 

Historical Sketches of South India, 3 Vols 
History of Mysore, Vol. II (1932). 

Early Annals of the English in Bengal, 2 Vols. 
Religious Sects of the Hindus. 

History of the Madras Army, 4 Vols. (Madras 
1882). 

The Pandian Chronicle. 

The Men Who Ruled India, Vols. I & II. 

Life of Sir Eyre Coote (1922). 

Fountain of the Elephants. 

Nizam-ul-Mulk Asaf Jah (1963 Edn.). 


Lehuraux, A. 

Martineau 

Martin, F. 

Tieffenthaler, 

Joseph 

Wendel 


FRENCH 

La decouverte de Dupleix Fathabad. 

Dupleix et Inde Francaise, 3 Vols. 

Memoirs of Francois Martin, III Vols. 

Geograephie de V Indoustan. 

Memoires de V origine, acroissement et etat 
present de paissance des jats dans V Indos - 
tan, by Father Francois Xavier. 


810 


SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 


PORTUGUESE 


Peixoto 

Pissurlencar, 


History of Haidar Ali Khan. 


Panduranga 


Antigualhas « 

Maratas em Bacaim. 


-do- 


JOURNALS, PROCEEDINGS, ETC. 


All India Modern History Congress. 

Asiatic Annual Register. 

The Bengal Spectator, April 1842. 

Calcutta Review. 

Indian Historical Quarterly. 

Indian Journal of Economics, Vol. V, No. Ill, by W. H. Moreland. 
Indian Historical Records Commission ; Proceedings. 

Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal , t 1878 and 1879. 

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society (1882). 

Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, XX. 
Mediaeval India Quarterly, Vol. II. 


811 
































** 












































. 


































CHRONOLOGY 


1658 

1681, November 
14 

1683 

1693, March 16 
1699 

1702-8 

1703 

1704 

1707, March 3 
(New style) 

1707, March 14 
1707, May 8 
1707, June 18 

1707, October 12 
1707 

1708, January 
1708, August 
1708, October 6 

1708, November 17 

1709, January 13 
1709 


English factories on the Coromandel Coast and 
in Bengal made subordinate to Fort St. 
George (p. 615). 

William Hedges appointed first independent 
Agent and Governor of East India Com¬ 
pany’s factories in Bengal (p. 578). 

By the Charter of 1683, the East India Co., is 
gjjfven full powers to declare and make war 
and peace with native powers (p. 616). 

Birth of Malhar Rao Holkar (p. 267). 

Marathas invade Malwa for the first time 
(p. 79). 

Union of the rival East India Companies. 

NemajI Sindia bursts into Malwa near Handia 
and reaches Sironj (p. 79). 

A jit Singh of Mewar and Durgadas of Marwar 
make peace treaty with Aurangzib (p. 5). 

Death of Aurangzib. 

Azam, second son of Aurangzib, proclaims 
himself Mughul emperor (p. 10). 

Raja Shahu leaves Mughul camp for home 
(p. 45). 

Prince M‘uazzam defeats and kills Prince 
A‘zam at the battle of Jajau near Samugarh 
(pp. 11, 78). 

Battle of Khed between the armies of Raja 
Shahu and Tara Bai (p. 47). 

Ajit Singh of Jodhpur, Jay Singh of Amber 
and Amar Singh of Udaipur form a con¬ 
federacy (p. 13). 

Raja Shahu ascends the Marat ha throne at 
Satara (p. 48). 

Death of Dhanaji Jadhav, Raja Shahu's Sena - 
pati (p. 49). 

Bahadur Shah (Mu'azzam) restores Jay Singh 
of Amber and Ajit Singh of Jodhpur to their 
ranks in the services (p. 141). 

Murder of Guru Govind Singh at Nanded (pp. 
14, 126. Also see ibid, pp. 237, 322 & 323 of 
Vol, VII). 

Bahadur Shah disposes of Kam Baksh (p. 11). 

Death of ParsojI Bhosle (pp. 50, 240). 

813 


1710, December 

1712, February 27 

1713, January 
1713, September 

1713, November 17 
1713 

1714, May 6 

1715, December 7 
1715 

1716, June 19 

1716, November 

1717, September 

1717 

1718 

1719, February 
1719, March 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Emperor Bahadur Shah expels Banda Bahadur 
from Lohgarh fort (p. 162). 

Death of Bahadur Shah, Mughul emperor (pp. 
15, 126). 

Farrukh-siyar ascends the Mughul throne on 
the death of Bahadur Shah (p. 152). 

Farrukh-siyar confers diwani of Bengal subdh 
on Murshid Qull (titled as Jafar Khan) 
(p. 104). 

BalajI Vishwanath appointed Peshwa of 
Shahu’s kingdom (p. 53). 

Chin Qilich Khan appointed by Farrukh-siyar 
as the governor of the six subdhs of the 
Deccan with the title of Nizam-ul-Mulk 
Bahadur Fath Jang (p. 119). 

Murshid Qull Khan (titled Jafar Khan) made 
Deputy Governor of Bengal, and Subahdar 
of Orissa (p. 104). 

Banda Bahadur captured by the Mughuls with 
his followers at Gurdas Nangal (p. 162). 

Nizam-ul-Mulk, Governor of Deccan, recalled 
and in his place Sayyid Husain Ali appointed 
(p. 119). 

Banda Bahadur, the Sikh leader, tortured to 
death (p. 127). 

Sawai Jay Singh of Amber, on instructions of 
the Mughul emperor, raids Thun, but is com¬ 
pelled to raise the siege as the Jat leader 
Churaman makes peace with Sayyid Ab¬ 
dulla, Vazir (p. 153). 

Murshid Qull Khan, Deputy Governor of 
Bengal, made subahdar of Bengal (p. 104). 

Farrukh-siyar issues a farman granting the 
English East India Co. permission to trade in 
Bengal, free of all duties, on a payment of 
Rs. 3,000 per annum (p. 105). 

The Peshwa and Sayyid Husain Ali Khan, 
Deccan Subahdar 9 enter into a treaty and the 
Peshwa gets the grants of Swaraj , Chauth 
and Sardeshmukhi of the six subdhs of the 
Deccan (pp. 44, 64, 80). 

Sayyid Brothers seize emperor Farrukh-siyar 
and put him in prison (p. 59). 

The Sayyids who had seized power from 
Farrukh-siyar grant sanads to Raja Shahu 
agreeing to his demands of Chauth , Sardesh¬ 
mukhi and Swaraj of the six subdhs of the 
Deccan (p. 59). 


814 


CHRONOLOGY 


1719, March 


1719, April 
1719, May 


1719, June 6 


The new Mughul emperor, Rafi-ud-Darjat, rati¬ 
fies the grants of Swaraj, Chauth and Sar- 
deshmukhi of the six subdhs of the Deccan 
to the Peshwd, agreed to in 1718 (pp. 64, 
79, 80). 

Farrukh-siyar done to death (p. 20). 

BalajI Vishwanath, Peshwd, returns to Deccan 
with the deeds granting Chauth, Sardesh - 
mukhi and Swaraj, along with Raja Shahu’s 
mother (p. 59). 

Rafi-ud-Daulah is raised to Delhi throne by the 
Sayyid brothers (p. 20). 


1720, April 2 
1720, April 17 

1720, September 19 

1720, June 19 

1720, July 31 
1720, October 8 

1720, November 13 

1720, December 25 

1720 

1720 

1720-21 

1721, January 4 

1721, May 25 

\ 

1721, August 20 

1722, February 


Death of BalajI Vishwanath, Peshwd, at Sas- 
wad (p. 61). 

BajI Rao succeeds to the peshwdship on the 
death of his father BalajI Vishwanath 
(p. 63). 

The English navy attack Gheria (Vijayadurg), 
the stronghold of Kanhoji Angria unsuccess¬ 
fully (p. 296). 

The battle of Khandwa fought between Sayyid 
Dilawar All Khan and Nizam-ul-Mulk. Dila- 
war All Khan is killed (p. 120). 

‘Alam ‘All Khan, deputy of Husain ‘Ali, is de¬ 
feated by the Nizam at Balapur (p. 67). 

Sayyid Husain All, one of the Sayyid brothers, 
assassinated by Haidar Beg near Toda-Bhim. 
(pp. 23, 65, 67 & 120). 

Battle of Hasanpur. Sayyid Abdulla captured 
and imprisoned (p. 23, 120). 

Muhammad Khan Bangash appointed Gover¬ 
nor of Allahabad (pp. 83 & 138). 

The first Bank established in Bombay (p. 634). 

The Bundelas rise in revolt against Mughul 
Governor of Allahabad (p. 138). 

Peshwd BajI Rao invades Khandesh (p. 67) 

Peshwd BajI Rao meets Nizam-ul-Mulk for the 
first time near Chikalthan (p. 67). 

Chhatrasal Bundela defeats Dilir Khan (a 
general of Muhammad Khan, Governor of 
Allahabad). Dilir Khan is killed (pp. 138 & 
139). 

The English and the Portuguese enter into an 
alliance to end the menace of Kanhoji 
Angria (p. 297). 

Nizam-ul-Mulk is appointed Vazir (p. 130). 


815 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


1722, September 

1722, November 

1722 

1723, February 

1723 
1723 
1723 

1724, May 18 

1724, October 1 

1725, February 

1725, June 

1725 

1725- 26 

1726, January 

1726, April 

1726 

1726- 27 


Mir Muhammad Amin alias Saadat Khan is ap¬ 
pointed Mughul Governor of Awadh (p. 26). 

Jay Singh, Governor of Agra, conquers Thun 
(p. 153). 

Murder of Abdullah, one of the Sayyid bro¬ 
thers (p. 65). 

The Peshwd invades Malwa and meets Nizam- 
ul-Mulk at Badaksha near Jhabua (p. 80). 

Pilaji Gaikwar defeats Momin Khan, governor, 
and levies chanith in Surat Athavisi (p. 280). 

Raja Ajlt Singh of Jodhpur and the Mughul 
emperor enter into a treaty (p. 139). 

The Maratha army commences probing attacks 
on Portuguese territories on the West coast 
(p. 95). 

Nizam-ul-Mulk meets the Peshwd at Nalcha, 
enters into an agreement with the Peshwd 
BajI Rao and wins him over to his cause 
(p. 67). 

Nizam-ul-Mulk defeats Mubarlz Khan, Subah - 
dar of Hyderabad, at Sakharkharda (p.67). 

Hamid Khan, the Deputy of Nizam with the aid 
of Kanthaji Kadam Bande and Pilaji 
Gaikwar defeats Shuja‘at Khan, a deputy ot 
Governor Sarbuland Khan, and kills him 
(p. 72). 

Girdhar Bahadur is appointed as Mughul 
subdhdar of Malwa (p. 81). 

Nizam-ul-Mulk recovers Hyderabad, From this 
period dates the independence and the found¬ 
ing of the Hyderabad State (p. 120). 

Maratha forces, under the leadership of the 
Pratinidhi and the Peshwd , invade parts of 
Karnataka but are met with opposition by 
the armies of the Nizam (p. 68). 

Sarbuland Khan, Mughul Governor of Gujarat* 
defeats Pilaji Gaikwar and Kanthaji Kadam 
Bande in a battle near Sojitra (p. 72). 

Sarbuland ,Khan agrees to grant chauth of 
Gujarat to the Peshwd (p. 73). 

The Court of Directors send along with the 
Charter of 1726, a book of instructions with 
respect to the method of proceeding in all 
actions and suits—civil and criminal (p. 620). 

Maratha forces under the leadership of the 

Pratinidhi and the Peshwd again invade parts of 
Karnataka but are met with opposition by 
the armies of the Niz5m (p. 68). 

816 


CHRONOLOGY 


1727, February 8 


1727, February 20 


1727, June 30 
1727, July 30 

1727 

1727, August 1 

1728, February 25 
1728, November 29 


1728, December 


1729, March 22 


1729, June 20 
1729, July 

1729, August 5 

1729, September 
1729, December 


1729 (end) 


1730, March 23 


Sidi Sa‘at, commandant of Anjanwel fort, razes 
to the ground the temples and dharmasala 
raised by Brahmendra Swami at Parshuram 
(p. 76), 

Sarbuland Khan, Mughul Governor of Gujarat, 
continues the agreement made in April 1726 
to grant chauth and Sardeshmukhi of Guja¬ 
rat to the Peshwa (p. 73 ). 

Death of Murshid Quli Khan (p. 106). 

Raja Shahu orders that ‘the Mokasa’ of prant 
Gujarat previously granted to Chimnaji 
Ballal be given to Khanderao Dabhade to¬ 
wards the maintenance of his troops (p. 73). 

The Mayor’s court is re-organised (p. 618). 

The Maratha army under the generalship of 
Peshwa Baji Rao invades Nizam’s territories 
of Khandesh and Gujarat (p. 69). 

The Nizam defeated at Palkhed. Treaty of 
Mungi-Paithan (pp. 69, 81, 97, 98, 121). 

Chimnaji Appa attacks Subddhar Girdhar- 
Bahadur at Amjhera and. completely annihi¬ 
lates the Mughul army (pp. 81, 91, 143, 144, 
145, 267). 

Jaitpur, a Bundela stronghold, a surrenders to 
Mughul governor Muhammad Khan Bangash 
(p. 83). 

Peshwa Baji Rao, on a request from Chhatrasal 
Bundela for help, defeats Muhammad Khan 
Bangash and obtains a Jogfa* in Bundlekhand 
(pp. 83, 139, 40). 

Death of Kanhoji Angria (p. 299). 

Ranoji Sindia is granted Saranjam previously 
enjoyed by Pilaji Jadhav (p. 251). 

Sekhoji Angria succeeds to the Admiralty of 
the Maratha navy on the death of his father 
Kanhoji Angria (p. 299). 

Death of Khanderao Dabhade Senapati. 

Chimnaji Appa, brother of the Peshwa, raids 
Gujarat, and occupies Pawagarh held by 
Kanthaji Kadam Bande (p. 74). 

Sawai Jay Singh appointed Governor of 
Malwa. Suggests a policy of appeasement 
(p. 81). 

Sarbuland Khan, Mughul Governor of Gujarat, 
further extends the treaty concluded in April 
1726 and continued on 20 February 1727 
granting chauth of Gujarat to the Peshwa 
(p. 73). 


M.S.—*2 


817 


1730, March 


1730, September 

1730, October 

1731, April 1 


1731, April 13 

1731, December 14 

1732, December 


1732 


1732 

1733, February 
1733, February 


1733, 

May-December 
1733, June 8 

1733, July 16 

1733, August 28 
1733, December 1 


1734, April 22 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

The fort of Mandu (Malwa), captured by the 
Marathas (Holkar and Pawar) restored to the 
subdhdar as a result of the understanding 
arrived at between Raja Shiahu and the 
Mughul emperor (p. 82). 

Muhammad Khan Bangash is appointed Mughul 
subdhdar of Malwa in place of Sawai Jay 
Singh (p. 82). 

Malhar Rao Holkar is granted the entire assign¬ 
ment of the subdh of Malwa (p. 84). 

Armies led by Trimbak Rao Dabhade Senapati 
and the Peshwd clash against each other at 
Dabhoi and the army led by the Senapati 
is defeated and he is slain (pp. 75, 121, 279, 
281). 

A treaty (offensive and defensive) concluded 
between Raja Shahu and Raja Shambhuji of 
Kolhapur (pp. 71, 231-32). 

Death of Chhatrasal Bundela at Panna at the 
age of 82 (p. 140). 

Meeting between Peshwd Baji Rao and the 
Nizam at Rohe Rameshwar. An agreement 
concluded by which the Nizam was to have 
a free hand for expansion in the south and 
the Peshwd in the north (pp. 75, 121). 

Peshwd’s chief sardars—Holkar, Sindia and 
Pawar—-start sharing collections from Malwa 
(p. 84). 

The Marathas launch an offensive against 
Malwa (p. 84). 

Death of Sidi Rasul Khan, the Sidi chief (p. 76). 

The Marathas surround Sawai Jay Singh near 
Mandasor and extract from him Rs. six lakhs 
in addition to the revenue of 28 parganas al¬ 
ready collected (p. 84). 

Peshwd Baji Rao’s campaign against Janjira 
(pp. 76-78). 

Shripat Rao Pratinidhi occupies Raigarh 
fort (p. 77). 

The English occupy Underi with the consent of 
Sidi of Janjira (p. 300). 

Death of Sekhoji Angria (pp. 77, 300). 

Truce is declared between the Marathas and 
the Sidis and Abdur Rahman, grandson of 
Sidi Rasul Khan, is seated on the Janjira 
masnad (p. 78). 

Malhar Rao Holkar and Ranoji Sindia capture 
Bundi, oust Dalel Singh (nominee of Jay 
Singh of Amber) and reinstate Budh Singh 
to the throne of Bundi (pp. 25, 84, 143). 

818 


CHRONOLOGY 


1734, October 


1735, February 28 
1735, February 

1735, March 24 

1735, October 
1735 

1736, January 15 

1736, February 4 
1736, February 
1736, March 4 


1736, April 
1736, September 25 


1737, March 26/27 

1737, March 
1737, March 30 


Jay Singh of Amber convenes a conference of 
all the Rajput chiefs at Hurda to explore 
ways and means of holding the Marathas be¬ 
yond the Narmada, in which all agree and 
sign an agreement. The agreement remained 
a dead letter (p. 25). 

The armies of Sindia and Holkar plunder Sam- 
bhar (p. 85). 

Vazir Qamar-ud-din Khan attacks Maratha 
army under the leadership of Pilaji Jadhav 
in vain near Narwar (p. 84). 

The Maratha chieftains agree to accept Rs. 22 
lakhs as chauth for Malwa and thus the 
Mughul efforts to hold at bay the Marathas 
prove a failure (p. 85). 

Peshwd Baji Rao I starts from Poona on his 
north-Indian campaign (p. 86). 

On the death of Chand Sultan, Raja of Deo- 
garh, his illegitimate son Vali Shah usurps 
the throne (pp. 240-41). 

Peshwd BajI Rao I on his north Indian cam¬ 
paign reaches Mewar frontier and compels 
Rana Jagat Singh of Mewar to sign a treaty 
(p. 143). 

Peshwd BajI Rao visits Jalmandir in Pichola 
lake (p. 86). 

Peshwd BajI Rao I and the Rana of Udaipur 
meet in formal Darbar (p. 86). 

Peshwd Baji Rao I meets Sawai Jay Singh at 
Bhambholao near Kishangarh to discuss 
the jaglr and chavCth to be conferred on the 
Peshwa on behalf of the Mughul emperor. 
The Peshwd demands control over Malwa, 
Bundelkhand, Bengal and the Deccan 
(pp. 24, 87). 

Chimnaji Appa, the Maratha General, defeats 
and destroys the force of Sidi Saat at the 
battle of Charhai Kamarle (p. 301). 

A treaty concluded between the Sidi chief and 
Chimnaji Appa, by which a dual government 
is established in the eleven mahals, formerly 
owned by the Sidi. The Sidi becomes a tri¬ 
butary of the Maratha State (p. 78). 

An advance detachment of the Marathas en¬ 
ters Salsette island in a surprise attack. 
Thana fort under possession of the Portu¬ 
guese surrenders (p. 95). 

Peshwd Baji Rao I marches to Delhi (p. 89). 

Peshwd’s commander, Satvoji Jadhav, routs 
the Mughul army near Delhi (p. 89). 


819 


1737, July 

1737 

1738, January 7 


1738, November 26 

1738, November 

1739, January 25 
1739, February 16 

1739, February 24 

1739, March 12 

1739, March 20 
1739, March 20 

1739, March 21 


1739, March 30 
1739, April 
1739, May 5 

1739, May 12 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Muhammad Shah, Mughul emperor, summons 
Nizam-ul-Mulk to the court. Nizam-ul-Mulk 
is appointed Governor of Agra vice Jay 
Singh (p. 27). 

Gujarat is finally lost to the Mughul empire 
(p. 24). 

Peshwa BajI Rao defeats Nizam-ul-Mulk at the 
battle of Bhopal and compels him to sign a 
convention at Duraha Sarai by which the 
Peshwa gets subahdari of Malwa, tributes 
from the Rajas between the Narmada and 
the Chambal and Rs. 50 lakhs from the 
Nizam to meet war expenses (pp. 24, 91, 122, 
144). 

Nadir Shah on his way to India, with an inten¬ 
tion of invading, occupies Khyber Pass 
(p. 92). 

The Portuguese make a vain bid to recapture 
Thana, occupied by the Marathas in March 
1737 (p. 96). 

Lahore surrenders to Nadir Shah (p. 92). 

Nadir Shah arrives at Sirhind on his invasion 
of India (p. 30). 

Emperor Muhamifiad Shah is made a captive 
by Nadir Shah (p. 92). 

Nadir Shah, the Persian invader, enters the 
Shalimar Gardens near Delhi with his cap¬ 
tive Muhammad Shah, emperor, Vazlr 
Qamar-ud-din and the royal harem (p. 33). 

Nadir Shah, the Persian invader, enters Delhi 
with his army (pp. 33, 93). 

Sa'adat Khan (originally known as Mir 
Muhammad Amin), a Mughul noble and the 
founder of the kingdom of Awadh, commits 
suicide (p. 113). 

Nadir Shah proclaimed sovereign of Delhi. Due 
to a rumour, a tumult breaks out and Nadir 
Shah orders a general massacre of Delhi 
population in which 4 lakh lives are butcher¬ 
ed (pp. 33 & 93). 

Death of Shuja-ud-din, Governor of Bengal 

(p. 108). 

Harde Sah, son of Chhatrasal Bundela and 
Raja of Panna, passes away (p. 140). 

The Marathas succeed in wresting Bassein fort 
from the Portuguese. Portuguese power 
wanes (p. 96). 

Nadir Shah as Sovereign of India, holds a Dar- 
har at Delhi (p. 36). 


820 


CHRONOLOGY 


1739, May 16 

1740, January 

1740, April 10 

1740, April 28 
1740, May 19 


1740, June 25 

1740, September 
1740-41 

1741, March 26 
1741 


1741, July 


1741, September 7 


1741-43 

1742, January 12 
1742, April 
1742, May 6 
1742, September 27 


1743, January 


1743 


Nadir Shah, the Persian invader, leaves Delhi 
on his homeward journey (pp. 36, 94). 

Chimnaji Appa foils attempt of SambhajI An- 
gria to wrest Kolaba from Manaji Angria. 
The English send succour to Manaji (p. 303). 

All Yard! Khan, Governor of Bihar, rebels 
against Nawab Sarfaraz Khan, his master, 
kills him and usurps the subdhdari of Bengal 
(pp. 109, 241). 

Death of Peshwa Baji Rao I at Haverkhedi, 36 
miles from Khargon (p. 97). 

The allied Maratha army under Fateh Singh 
Bhosle and RaghujI Bhosle, defeats Dost Ali, 
Nawab of Arcot, in a battle near Damal- 
cherry (p. 180). 

Balaji Rao Peshwa, alias Nana Saheb, succeeds 
Baji Rao to the Peshwaship (p. 170). 

Treaty concluded between the Marathas and 
the Portuguese (p. 96). 

Expedition of Balaji Rao Peshwa against Raj- 
putana (p. 175). 

RaghujI Bhosle wrests Trichinopoly and cap¬ 
tures Chanda Sahib (p. 180). 

Nasir Jang, son of Nizam-ul-Mulk who rises 
against his father for grabbing subdhdarship 
pi the Deccan, is defeated with the aid of the 
Marathas (p. 122, 180). 

Jay Singh of Amber as Mughul Viceroy cedes 
Malwa to the Marathas and appoints Peshwd } 
Balaji Rao as the Deputy Governor of Malwa 
(pp. 24, 145, 173). 

Balaji Rao Peshwa gets chauth and sardesh - 
mukhi of Malwa by a jarman from Sawai, 
Jay Singh, Mughul Governor of Malwa 
(p. 176). 

Expedition of Balaji Rao Peshwa against Ben¬ 
gal and Bihar (p. 176). 

Death of SambhajI Angria (p. 303). 

Marathas invade Bengal (p. 113). 

Mir Habib plunders Murshidabad (p. 242). 

All VardI Khan raids the Maratha camp under 
the command of Bhaskar Ram and Maratha 
army flees (p. 242). 

Nizam-ul-Mulk marches into Karnataka and 
brings it under his control and the Marathas 
are ousted (p. 180). 

Nizam-ul-Mulk appoints his second son Nasir 
Jang as the subahdar of Adoni (p. 122). 

821 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


1743, April 
1743, August 


1743 

1743, September 

1744, March 30 

1744-45 

1745, January 25 
1745, February 15 

1745, March 11 
1745, May 23 

1745, July 

1745, December 21 
1745 

1745 

1746, September 21 

1746 

c. 1746 

1747, March 


All Vardi Khan, Nawab of Bengal, with the 
help of Peshwa’s army, drives out of Bengal 
Raghuji Bhosle’s army (p. 242). 

Raja Shahu settles the dispute between the 
Peshwa and Raghuji Bhosle and marks out 
spheres of the two. This was done as a 
sequel to interference of the Peshwa in Ben¬ 
gal which was Raghuji Bhosle’s sphere 
(p. 243). 

Tulaji Angria is appointed Sarkhel by the Raja 
of Satara setting aside the claim of Manaji 
Angria (pp. 184, 303). 

Death of Jay Singh of Amber (p. 26). 

Bhaskar Ram Kolhatkar, invited by All Vardi 
Khan, Nawab, is treacherously murdered by 
him (p. 243). 

Expedition of BalajI Rao Peshwa against Rajas¬ 
than and Bundelkhand (p. 177). 

Tulaji Angria captures Anjanwel and Govalkot. 
(p. 303). 

Nizam-ul-Mulk defeats the Maratha army led 
by Babuji Naik and Fateh Singh Bhosle 
in Karnataka (p. 180). 

Ranoji Sindia wrests Bhilsa from the Nawab 
of Bhopal (p. 177). 

A peace treaty concluded between Muhammad 
Shah, emperor and All Muhammad Rohilla 
(p. 135). 

Death of Ranoji Sindia, founder of the House 
of Sindia at Shujalpur (p. 252). 

Raghuji Bhosle raids Murshidabad, but the at¬ 
tack is repulsed by Nawab’s forces (p. 243). 

Death of Zakariyah Khan, Mughul governor of 
the Punjab. A civil war among his sons 
breaks out and one of his sons invites Ahmad 
Shah Abdall for his help (pp. 37-38). 

The Afghan generals and Afghan soldiers of 
All Vardi Khan rise in rebellion against All 
Vardi (p. 110). 

The French capture Madras Fort (p. 318). 

Orissa passes into the possession of Raghuji 
Bhosle (p. 37). 

The ruler of Jammu stops paying tribute to the 
Mughuls (p. 162). 

Jagat Singh, Rana of Udaipur who supported 
the claims of Madho Singh, is defeated at 
Rajmahal by the combined armies of Jaipur, 
Marwar and Bundi (pp. 144, 178). 


822 


CHRONOLOGY 


1747, June 
1747 

1748, January- 
March 

1748, February 


1748, March 11 


Nadir Shah assassinated (p. 123). 

Balaji Rao Peshwa goes on his North-Indian 
campaign (p. 177). 

Ahmad Shah Abdali, the ruler of Afghanistan, 
raids India for the first time, but his attack 
is repulsed (pp. 123-24, 129, 177, 186). 

All Muhammad Rohilla, who was appointed 
faujdar of Sirhind, returns to Rohilkhand 
with his followers and re-establishes himself 
in March/April 1748, overthrowing Mughul 
rule (pp. 37, 136). 

Death of Vazir Qamar-ud-din (p. 129 ). 


1748, April 25 

1748, May 21 
1748, June 20 
1748, August 


1748, September 15 


Death of Mughul emperor Muhammad Shah 
(pp. 38, 184). 

Nizam-ul-Mulk passes away (pp. 122, 184). 

Safdar Jang is appointed Vazir (p. 129). 

Holkar marches against Ishwari Singh and 
compels him to share his kingdom of Jaipur 
with Madho Singh (p. 179). 

Death of Ali Muhammad Rohilla (p. 136) , 


1748 

1748 

1748 

1748-67 

1749 

1749, August 
1749, August 
1749, December 15 
1749, December 


Mustafa Khan, Shamsher Khan and Sardar 
Khan, the Afghan generals and Afghan sol¬ 
diers of All Vardi Khan rise in rebellion. All 
Vardi defeats them in a battle at Rani Chak 
(Ranisarai) (p. 110). 

' Siraj-ud-daulah is appointed nominal Deputy 
Governor of Bihar (p. 110). 

Revolt in Gond State and Diwan Raghunath 
Singh tries to throw off Maratha yoke. 
Raghuji Bhosle takes over the administra¬ 
tion of the State (p. 241). 

Ahmad Shah Abdali raids India seven times 
(pp. 123 and f.note 36, p. 166). 

The French promise their help to Chanda 
Sahib against Anwar-ud-din (p. 320). 

Death of Anwar-ud-din, subdhdar of Kama- 
tak at the battle of Ambur (p. 321). 

Madras is restored to the English by the 
French (p. 321). 

Death of Raja Shahu, the Maratha ruler (pp. 
181, 184). 

Ahmad Shah Abdali raids India for the second 
time and conquers the Punjab after defeat¬ 
ing the Mughul Governor (pp. 124, 130, 
186). 


823 


1750, January 1 

1750, September 13 
1750, October 

1750, November 24 
1750, December 

1750, December 

1751, January 10 
1751, January 

1751, February 18 

1751, March/April 

1751, May 

1751, November 

1751, December 

1752, March 5 


1752, March 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Suraj Mai Jat defeats the Mughul army led by 
Salabat Khan and compels him to accept his 
terms (p. 155). 

Safdar Jang is defeated by the Afghans at Ram 
Chatauni (pp. 113, 137). 

BalajI Rao Peshwa arrives at an agreement 
with Ram Raja, making his own authority 
supreme in the State. This is known as 
Sangola agreement (pp. 63, 182). 

Tara Bai puts Ram Raja, the Maratha ruler, 
in confinement (p. 182). 

Nasir Jang is shot dead in an encounter with 
the forces of Nawab of Kamatak (p. 322). 

Ishwari Singh of Amber commits suicide 
(p. 144). 

The Rajputs massacre the Marathas in Jaipur 
(p. 179). 

Muzaffar Jang, Nawab of Karnatak, is cut to 
pieces in a melee in the Cuddappah district 
(p. 323). 

The battle of Bahadurpura is fought between 
the army of Peshwa BajI Rao and Damiaji 
Gaikwar, but Damaji forces his way towards 
Satara (p. 282). 

Safdar Jang’s alliance with the Marathas. The 
combined armies of Mughuls and the Mara¬ 
thas inflict severe defeats on the Rohillas 
(p. 253). 

__ $ 

Treaty concluded between Nawab All Vardi 
Khan and RaghujI Bhosle, ceding Orissa to 
the Marathas and agreeing to pay Rs. 12 
lakhs as chauth to RaghujI from Bengal re¬ 
venue (pp. 37, 110 & 243). 

Ramdas, the Diwan of Salabat Jang, invades 
Maratha territory on the advice of the 
French and concludes treaty at Shingwa 

(p. 182). 

Ahmad Shah Abdall raids India for the third 
time, defeats Governor Mir Mannu and con¬ 
quers Kashmir (p. 124, 186), 

Muin-ul-Mulk, the Mughul Governor of the 
Punjab, surrenders to the Abdall and thus 
the subdhs of Lahore and Multan go to the 
Durranis and the emperor confirms these in 
a treaty entered into with Abdall on April 
13, 1752 (p. 186). 

Gujarat partitioned between the Peshwa and 
Damaji Gaikwar (p. 283). 

824 


CHRONOLOGY 


1752, April 


1752, May 


1752, June 
1752, August 27 
1752, October 16 

1752, November 

1752 

1753, January 8 
1753, March 20 

1753, November 

1753, March- 
No vember 

1753-60 

1753 

1754, June 2 

1754, June 23 
1754, September 15 

1754, October 

1754 

1755, February 


Safdar Jang, Vazir, under orders of the Mughul 
emperor makes peace with the Rohillas and 
the Bangashes (p. 113, 139). 

The Mughul emperor enters into a defensive 
subsidiary treaty with the Marathas and en¬ 
trusts the Marathas the task of defending 
the empire from internal and external 
aggressions (pp. 186-87, 387). 

Chanda Sahib is killed at the instigation (?) of 
Muhammad Ali (p. 325). 

Khwaja Javid Khan, a favourite and confidant 
of Mughul emperor, is murdered (p. 187). 

Ghazi-ud-din, eldest son of Nizam-ul-Mulk, 
who gets a farman from the Emperor as 
subdhdar of the Deccan, dies of poisoning 

(p. 182). 

Treaty of Bhalki concluded between the Nizam 
and the Peshwa (pp. 182, 253, 326). 

The Marathas wrest from the Nizam Junnar, 
Ahmadnagar and Khandesh districts 
(p. 253). 

By a royal charter Courts of Justice are esta¬ 
blished at Fort William (p. 596). 

Jawan Mard Khan Babi, the Mughul comman¬ 
der, surrenders Ahmadabad to the Marathas 
(p. 284). 

Death of Mir Mannu (Muin-ul-Mulk) (p. 124). 

A civil war ensues between emperor Ahmad 
Shah and his Vatfr Safdar Jang (p. 114, 
155). 

Peshwa Balaji Rao conducts a number of cam¬ 
paigns in Karnatak to collect tribute and 
establish Maratha supremacy (p. 183). 

Sukhjiwan Mai submits to Ahmad Shah AbdalT 
as a feudatory (p. 164). 

Imad-ul-Mulk, with the help of the Marathas, 
deposes Mughul emperor Ahmad Shah 
(p. 187). 

Jayappa Sindia raids Marwar and collects 
some contributions (p. 190). 

Jayappa Sindia defeats Bijay Singh of Marwar 
near Merta (p. 190). 

Death of Safdar Jang. His son Shuja-ud-Daulah 
becomes subdhdar of Awadh (p. 114). 

Treaty of Pondicherry between the English 
and the French (pp. 329, 337). 

Death Of RaghujI Bhosle (p. 244). 

825 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


1755, March 19 

1755, April 7 

1755, July 25 

1756, February 12 

1756, February 13 

1756, February 

1756, April 21 

1756, June 4 

1756, June 20 
1756, October 12 


1756, October 16 
1756, November 


1756 

1757, January 23 


1757, January-April 


1757, February 9 


1757, March 


Balaj I BajI Rao and the English conclude a 
treaty to wipe out the power of Tulaji 
Angria on the West Coast (pp. 184, 305). 

Suvarnadurg fort held by Tulaji Angria falls 
to the joint attack of the English and the 
Peshwd (p. 305). 

Jayappa Sindia assassinated (p. 254). 

Tulaji Angria surrenders to the Maratha com¬ 
mander when attacked by the joint forces 
of the Marathas and the English and the 
navy (p. 306). 

The English occupy Vijayadurg against the 
wishes of the Peshwd Bala j I Rao (p. 184). 

Jaipur and Jodhpur make peace treaty with 
the Marathas (pp. 190-91). 

Death of All Vardi Khan, Subahdar of Bengal. 
Siraj-ud-Daulah succeeds him (p. 111). 

Siraj-ud-Daulah’s soldiers storm the English 
factory at Kasimbazar (p. 112). 

Siraj-ud-Daulah captures Calcutta (p. 112). 

The Peshwd and the English come to an under¬ 
standing and Vijayadurg is restored to the 
Peshwd and Bankot and ten surrounding 
villages go to the English (p. 306). 

Siraj-ud-Daulah defeats and kills Shaukat Jang 
in a battle at Manihari (p. 112). 

Ahmad Shah Abdalx invades India for the 
fourth time and reaches up to Delhi on 
January 23, 1757 (pp. 124, 131, 187, 191). 

The Nawab of Cambay seizes Ahmadabad but 
D&maji Gaikwar recovers it (p. 284). 

Ahmad Shah Abdall in his fourth invasion of 
India reaches Delhi and plunders the city 
and the people are subjected to pillage 
(pp. 124, 187). 

Mughul emperor formally cedes to Ahmad 
Shah Abdali the Punjab, Kashmir and Thatta 
and the Sirhind districts (p. 124). 

Siraj-ud-Daulah and the English conclude a 
treaty known as Treaty of Alinagar by 
which (1) trade rights and factories are res¬ 
tored to the English (2) the subahdar agrees 
to pay compensation, and (3) the English 
are granted permission to fortify Calcutta 
and coin sicca rupees (p. 112). 

Ahmad Shah Abdall during his invasion of 
India raids the fort of Ballabhgarh held by 
the Jats and puts to death all the inhabi¬ 
tants (p. 155). 


826 


CHRONOLOGY 


1757, April 2 

1757, June 23 
1757, June 


1757, August 11 

1757, August to 
1758, January 2 

1757, September 9 

1757, December 
12-17 

1757-1760 

1758, February- 
April 

1758, April 
1758, April 


1758, October 
1758, October 


1758 

1758 

1759, January 29 


1759, October 


1759, October to 
February 1760 


Ahmad Shah Abdall leaves Delhi for his home 
country (p. 187). 

Battle of Plassey (p. 339). 

The Marathas enter into a new treaty with 
Imad-ul-Mulk and get one-half of all the re¬ 
venues that they could gather from the 
Mughul dominions (pp. 187-88). 

Raghunath Rao, the Maratha general, attacks 
Delhi and captures it (p. 188). 

Sindkhed campaign of Balaji Rao Peshwa 
against the Nizam for realising the promised 
Jagtr of 25 lakhs (p. 182). 

Najib Khan Rohilla makes peace with the 
Marathas (p. 188). 

Battle of Sindkhed (p. 254). 

Clive’s first Governorship. 

The first Maratha invasion of the Punjab under 
the leadership of Raghunath Rao assisted by 
Malhar Rao Holkar (pp. 132 & 188). 

Count de Lally reaches Pondicherry (p. 333). 

A Maratha army under Raghunath Rao defeats 
Abdali’s Governor of the Punjab and ex- 
pells the Afghan army, and Raghunath Rao 
appoints Adina Beg Khan as the Maratha 
Governor of the Punjab (p. 125). 

Adina Beg Khan, Governor of the Punjab, 
passes away (pp. 125, 189). 

The Marathas under the leadership of Tukoji 
Holkar march beyond Attock and reach 
Peshawar (p. 189). 

Death of Manaji Angria (p. 306). 

Jagat Raj, son of Chhatrasal Bundela, and 
Raja of Jaitpur passes away (p. 140). 

Dattaji Sindia meets the Vazir’s (Imad-ul- 
Mulk) forces near Delhi and after a few 
skirmishes compels the Vazir to an agree¬ 
ment (p. 192). 

Ahmad Shah Abdali, invades India and esta¬ 
blishes his government at Lahore. This in¬ 
vasion was on an invitation from Najib-ud- 
daulah, who actively helped the invader 
(p. 190). 

Sadashiva Rao Bhau, on behalf of Balaji Rao 
Peshwa conducts the campaign of Udgir 
against the Nizam and defeats him comple¬ 
tely (Feb. 3, 1760) (p. 183). 


827 


1759 

1759, December 
1759 

1760, January 10 

1760, February 
1760, March 4 

1760, May 16 


1760, August 2 

1760, September 

1760, October 17 
1760, October 29 

1760, November 1 

1760, December 18 

1761, January 14 

1761, January 15 
1761, January 
1761, March 20 

1761, April 

1761, May/June 
1761, June 23 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Ali Gauhar’s (Shah Alam II) Bihar expedition 
fails (p. 114). 

Clive humbles the Dutch forces in Bengal 
(p. 342). 

Peshwd BalajI Rao wrests Underi fort from the 
Sidis (p. 184). 

Dattaji Sindia is killed in the battle of Buradi 
Ghat against Ahmad Shah Abdall (pp. 192, 
254). 

Clive leaves for England (p. 342). 

The Maratha army under the command of 
Malhar Rao Holkar is defeated by Ahmad 
Shah AbdalTs forces at Sikandrabad (pp. 
192, 254). 

Hafiz Rahmat, on behalf of Ahmad Shah 
Abdall meets Malhar Rao Holkar and Suraj 
Mai for peace, but the Maratha terms being 
exorbitant, no agreement is reached 
(p. 193). 

Sadashiv Rao Bhau, the commandant of the 
Marathas, captures Delhi (p. 193), 

Mir Qasim is made subahdar in place of Mir 
Jafar by the English (p. 344). 

The Bhau advances to Kunjpura (p. 194). 

The Maratha army, under the leadership of 
Sadashiv Rao Bhau, retraces its steps and 
reaches Panipat (p. 194). 

The invader, Ahmad Shah Abdall, reaches 
Panipat along with his allies for ousting the 
Marathas from the North (p. 194). 

Death of Raja Shambhuji of Kolhapur (p. 234). 

Ahmad Shah Abdall, defeats the Maratha 
army at the third battle of Panipat (pp. 44, 
125, 132, 137, 146, 194-97). 

The English force, led by Major Carnac, de¬ 
feats Shahzada (p. 344). 

Lally surrenders to the English at Pondicherry 
(p. 335). 

Ahmad Shah Abdall starts on his homeward 
journey after winning the battle of Panipat 
(January 14, 1761) (p. 125, 196). 

Ahmad Shah Abdall makes an unsuccessful 
attempt for peace with the Marathas 
(p. 196). 

Malhar Rao Holkar captures Rampur^ and 
Gagroni (p. 215) . 

Death of BalajI Rao Peshwa (p. 197). 


828 


CHRONOLOGY 


1761, September 14 

1761, November 
29/30 

1762, January 

1762, February 15 

1762, March/April 

1763, February 
1763, April 4 

1763, May 
1763, June 21 

1763, June 

1763, July 
1763, August 10 

1763, September 25 

1763, December 25 

1763 

1764, February 
1764, May 3 
1764, October 22 


Raghunath Rao, the regent, concludes an 
agreement with the English making sub¬ 
stantial concessions to the English but re¬ 
ceiving nothing in return (p. 202). 

Malhar Rao Holkar defeats the Jaipur army of 
Madho Singh in the battle of Mangrol (pp. 
215, 269, 388). 

The Nizam invades Maratha territory but suf¬ 
fers a defeat (pp. 201, 204). 

Shuja-ud-daulah appointed Vazir (p. 115). 

Shuja-ud-daulah conducts an expedition 
against Hindupati, ruler of Bundelkhand 
(p. 115). 

Peshwd Madhav Rao I plunders suburbs of 
Hyderabad (p. 202). 

An English deputation consisting of Amyatt 
and Hay wait on Mir Qasim for settling 
levies on inland and foreign trade (p. 348). 

Nizam Ali plunders Poona (p. 202). 

Ellis, chief of the English factory at Patna, 
seizes Patna city and begins war (p. 349). 

Mir Qasim routed at Katwa and Murshidabad. 
Murders his commander-in-chief and the 
English prisoners (p. 349). 

Nawab Mir Qasim deposed by the English 
(p. 115). 

Nizam All’s army under the command of Vithal 
Sundar defeated by the Peshwd Madhav Rao 

I at the battle of Rakshasbhuvan (pp. 202, 
244). 

Peace concluded between Nizam Ali and 
Peshwd Madhav Rao I (p. 203). 

Death of Suraj Mai Jat in a contest with 
Najib-ud-daulah on the bank of the Hindaun 
(p. 156). 

Haidar Ali expands his dominions almost to 
the banks of the Krishna by subjugating 
Peshwd’s territories (p. 205). 

Exile Mir Qasim promised help by Shah Alam 

II in recovering Bihar and Bengal (p. 115). 

Haidar Ali defeated by the Marathas at Rate- 
halli (pp. 205, 455). 

Battle of Buxar between the English army 
under Major Munro and Shuja-ud-daulah 
and Mir Qasim. The allies are defeated. 
The battle established the supremacy of the 
English (pp. 115, 349>. 


829 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


1764, November 

1764, December 1 

1764 

1764 

1764 

1765, February 

1765, February 
1765, March 


1765, May 3 

1765, May 
1765, July 

1765, August 12 
1765, August 16 


The Marathas recapture Dharwar from Haidar 
All (p. 205). 

Battle of Jadi Anvatti between Haidar All and 
the Maratha army led by Peshwd Madhav 
Rao I. Hadiar All defeated (p. 206). 

Shuja-ud-daulah reappointed Vazir under 
pressure from Clive (p. 116). 

The triumphant Sikhs establish their sovere¬ 
ignty in the Punjab, assemble at Amritsar 
and strike coins of gold and silver with the 
inscription “Degh, Tegh, Fateh” (p. 133). 

Ahmad Shah Abdali ratifies a formal peace 
with the Marathas (p. 216). 

Jawahir Singh Jat makes peace with Najib 
Khan Rohilla (p. 216). 

Death of Mir Jafar (p. 350). 

Agreement is concluded between Haidar All 
and Peshwd Madhav Rao I, and Haidar Ali 
surrenders several Maratha districts includ¬ 
ing Bankapur and gives up claim over 
Savanur and Gooti and agrees to pay tribute 
of 32 lakhs (p. 206). 

The allies of exile Mir Qasim, Shuja-ud-dau¬ 
lah and Malhar Rao Holkar are finally de¬ 
feated at Kora by the English army under 
Sir Robert Fletcher (pp. 115, 216). 

Clive arrives in Calcutta for the second time to 
administer the English affairs (pp. 116, 351). 

Mahadji Sindia settles the tribute of Kota at 
15 lakhs and leaves Diwan Achyut Rao to 
collect the tribute from Udaipur, Shahpura, 
and Rupnagar (p. 216). 

Farman from Shah Alam granting the Diwani 
of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa to the E. I. Com¬ 
pany (pp. 352, 502). 

The treaty of Allahabad concluded between 
Nawab Shuja-ud-daulah and the English, 
terms being (1) restoration of all the terri¬ 
tories held by the Nawab with the exception 
of Allahabad and Kora districts given to the 
emperor, (2) Chunar to be retained by the 
English, (3) the faujdari of Banaras to be 
with the family of Balwant Singh under 
English protection although formally sub¬ 
ordinate to the Nawab of Awadh, (4) The 
Nawab to pay to the English Rs. 50 lakhs 
as war indemnity, (5) The Nawab of Awadh 
to defray the cost of maintenance of the 
troops for the defence of his territories 
under the defensive treaty clause (p. 116). 


830 


CHRONOLOGY 


1765, October 

1766, January 
1766, March 13/14 

1766, April 

1766, May 20 
1766, July 

1766, November 12 


1766, December 
1766, December 

1766, December 
1766 

1766 

1767, January 

1767, February 
1767, May 


Peshv>d Madhav Rao I, marches against Janoji 
Bhosle and brings him to book—Treaty of 
Khalapur (p. 245). 

Raghunath Rao leads an expedition into Hin¬ 
dustan (p. 217). 

The combined Jat-Sikh army under the leader¬ 
ship of Jawahir Singh defeats the Maratha 
army at the battle of Dholpur and .occupy 
Dholpur (p. 217). 

The Maratha armies under Malhar Rao Holkar 
and Mahadji Sindia join the forces under 
Raghunath Rao near Bhander (p. 217). 

Death of Malhar Rao Holkar at Alampur (pp, 
146, 217, 255, 269). 

Robert Clive convenes a congress at Chapra 
which is attended by Shuja-ud-daulah and 
the envoys of the emperor, the Jat Raja and 
the Rohilla chiefs in which a treaty is con¬ 
cluded for ‘mutual defence and security’ 
against Maratha invasion (p. 116). 

General Caillaud, on behalf of the English, 
concludes a treaty with Nizam Ah which in¬ 
directly provided for the employment of 
English auxiliary troops by Nizam against 
Haidar All (p. 207). 

Nahar Singh Jat, a rival of Jawahir Singh Jat 
and a protege of the Marathas, Commits 
suicide (p. 217). 

Jawahir Singh Jat concludes peace with 
Raghunath Rao by surrendering Maratha 
commanders captured in March, 1766 

(p. 218) . 

The Rana of Gohad makes peace with Raghu¬ 
nath Rao through Mahadji Sindia and agrees 
to pay 15 lakhs (p. 218). 

Rana Ari Singh II of Udaipur agrees to pay to 
the Marathas a sum of Rs. 26,30,221 in four 
years (p. 216). 

The English, the Marathas and the Nizam form 
a triple alliance against Haidar All (p. 122). 

Peshwd Madhav Rao I marches into Karnatak 
and captures several forts held by Haidar 
All (p. 207). 

Robert Clive leaves India (p. 354). 

Peace is concluded between Haidar Ali and 
Peshvod Madhav Rao I. Peshwd recovers lost 
territory in Karnatak. Haidar also agrees 
to pay 3 lakhs to the Peshwd in tribute 

(p. 208). 

831 


1767, July 
1767, August 
1767, September 

1767, November 
1767, December 14 
1767 

1767 

1767-73 


1768, February 23 
1768, February 

1768, June 10 


1768, July 
1768, August 18 
1768, November 29 


1768, November 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Raghunath Rao returns from Hindustan dis¬ 
comfited. 

The first Anglo-Mysore war breaks out 

(p. 208). 

The English troops under the command of 
General Smith defeat the forces of Haidar 
All and Nizam All at the pass of Changama 
and at Trinomali (p. 122). 

Thomas Mostyn, an envoy of the English, sent 
to Poona to persuade the Peshwd to join the 
English against Haidar Ali (p. 208). 

Jawahir Singh wins a pyrrhic victory over 
Jaipur troops in the battle of Maonda (pp. 
158, 218). 

The Bengal Government make advances to 
Janoji Bhosle for the transfer of Orissa on 
condition of payment of chmith of Bengal, 
which Janoji rejects (p. 247). 

Jawahir Singh Jat raids Maratha possessions 
in northern Malwa and conquers large areas 
(p. 158). 

The Sikhs extend their power from Saharan- 
pur in the east to Attock in the west, from 
Multan in the south to Kangra and Jammu 
in the north and organize themselves into 
12 misls (confederacies) (p. 133). 

Nizam Ali confirms the old treaty of 1766 
(p. 123). 

The Bombay Government send an expedition 
against Haidar All's fleet on the west 
coast (p. 209). 

Battle between Peshwa Madhav Rao I and his 
uncle Raghunath Rao at Dhodap in which 
Raghunath Rao is defeated and taken a cap¬ 
tive (pp. 203-04, 245). 

Jawahir Sigh Jat is assassinated (p. 219). 

Death of Damaji Gaikwar (p. 284). 

The English conclude a treaty with Shuja-ud- 
daulah which checked the strength and pro¬ 
gress of his army. Hastings reversed it in 

1772 and cancelled it fully on September 8, 

1773 (p. 117). 

The English effect a reconciliation between the 
Mughul emperor and Shuja-ud-daulah and 
Shuja-ud-daulah becomes the de facto Vazir 
(p. 117). 


832 


CHRONOLOGY 


1769, March 23 


1769, April 4 

1769, April 8 
1769, May 


1769, October 
1769 

1769-70 

1770, A}?ril 6 

1770, October 31 

1770, December 

1771, January 
1771, February 10 

1771, March 5 

1771, February 12 
1771 


Peace is concluded between Peshwd Madhav 
Rao I and Janoji Bhosle at Kanakapur and 
Janoji surrenders territories worth 8 lakhs 
to the Peshwd and promises loyalty to the 
Peshwd (pp. 204, 210, 246). 

The English (Madras Government) sign a 
treaty with Haidar All which provides resti¬ 
tution of mutual conquests and is a defen¬ 
sive alliance (p. 458). 

Ratan Singh Jat, ruler of Bharatpur, is mur¬ 
dered by an alchemist (p. 159). Civil war 
ensues (p. 219). 

Mahadji Sindia and TukojI Holkar appear near 
Udaipur to support the cause of Ratan Singh 
(falsely reported to be a son of Rana Raj 
Singh II). But no action takes place as dif¬ 
ferences develop between Sindia and Holkar 
and Ari Singh agrees to pay 64 lakhs as pre¬ 
sent to Sindia and alienate 1J lakhs worth 
jag^ir in favour of Ratan Singh (p. 219). 

Peshwd Madhav Rao I starts on his expedition 
of Karnatak (p. 211). 

The English appoint European servants 
throughout the whole country to super¬ 
intend native officers in their work of re¬ 
venue collection and administration of 
justice (p. 355). 

A terrible famine visits Bengal (p. 357). 

The Marathas defeat Nawal Singh, Jat ruler, 
near Sonkh (p. 220). 

Death of Najib-ud-daulah Rohilla (p. 255). 

Shah Alam II, the emperor, who has been a 
pensioner of the English, negotiates with 
Mahadji Sindia (p. 221). 

Gopal Rao Patwardhan, an able general of 
Peshwd Madhav Rao, passes away (p. 212). 

Mahadji Sindia captures Delhi and requests 
Shah Alam to return to his capital (pp. 221, 
255, 367). 

Trimbak Rao Pethe, the Maratha general, de¬ 
feats Haidar AH in the battle of Moti Talav, 
and Haidar All escapes (pp. 213, 423, 456). 

Shah Alam II ratifies a formal agreement with 
the Marathas (p. 388). 

Fateh Singh Gaikwar, younger brother of 
Govind Rao Gaikwar, obtains recognition 
for Sayaji Rao as chief from the Peshwd in 
preference to Govind Rao (p. 285). 


M.S.—53 


833 


1772, January 6 
1772, March 

1772, April 


1772 

1772, April 

1772, May 16 
1772, June 17 


1772, November 18 
1772, December 


1773, August 30 
1773, September 7 


1773 (Spring) 

1773 

1774, March 26 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Shah Alam II, enters Delhi as emperor ynder 
protection of the Marathas (p. 388). 

Raghunath Rao, who had rebelled against 
Peshwa Madhav Rao I and had been kept 
in confinement, is released (p. 204). 

Peshwa Madhav Rao I and Haidar All con¬ 
clude peace. Haidar pays 31 lakhs to the 
Peshwa and promises to pay 19 lakhs. The 
Marathas retain Sira, Madgiri, Gurrum- 
konda, Dod Ballapur, Kolar and Hoskote 
while Nandigarh, Chik Ballapur and Deva- 
rayanadurg go to Haidar. 1772-85 Warren 
Hastings’ Governorship. 

Quinquennial settlement (p. 363, 382). 

Warren Hastings stops payment of pension to 
Shah Alam (p. 117). 

Death of Janoji Bhosle of Nagpur (p. 246). 

Shuja-ud-daulah, Nawab of Awadh, concludes 
a treaty with the Rohillas in the presence 
of Sir Robert Barker, English commander, 
under which the Rohillas agree to pay Rs. 40 
lakhs to the Nawab for expelling the Mara¬ 
thas from Rohilkhand (pp. 118, 138, 221, 
367). 

Death of Peshwa Madhav Rao I (p. 222). 

The Marathas (Holkar and Visaji Krishna) 
compel Shah Alam II to confer the office of 
Mir Bakshi on Zabita Khan (son of Najib- 
ud-daulah) and grant Kora and Allahabad 
to the Marathas (p. 221). 

Peshwa Narayan Rao is murdered (p. 388). 

The English and Shuja-ud-daulah conclude the 
treaty of Benaras under which the districts 
of Kora and Allahabad were given to the 
Nawab for a sum of Rs. 50 lakhs and an 
annual subsidy for the maintenance of a 
garrison of the Company’s troops for the 
protection of the Nawab. The other matters 
protection of the Nawab. (pp. 117-18, 368). 

The combined forces of the English and Awadh 
repulse the Maratha attack on Rohilkhand. 
(pp. 118, 367). 

The Regulating Act for the better manage¬ 
ment of the Company’s affairs (pp. 370-72). 

A Royal Charter is issued by the English 
Crown providing for the establishment of a 
Supreme Court (p. 598). 


834 


CHRONOLOGY 


1774, April 


1774, October 20 


1774-82 

,i 

1775, January 26 
1775, January 26 

1775, February 17 

1775, March 6 
1775, March 

1775, May 

1775, May 

1775, April-June 

1776, March 9 
1776, March 

1776, March 


1777, January 8 

1777 

1777 


The combined armies of the English and 
Shuja-ud-daulah march into Itohilkhand on 
the failure of Hafiz Rahmat Khan to pay 
Rs. 40 lakhs to drive out the Marathas and 
occupy Rohilkhand. Hafiz Rahamat Khan is 
killed in the battle of Miranpur Katra 
(pp. 118, 370). 

The first meeting of the new Council under 
the Regulating Act is held under the presi¬ 
dentship of Warren Hastings, Governor- 
General (p. 598). . 

First Anglo-Maratha war (pp. 44, 147). 

Death of Shuja-ud-daulah (p. 119). 

The battle of Panchgaon fought between 
Mudhoji Bhosle and Sabaji Bhosle in which 
Sabaji is killed (p. 246). 

Peshwd Raghunath Rao, who flees Poona and 
joins Govind Rao Gaikwar at Baroda when 
pursued by Barbhais, is defeated at Anand 
Mogri (p. 286). 

Treaty of Surat. Raghunath Rao obtains Bri¬ 
tish help against the Poona Council (pp. 256 
286, 424, 635). 

Nandkumar brings against Warren Hastings a 
charge of accepting bribe from Munni 
Begam, guardian of Nawab of Awadh 
(p. 373). 

Treaty of Fyzabad between the Nawab of 
Awadh Asaf-ud-daulah and Bristow on be¬ 
half of the Bengal Council (pp. 372-73). 

Nandkumar executed on forgery charges. 

Konher Rao Trimbak Patwardhan attacks 
Kolhapur and defeats the Kolhapur army in 
the civil war (p. 235). 

The Patwardhans once more attack Kolhapur 
and plunder it (p. 235). 

Haidar All captures Gooty and imprisons its 
ruler Murar Rao Ghorpade along with his 
two sons (p. 424). 

Treaty of Purandhar to secure a general peace 
between the E.I. Company and the Mara¬ 
thas (p. 425). 

Haidar All defeats the Maratha army led by 
Patwardhans at Saunshi (p. 425). 

Death of Mir Qasim (p. 349). 

Mudhoji Bhosle lays claim to Satara throne 
under English encouragement (p. 247). 

835 


1778, February- 
April 

1778, November 

1778 

1779, January 16 

1779, March 19 

1779 

1780, January. 26 
1780, February 15 

1780, February 20 

1780 

1780, April 11 

1780, August 3 

1781, January 22 
1781, July 1 

1781, July 1 

1781, September 27 

1781, October 27 

1781, October 13 

1781 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Mahadji Sindia invests Kolhapur and Kolha¬ 
pur Raja agrees to pay Rs. 15 lakhs to raise 
the siege (pp. 235-36). 

The British renew war with the Marathas. 

War breaks out between England and France 
(p. 426). 

Convention of Wadgaon (p. 256). 

Mahe, a French possession, falls to the English 
(p. 458 ). 

Nizam takes active interest in the formation 
of anti-British confederacy in collaboration 
with the Peshwa, Haidar All and Bhosle of 
Nagpur (p. 442). 

A treaty of offensive and defensive alliance is 
concluded between Fateh Singh Gaikwar 
and the English at Kandila (p. 286). 

The allied army of the English and Fateh 
Singh Gaikwar captures Ahmadabad (p. 
286). 

Haidar Ali concludes a treaty with the Mara- 
thias (p. 426). 

Nana Phadnis forms a quadruple alliance 
against the English with Mudhoji Bhosle, 
Nizam and Haidar All as his allies to oust 
the English (p. 247). 

The Governor-General and the Council pass a 
series of regulations for administration of 
justice (p. 379). 

The English force under Col. Popham surprise 
Gwalior (p. 256). 

The Maratha war with Kolhapur ends (p. 236) 

Coote defeats Haidar All in the battle of Porto 
Novo (p. 459). 

Mahadji Sindia defeats an English contingent 
near Sipri (p. 257). 

Coote defeats Haidar Ali in the second battle 
of Pollilore (p. 459). 

Coote defeats Haidar Ali in the battle of Solin- 
gar (p. 459). 

Truce between Mahadji Sindia and Col. Muir 
of East India Co. effected on terms of no gain 
no loss to either party (p. 257). 

The British Parliament passes the Act of 
Amending the Constitution of the Supreme 
Court in India (p. 380). 

Death of Mirza Najaf Khan, emperor Shah 
Alam’s regent (p. 257). 

836 


1782, April 6 


CHRONOLOGY 


1782, May 17 

1782, December 7 

1783, October 


1784, March 11 
1784, April 


1784, June 

1784, November 

1785, February 
1785, March 

1785, May 10 
1785, May/July 


1786, September 
1786 


1786, March-April 

1787, March 

1787, July 
1787 


1788, April 
1788, June 17/18 
1788, July 30 


The treaty of Salbai between the Marathas and 
the English (pp. 257, 287). 

Death of Haidar All (pp. 426, 460). 

Mahadji Sindia concludes a new treaty with 
the English to enforce the treaty of Salbai 
on Tipu (p. 449). 

The treaty of Mangalore between the English 
and Tipu is signed (p. 427, 460). 

Prince Jahandar Shah (Jawan Bakht) runs to 
the protection of the English at Lucknow 
(p. 389). 

* 

The treaty of Yadgir between the Nizam and 
Marathas is concluded (p. 442). 

Mahadji Sindia attains supreme power in 
Delhi (pp. 258, 390). 

Warren Hastings leaves India (pp. 385, 472). 

Ambaji Ingle, Mahadji Sindia’s subdhdar con¬ 
cludes a treaty with the Sikh chiefs (pp. 
472-73). 

Mahadji Sindia concludes a treaty of friend¬ 
ship with Sikh chiefs (p. 391). 

Tipu Sultan occupies Dodwad, Dharwar, Sam- 
pgaon and Jamboti belonging to the Mara¬ 
thas (p. 427). 

Lord Cornwallis arrives in India as Governor- 
General (p. 472). 

Death of Tulaji Angria in Maratha custody. 
(He had surrendered to the Maratha com¬ 
mander on February 12, 1756) (p. 306). 

Mahadji Sindia demands arrears of tribute 
from Jaipur. 

The Poona Government and Tipu reach a 
settlement (p. 432). 

The battle of Lalsot (p. 148, 260). 

The Kolhapur army attacks the Sawant of 
Wadi (a feudatory) who flouts the autho¬ 
rity of the Raja of Kolhapur. The Raja of 
Sawantwadi is helped by the Portuguese in 
facing the Kolhapur army (p. 236). 

Sindia’s army is defeated at the battle of 
Chaksana by the Rohillas (p. 261). 

Mahadji Sindia’s forces defeat Ismail Beg at 
Agra (pp. 261, 398). 

Ghulam Qadir and Ismail Beg jointly take pos¬ 
session of Delhi (p. 398). 


837 


1788, August 1 

1788, August 
1788, October 2 
1788, October 16 

1788, December 31 
1788 

1788 

1788 

1789, March 3 
1789, December 29 

1789, December 

1790, February 
1790, April 

1790, June 1 

1790, June 20 

1790, July 4 

1790, September 10 

1790, December 10 

1791, January 6 
1791, March 21 
1791, April 4 
1791, December 4 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

Ghulam Qadir deposes Shah Alam II and in¬ 
stalls Bidar Bakht on the Delhi throne 
(p. 398). 

Ghulam Qadir’s atrocities. 

Mahadji Sindia occupies Delhi (p. 399). 

Shah Alam II is reinstated on the Delhi throne 
by the Marathas (p. 399). 

Ghulam Qadir captured (p. 262). 

Peace established between England, France 
and Holland (p. 433). 

Mudhoji Bhosle of Nagpur passes away 
(p. 247). 

Nizam All surrenders Guntur Sarkar to the 
English (p. 474). 

Ghulam Qadir put to death (p. 399). 

Tipu attacks Travancore but fails in his design 
(pp. 433, 463). 

Death of Fateh Singh Gaikwar of Baroda 
(p. 287). 

Ismail Beg defects to the Rajputs (p. 402). 

Tipu Sultan attacks Travancore for the second 
time and Travancoreans have to retreat 
(p. 463). 

Treaty of Poona between the Peshwd and the 
English directed against Tipu Sultan (pp. 
434, 463). 

Battle of Patan fought between Mahadji 
Sindia and the Rajput allies. The Rajputs 
defeated (pp 262, 402). 

Kennaway, on behalf of the English, concludes 
a separate treaty with Nizam All, to secure 
his alliance against Tipu Sultan (pp. 434, 
463). 

Battle of Merta: Jodhpur army defeated by 
Sindia’s army led by De Boigne (p. 262). 

The English forces, led by Abercrombie, over¬ 
run Malabar (p. 435). 

The Jodhpur Raja, Bijay Singh, enters into a 
treaty with Mahadji Sindia (p. 404). 

Cornwallis, the English commandant, carries 
Bangalore by assault (p. 436). 

Parashuram Bhau Patwardhan reduces Dhar- 
war fort (p. 435). 

Khande Rao Hari, a commander of Mahadji 
Sindia, intercepts Ismail Beg on his way to 
Kanud and defeats him (p. 405). 

838 


CHRONOLOGY 


1791 

1792, March 

1792, April 

1792 

1792 


1793, June 1 

1793 

1793 

1794, February 12 
1794, May 10 

1794, July 

1794, November 

1795, March 11 

1795, April 10 

1795, August 13 
1795, August 

1795, October 27 

1795, October 

1795, October 

1796, October 7 
1796, December 5 


Varanasi Rajakiya Sanskrit Mahavidyalaya 
(the present Sanskrit Vishwa Vidyalaya) is 
founded (p. 701). 

Tipu Sultan defeated by the allies: treaty of 
Seringapatam (p. 440). 

Ismail Beg surrenders to Perron (p. 405). 

Municipal functioning proper is given to 
Madras by an Act of Parliament of 1792 

(p. 620). 

The East India Co., sends a maritime expedi¬ 
tion against Kolhapur State for piracies 
committed by the Kolhapur ships; obtain re¬ 
parations for losses suffered and gets per¬ 
mission to open factories at Malwan and 
Kolhapur (p. 236). 

Holkar’s troops are defeated by Sindia’s army 
in the battle of Lakheri (p. 272). 

Death of Raghuji Angria (p. 306). 

Permanent Settlement at Bengal. 

Death of Mahadji Sindia at Vanawadi (near 
Poona) (pp. 263, 407). 

Daulat Rao Sindia, son of Anand Rao Sindia, 
is installed as successor to Mahadji Sindia 
(p. 490). 

Nizam Ali and the Marathas commence nego¬ 
tiations for a settlement (p. 444). 

Lakhba Dada appointed Daulat Rao Sindia’s 
viceroy in northern India (p. 410). 

The battle of Kharda: the Nizam is defeated 
(pp. 446-48). 

The treaty of Kharda concluded between the 
Nizam and the Marathas (pp. 447-48). 

Death of Ahalya Bai Holkar (p. 272). 

Lakhba Dada, the Maratha viceroy in north 
India, occupies Sabalgarh (p. 413). 

Accidental death of Peshwd Sawai Madhav Rao 
(p. 263). 

Bhanga Singh of Thaneshwar and the Queen 
of Patiala assail Maratha force and Nana 
Rao beats back a hasty retreat to Delhi 
(p. 417). 

Lakhba Dada, the Maratha viceroy, occupies 
Narwar (p. 413). 

Nana Phadnis enters into a secret treaty with 
Nizam Ali (p. 449). 

Baji Rao Raghunath becomes Peshwd (p. 488). 


839 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


1797, August 15 
1797, September 14 

1797, November 3 

1797, December 31 

1798, March 10 
1798, June 16 

1798, July 15 
1798, August 4 

1798, September 1 

1798, October 

1799, April 17 
1799, May 4 
.1799, May 5 
1799, September 16 

1799, September 
1799, October 27 

1799, December 

1799 

1799-1801 

1800, March 13 

1800 September 


Death of TukojI Holkar (pp. 264, 490). 

Malhar Rao Holkar II killed in a fight at Bham- 
burda by the forces of Daulat Rao Sindia 
(p. 490). 

Zaman Shah occupies Lahore (p. 414) . 

Nana Phadnis is arrested by Michael Filose, 
an officer of Daulat Rao Sindia, and made a 
prisoner (p. 489). 

Lakhba Dada arrested under orders of Daulat 
Rao Sindia by Harji Sindia (p. 415). 

The combined armies of the Rajas of Satara 
and Kolhapur and Chhatra Singh defeat the 
Peshvxi’s army led by Madhav Rao Raste 
(p. 488). 

Nana Phadnis released from confinement 
(p. 489). 

Parashuram Bhau defeats the Satara Raja and 
occupies the fort of Satara on 31 August, 
1798 (p. 237). 

Wellesly binds the Nizam with a subsidiary 
alliance (pp. 123, 449). 

Zaman Shah invades India for the last time; 
reoccupies Lahore but retreats (p. 483). 

The allies (the English and Nizam) lay siege 
to Seringapatam (p. 466). 

Tipu Sultan falls fighting at Seringapatam 
against the combined armies (p. 441, 446). 

Lakbha Dada and Rala Rao Ingle make an 
armistice (p. 416). 

Parashuram Bhau defeated and killed in the 
battle near Pattankudi by the Kolhapur 
forces (p. 238). 

Daulat Rao Sindia deprives Ambaji Ingle of 
authority over Mewar (p. 416). 

A peaceful settlement is entered into between 
Lakhba Dada and General Perron at Muaz- 
zamabad (pp. 416-17). 

Shivaji III, Chhatrapati of Kolhapur, defeated 
by Peshwa's forces and compelled to seek 
shelter at Panhala (p. 488). 

Death of Ismail Beg at Agra fort while in im¬ 
prisonment (p. 405). 

The Polygar war (p. 628). 

Death of Nana Phadnis (p. 489). 

Death of Govind Rao Gaikwar (p. 289). 

840 


CHRONOLOGY 


1800-05 

1800-18 

1801, June 25 
1801, July 4 

1801, July 15 

1801, July 18 
1801, October 14 

1801, November 

1802, March 

1802, June 6 
1802, October 8 

1802, October 25 

1802, October 25 

1802, December 

1803, March 18 

1803, May 13 

1803, August 7 

1803, August 29 
1803, September 4 

1803, September 11 

1803, September 16 


Pychy rebellion in Malabar (p. 626). 

Period known in Maratha history as Gardi Ka 
Wakt (period of trouble) (p. 273), 

Yashwant Rao Holkar, on his plundering spree 
of Sindia’s possessions, defeats Sindia’s 
officer MacIntyre at Newri (p. 491). 

Captain Brownrigg, an officer of Sindia, de-. 
feats Yashwant Rao Holkar in a battle near 
Satwas (p. 491), 

Death of Umdat-ul-Umara, Nawab of Arcot 
(p, 526). 

Yashwant Rao Holkar captures Ujjain. 

Daulat Rao Sindia attacks Indore and scatters 
the forces of Holkar (pp. 149, 265, 491). 

The Nawab-Vazir of Awadh enters into a new 
subsidiary treaty with the English (p. 524) 

Convention of Cambay between the Gaikwar 
and the English. The English obtain a strong¬ 
hold over Anand Rao Gaikwar (pp. 290, 
487). 

Anand Rao, the Raja of Baroda, enters into a 
subsidiary alliance with the English (p. 290 ). 

Fateh Singh Mane, an adventurer, who had 
joined Yashwant Rao Holkar, defeats the 
Peshwd’s forces led by his commander Nana 
Purandare at Baramati (p. 492). 

Yashwant Rao Holkar defeats the combined 
armies of the Peshwd and Daulat Rao Sindia 
at the battle of Hadapsar (p. 265, 273). 

Peshwd Baji Rao II, makes proposals to the 
English for subsidiary alliance (p. 492). 

Treaty of Bassein: Peshwd Baji Rao aqcepts 
subsidiary alliance losing his independence 
(p. 238). 

Governor-General ratifies the treaty of Bas¬ 
sein (p. 492). 

The Peshwd, who had fled Poona, returns to 
under British protection (p. 494). 

Arthur Wellesley declares war on Bhosle ~and 
Sindia (p. 494). 

The English capture Broach (p. 496). 

The English army led by Lake defeats Sindia’s 
forces at Aligarh (pp. 266, 496). 

The English army defeats Sindian forces at 
the battle of Delhi (pp. 266, 496). 

Shah Alam seeks British protection. 


841 


THE MAKATHA SUPREMACY 


1803, September 17 
1803, September 23 

1803, September 

1803, October 15 
1803, October 18 
1803, October 21 
1803, October 

1803, November 1 

1803, November 
28/29 

1803, December 15 
1803, December 17 

1803, December 30 


1804, February 5 

1804, February 27 

1804, April 16 

1804, July-August 

1804, November 13 
1804, November 17 

1804, December 23 
1804 

1805, January 7 

1805, April 

1805, October 5 
1805, November 21 


The English capture Champaner and Pava- 
garh (p. 496). 

Arthur Wellesley defeats the combined armies 
of Sindia and Bhosle at the battle of Assaye 
(pp. 265, 495). 

Ranjit Singh Jat enters into a defensive and 
offensive alliance with the English (p. 160). 

The English capture Burhanpur (p. 495). 

The English capture Agra (p. 496). 

The English capture Asirgarh (p. 495). 

The English become masters of the province of 
Cuttack (p. 496). 

The English forces defeat Sindia’s army at the 
battle of Laswari (p. 266). 

The English defeat Bhosle’s forces at the battle 
of Argaon (pp. 265, 496). 

The English capture Gawligarh (p. 496). 

Treaty of Deogaon between Bhosle of Nagpur 
and the English (pp. 248, 496). 

Treaty of Sarje Anjangaon concluded between 
Daulat Rao Sindia and the English (pp. 266, 
497). 

Yashwant Rao Holkar tries to persuade Daulat 
Rao Sindia to withdraw from British alli¬ 
ance (p. 497). 

Daulat Rao Sindia concludes a defensive alli¬ 
ance with the English (p. 497). 

War declared against Yashwant Rao Holkar by 
the British (pp. 276, 498). 

Monson’s disastrous retreat from Mukundra 
pass to Agra. 

Holkar’s infantry defeated at Dig. 

Yashwant Rao Holkar routed by Gen. Lake's 
army at the battle of Farrukhabad (p. 498). 

The English capture Dig (p. 498). 

With a new treaty made with the Peshwa, the 
treaty of Deogaon concluded in 1803 is con¬ 
firmed (p. 248). 

The siege of Bharatpur by the English begins 
(p. 498). 

Ranjit Singh, the Raja of Bharatpur, makes 
peace with the English (pp. 161, 277, 499). 

Death of Lord Cornwallis (p. 526). 

Daulat Rao Sindia concludes a treaty with the 
English, known as treaty of Mustafapur 
(p. 499). F 

842 


CHRONOLOGY 


1805, December 24 
1807, July 
1808 

1811, October 20 
1811 

1812, August 

1812, October 8 
1812 

1814, November 
1816, March 

1816, March 

1816, May 27 

1817, February 
1817, June 13 
1817, October 16 
1817, November 5 

1817, November 5 
1817, November 15 

1817, November 24 

1817, November 27 


Yashwant Rao Holkar enters into treaty with 
the English at Rajpoor Ghat (pp. 278, 499). 

Treaty of Tilsit concluded between the Czar 
and Napoleon (p. 528) 

Appa Desai of Nipani defeats Kolhapur army 
near Savgaon (p. 238). 

Death of Yashwant Rao Holkar at Bhanpura 
(p. 500). 

Appa Desai of Nipani attacks Kolhapur army' 
which suffers very badly. This defeat leads 
to British arbitration (p. 238). 

Treaty of Pandharpur between the Peshwa 
and his feudatories through British media¬ 
tion (p. 503). 

Settlement between the Peshwd and Kolhapur 
Raja is reached through the British (p. 238). 

The College of Fort St. George, in imitation of 
Lord Wellesley's College of Fort William, is 
started to train civil servants (p. 637). 

The Anglo-Nepalese war is launched (p. 530). 

The treaty of Saugauli is signed between the 
English and the Raja of Nepal (p. 533). 

Death of Raghuji II Bhosle (pp. 248, 501). 

Appa Saheb, cousin of Parsoji Bhosle, con¬ 
cludes a treaty of subsidiary alliance with 
the English (p. 501). 

The Raja of Sikkim signs a defensive treaty 
with the English (p. 532). 

Peshwd Baji Rao II is compelled to sign the 
Treaty of Poona (p. 503). 

Marquis of Hastings opens campaign against 
the Pindarjs (p. 505). 

Bapu Gokhale, Peshwd’s commander, sets fire 
to the Residency buildings and attacks the 
English. Battle of Kirkee (pp. 505-06). 

Daulat Rao Sindia signs the treaty of Gwalior 
with the English (pp. 150, 266, 501). 

The English army led by General Smith de¬ 
feats Bapu Gokhale at the battle of Yervada 
(p. 506). 

Appa Saheb Bhosle of Nagpur receives from 
the Peshwa the robes of Sena Saheb Subah 
(p. 502). 

Battle of Sitabaldi fought between the English 
and forces of Appa Saheb Bhosle in which 
Bhosle’s forces are defeated (p. 506). 


843 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


1817, December 16 

1817, December 21 

1818, January 6 
1818, February 20 

1818, May 
1818, June 3 

1818, June 16 

<■ 

1819, April 8 
1819 

1827, March 
1837, November 20 

1839 

1840 

1844 

1851, January 
1853 


Appa Saheb Bhosle, Raja of Nagpur, surren¬ 
ders to the English (p. 506). 

Battle of Mahidpur fought between Holkar 
and the English. Holkar is defeated (pp. 150, 
506). 

Treaty of Mandasor concluded between Holkar 
and the English (pp. 150, 278, 506). 

The battle of Ashta fought between the 
English and Bapu Gokhale, in which Gok- 
hale is killed and his forces defeated 
(p. 507). 

Appa Saheb Bhosle escapes from British cus¬ 
tody and seeks refuge with the Rajputs. 

Baji Rao II, Peshwd, surrenders to the English 
at Mhow (p. 507). 

Bajiba Gujar is raised to the throne of Nagpur 
as Raghuji III (p. 506). 

The English wrest Asirgarh from its comman¬ 
dant Yashwant Rao Lad (p. 506). 

Ranjit Singh conquers Kashmir; and the 
Afghan rule which had commenced with the 
invasion by Ahmad Shah Abdall (1752) 
ends (pp. 164-65). 

Death of Daulat Rao Sindia (p. 266). 

By a legislative order, Persian ceases to be 
court language in British India (p. 700). 

The jagir of Manaji Angria lapses to British 
Government for want of a direct heir 
(p. 306). 

Appa Saheb Bhosle, who had taken shelter 
with Man Singh, the Raja of Jodhpur, 
passes away (p. 506). 

The British appoint a Diwan to administer the 
State of Kolhapur (p. 239). 

Daeth of Baji Rao II, Peshwd at Bithur 
(p. 507). 

Nagpur State is annexed to the British empire 
for want of a legitimate heir (p. 248). 


844 


INDEX 


Aba Chitnis, 408, 409 
‘Abdul Ahad, 389 
‘Abdul ‘Ali Khan, 109 
‘Abdul Hasan Khan Bandar, 164 
Abdul Karim (author), 34 
‘Abdullah (son of ‘Ali Muhammad 
Rohilla), 136 

Khan Alkozai (gr. of Kashmir), 165 
Khan Ishaq (gr. Kashmir), 164 
Abdus Samad Khan, 39, 127, 132, 163 
Abercromby, Sir Robert, 464 
Abhay Singh (of Marwar), 13, 18, 23, 
25; 39, 84, 86, 142, 146, 268, 282 
Abul Muzzaffar Nasiruddin Muhammad 
Shah Badshah Ghazi—See Muham¬ 
mad Shah 

Adidam Surakavi, 674 
Adina Beg Khan, 125, 128, 130, 131, 
188; invites Maratha. help against 
Abdali, 132; death of, 189 
Adoni, 207, 430 

Afghans, the, 1, 4, 43, 110, 113, 170, 185, 
188, 191, 396; rise of 134-35; settle¬ 
ment in the north, 133-34 
Afrasiyab Khan, 389 
Aga Muhammad Said, 108 
Agra 9, 10, 13, 20, 86, 90, 141, 390, 396, 
397 

Ahalya Bai Holkar, 147, 400; her chari¬ 
ties, 271; moral grandeur and suc¬ 
cessful administration, 269-72 
Ahirs, the, 147 
Ahirwada, 146 
Ahmad Khan Bangash, 155 
Ahmadnagar, 202 

Ahmad Shah (Mughul emperor), 38, 
123, 130, 155 

Ahmad Shah Abdali, 36, 38, 162, 164, 
165, 178, 182, 186, 187, 190, 218, 388, 
389; and Raja Ranjit Deo, 162-63; and 
the Jats, 155; and the Maratha, 125, 
132, 156, 177, 193; battle of Pani- 
pat, 194-97, 218, 254, 388, 389; and the 
Sikhs, 120, 130; invasion of India, 
123-26, 187, 190-91. 

Ahsan Khan, 11 
Aix-la-Chapelle, treaty of, 319 
Ajit Singh (Raja of Jodhpur), 12, 13, 
14, 18, 19, 20, 23, 26, 41, 58, 139, 140, 
141, 153 
Ajmer, 18 396 
Akbar Shah, 391 
‘Alam ‘Ali Khan, 22, 67 
Alam Chand, 106, 107, 108 
‘Alamgir II, 165; and Ahmad Shah 
Abdali, 187 


‘Ali Bahadur, 261, 262, 397, 399, 400, 
403 

Aligarh, 399; battle of, 266 
‘Ali Gauhar (Prince), see Shah, ‘Alam 
II. 

‘Ali Mardan Khan-Shamlu, 28 
‘Ali Muhammad Khan Rohilla—re¬ 
covers Rohilkhand, 37; establishes 
himself in Rohilkhand, 134-38 
‘AH QuH Khan WaHh, 699 
‘Ali Vardi Khan, 340, 644; and the 
EngHsh, 314; death of 314-15; esti¬ 
mate of, 111-113; kills subahdar, 
37; opposes the Marathas, 110, 176, 
241-42, 314; rise to subahdarship, 
106-09 

Allahabad, 22, 240; treaty of, between 
the EngHsh and the Mughul emperor, 
116 

‘AUama Fadl-i-Imam Khairabadi, 694, 
695 

Amar Singh (Rana of Udaipur), 12, 13, 
40, 140 

Amar Singh Thapa, 531 
Ambaji Ingle, 392, 396, 496. 

Ambaji Purandare (Peshwa’s Diwan), 
72 

Amber, see Jaipur 
Ambur, battle of, 321 
Amina Begam (Mother of Siraj-ud- 
daulah), 109 

Amini Commission, the, 383 
Amir Khan (a courtier), 22 
Amir Khan (Pindari chief) 533; con¬ 
cludes treaty with the English, 535- 
36 

Amir Khan Jawansher, 165. 

Amjhera, battle of, 71 
Amritsar, 131 

Amrut Rao Kadam Bande, 45 
Ananda Ranga PiUai, 672 
Anandi Bai (wife of Raghunath Rao), 
202 

Anand Ram Mukhlis _ (chronicler), 35 

Anand Rao Dhulap, 306 

Anafid Rao Gaikwar, 266, 289, 487, 501; 

agrees to subsidiary alliance, 289-91 
Anand Rao Pawar, 84 
Anand Rao Raste, 211 
Anant Phandl, Marathi Poet, 665 
Anantpur, 206 
Anderson, 391, 392 

Anglo-French wars, 184, 316, 317-36; 

seven years’ war, 331-32 
Anglo-Maratha wars, 44, 147, 149, 185, 
203, 272, 285. 


M.3.—55 


845 




THE MAKATHA SUPREMACY 


Anglo-Mysore wars, 203 
Angrias, of Kolaba, 291-306 
Anjanwel, 75, 78; seized by Tulaji 

Angria, 304-05 

Antaji Mankeshwar, 187, 254 
Anwar-ud-din Khan, 311, 314, 319, 320, 
336 and the English, 317 
Appa Desai of Nipani, 238 
Appa Khande Rao, 260 
Appa Saheb, Bhosale, 248; revolt 
against the English and surrender, 
506 

Arcot, 11, 324, 525-26 
Arcot, Nawab of, 209, 213, 214 
Argaon, battle of, 247, 265, 496 
Ari Singh II, Rana, 219 
Arunachala Kavirayar, 671 
Asad Khan ( Vazir ), 10, 13, 17 
Asad Yar 22 

Asaf-ud-daula (Nawab of Awadh), 119, 
372, 373, 476; cedes to the English 
territories of Chait Singh, 373 
Asaf Jah, see under Nizam-ul-mulk 
Ashraf ‘Ali Fughan, 685 
Ashta, battle of, 507 
Asirgarh, 202 

Assamese literature, 648-49 
Assaye, battle of, 247, 265, 495 
Ata Muhammad Khan Alkozai, 165 
Ataullah Khan, 109 
Airlchand, 721 
Aurangabad, 58 

Aurangzlb—conditions in India on his 
death, 1-6; effect of Deccan wars, 
43, 44, 57, 75, 78; his Deccan policy, 
5-6; his successors, 7-39, 443; his will 
and contemplated partition, 9 
Awadh, 8, 22, 367, 368, 369, 521, 523- 
25; its semi-independence, 26, 113-19; 
restored to Shuja-ud-daulah, 352; 
spoliation of, 482-84 
Azad Khan, 165 

A'zam (Shah), Prince, 12, 44, 45, 57, 
78; proclaimed king and defeated, 
9-10 

Azimullah Khan Bahadur, 32 
‘Azim-ul-Umara, 442, 443, 447 
‘AzIm-us-Shan (Prince), 2, 13, 16, 40, 
141 

A‘zzud-din (Prince), 17 

B 

Babuji Naik, 180, 181, 241 
Babur, 36 

Babu Rao Phadnis, 202 
Badami, 430 

Badan Singh Jat, 26, 27, 153, 154, 168 
Badi-uz-Zaman, 107 
Baghelkhand, 139 
Baghel Singh, 417 
Baglan, 60, 72, 279 
Bahadurpura, battle of, 283 


Bahadur Shah (formerly Prince 
Mu'azzam), 8, 9, 10, 13, 14, 24, 49,/ 
57, 66, 118, 152, 162, 163; administra¬ 
tive and political problems, 12-15,16/ 
character and estimate of, 11-12, 16; 
death of, 15; Maratha policy, 15, 16, 
49; Rajput policy, 13-14, 16, 140-41; 
and the Sikhs, 14-15, 126; war of 
succession amongst his sons, 16, 152 
Bahiropant Pingle, 52 
Baiswara, 26 
Baji Bhivarao, 72 
Baji Rao Ballal, 101 
BajI Rao I, Peshwd^-22, 25, 63-100, 177, 
185, 297; aids Chhatrasal 83; defeats 
the Nizam and Dabhade 65-75, 121; 
and Rajasthan, 72-4, 143; expansio¬ 
nist, 79-80, 96-100; as subdhddr of 
Malwa, 144-45; Basse in campaign, 

93; battle of Bhopal, 89-92; battle of 
Dabhoi, 75; convention of Duraha 
Sarai, 24, 91, 97, 122, 141; demands 
from the Mughuls, 87; enduring 
achievements 96-100; gets jdgir in 
Bundelkhand, 83; his policies, 99; 
humbles the Nizam, 65; Janjira 
campaign, 76; north-Indian cam¬ 
paigns (1736-37), 86-92, 98-100. 

Baji Rao Raghunath, Peshwd (alias 
Peshwd Baji Rao II), 264, 441, 488, 

502; civil war, 488-93; estimate of, 
488-89; rift with the English, 502-03, 
505-06. 

Bakhtamal, 165 
Bakht Singh, 12, 140, 142 
Bakul Kayastha, 649 
Baladeva, 725 
Balaghat, 67, 72 

Balaji Rao, Peshwd (alias Nan|l Sfdieb), 
171-97, 199, 201, 214, 233, 252, 268; 
administration of 181-82; and Abdall, 

193; and Gujarat, 281-84; and Raja 
ShambhujI of Kolhapur, 233; des¬ 
troys Tulaji Angria, 183-84, 305; 

design and defects 171-72; des¬ 
truction of Maratha naval power, 
183-84; Delhi politics and campaigns, 
191-94; estimate of, 174, 268; internal 
and external politics, 173-74; nor¬ 
thern expeditions, 175-79, 184-97; 

Rajputana campaigns, 175-76, 190-91; 
southern expeditions, 179-84; third 
battle of Panipat and death, 194-99. 
Balaji Vishwanath, Peshwd , 19, 43-62, 

177, 227, 295; appointed Peshwd, 52- 
53; wins over Kanhoji Angria to 
Raja Shahu’s side, 53-54; criticism of, 

59-61, 62; estimate of 60-62; Treaty of 
Delhi, 58-59. 

Balapur, 211; battle of, 120 
Bala Rao Ingle, 416 
Balwant Rao Mehendale, 193-195 
Balwant Singh, Raja (of Raghogarh), 

118, 147, 148, 392 


846 





INDEX 


Balwant Singh, Raja (of Banaras), 366 
Baloba Tatya Pagnis, 408, 409, 414, 417, 
489 

Ballabhgarh, 155 
Banaras, 113 

Banda (Bahadur) Bairagi, 14, 15, 16, 
18, 126; put to death, 18; revolt 
against Mughuls, 14-15, 126-33, 161- 
62; surrenders to Mughuls, 162 
Bangalore, 207, 464 
Bankapur, 205 
Bankot, 78 
Bapu Gaikwar, 655 
Bapu Gokhale, 491, 503, 507 
Baquir ‘AH, 312 
Baramati, battle of, 492 
Barbhais, 256 
Baramahal, 204 

Barlow, Sir George, 500, 526, 527 
Baroda, 24; and Arab soHdiery, 289-90; 

Gaikwars of, 278-91 
Bar Singh, 126 
Barwell, Richard, 372, 382 
Basalat Jang, 204, 459, 474 
Basawappa Nayak, 455 
Bassein, 94, 202; Bassein campain of 

the Marathas, 93, 94-96; Treaty of, 
492-93, 503-04, 521 
Bayana, 13, 113 
Bednur, see Bidnur 
Bellary, 207 

Bengal, 1-2, 8, 37, 87, 104-12, 113, 115, 
116, 177, 199, 201, 311, 314, 335; and 
the battle of Plassey, 339; consohda- 
tion of power by the English, 339- 
65; Diwani of, 257; revolution in 
(1739-40), 109-10 

Bengal Government, see English, the 

Bengali Hterature, 640-47 

Beni Bahadur, 116 

Benoit, French Governor, 316 

Berar, 4, 19, 58, 60, 240, 529 

Bettia, 108 

Bhadawar, 88 

Bhai Mani Singh, 657 

Bhairavadurg, 211 

Bhai Taru Singh, 128 

Bhangel Singh, 390 

Bhanpura, 81, 149 

Bhanwara, 108 

Bharatchandra Ray Gunakar, 640 

Bharatpur, 154, 160, 277, 397, 499 

Bhargava, V. S., 41 

Bharo Singh, 129 

Bhaskar Ram Kolhatkar, 242, 243 

Bhavani Ram, 81 

Bhilsa, 88, 146, 177, 218 

Bhils, the, 147 

Bhimsen, 6, 39 

Bhim Singh (Rana of Mewar), 405 
Bhim Singh (of Bundi), 22 
Bhim Singh Salumbar, 405 


Bhivandi, 76 
Bhojo, 655 

Bhopal, 88, 98; battle of, 89-92 
Bhosles of Nagpur, 239-49 
Bhudargarh, 236, 237 
Bhumias, the, 147 
Bhushana, 647 
Bidar, 58 

Bidar Bakht (Prince), 4, 10 
Bidnur, 205, 207, 213, 312, 455, 460 
Bihar, 2, 37, 107, 108, 110, 113, 115-16, 
177, 242, 346; diwani of, 2 
Bijapur, 5, 9, 58 
Bijayaram, 646 

Bijay Singh (Kachhwaha), 10, 12, 13, 
140, 254, 396, 402 
Bimbaji Bhosale, 244 
Birwadi, 76 

Bishveshvar Vaidyadhipa, 649 
Black hole tragedy, 112 
Bombay, 315, 633, 634 
Bombay Government, see English the 
Bradshaw, M., 416 
Brahmadas, 668 
Brahmananda, 655 
Brahmendra Swami, 76, 666, 727 
Bristow, Mr., 372 
British, the, see English, the 
Brome, 209 
Broome, 115, 166 
Browne, Major, 388, 389, 392 
Browne (author), 132, 167, 258 
Budh Singh (Hada), 10, 12, 22, 25, 142, 
268 

Budihal, 211 
Bullah, 660 

Bundelas, the, 4, 26, 42, 99, 138-40, 153; 
rising of, 9 

Bundelkhand, 4, 24-25, 73, 80, 82-83, 87, 
98, 177, 185, 214, 215, 218, 219, 221, 
387 529 

Bundi, 5, 22, 25, 26, 84, 142, 144, 186 
Buradi ghat, battle of, 192 
Burhan-ul-Mulk, see Sa'adat Khan (of 
Awadh) 

Burke, Edmund, 472 
Bussy, 182, 323, 332 
Buxar, battle of, 115-16, 349 

C 

Cambay, convention of, 290 
Carnac, Major, 115 
Chachendi, 26 
Chaitanya, 720-21 
Chait Singh, 118, 368 
Chakguru, see Amritsar 
Champion, Colonel, 118 
Chanda Saheb, 182, 241, 312, 316, 320, 
321; Nawab of Karnatak, 323 
Chandrasagara Varni, 678 
Chandrasen Jadhav, 49, 50, 55, 56, 66, 
119 

Chand Sultan, Raja (of Deogarh), 240 
I Charanadas, 719 


847 




THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Charhai Kamarle, battle of, 301 
Chaul, 75, 78 

Chauth, 15, 19, 49, 55, 58, 60, 64, 71, 
72, 80, 91, 119, 171, 174, 175, 177, 208, 
210, 231, 268, 279, 387, 442, 445, 493, 
497, 551-54 
Chel^vamba, 679 
Chennarayadurg, 207 
Chhabela Ram (gr. of Allahabad), 22, 
152 

Chharat Singh, 129 

Chhatrasal Bundela, 4, 24, 25, 82, 138 
Chhatra Singh (br. of Shahu II), 487, 
488 

Chhote Khan, 148 
Chik Ballapur, 207, 212 
Chiknayakanahalli, 211 
Chikodi, 235, 236, 237, 238 
Chimnaji Appa, 27, 74; conquest of 
Malwa, 81, 90, 84; Bassein campaign, 
95-6, 99, 252; and the Angrias, 301, 
305 

Chimnaji Damodar Moghe, 45 
Chin Qilich Khan 
(see Nizam-ul-Mulk) 

Chitnis, 41, 62, 101 
Chitor, 405 
Chitorgarh, 263 
Chunar, 113 

Churaman, the Jat leader, 18, 26, 152- 
53 

Clavering, Sir John, 372, 383 
Clive, Robert, 99, 112, 116, 306, 324, 335, 
battle of Plassey, 339, 341, 350, 352, 
353; obtains Diwani of Bengal, 352; 
reforms, 353 

Colebrooke (resident at Nagpur), 487 
Collins (Ambassador), 418 
Condore, battle of, 334, 338 
Coote, Colonel Eyre, 335 
Cornwallis, Lord, 105, 433, 434, 436, 
439, 461, 462, 464, 474, 475; his ad¬ 
ministrative reforms, 477-79; per¬ 
manent settlement, 479 
Cooch Bihar, 107 

Court of Directors, see English, the 
Craig, Major General, 484 

D 

Dabhoi, battle of, 75, 279 
Dado Bhimsen, 82 
Dalai Singh, 25, 142 
Dalewal, 128 

Dal Khalsa(ji), 127, 129, 130 
Damaji Gaikwar, 24, 203, 279, 282-84; 

death of, 284 
Damaji Thorat, 51 
Daman, 96 
Danvers, 103 

Dattaji Sindia, 185, 189, 190, 191, 193, 
254 

Datta, K. K„ 166 


Daud Rohilla, 134 

Dau’d Khan Panni, 39, 49, 51, 312 
Daulatabad, 202 

Daulat Rao Sindia, 148-49, 160, 237, 
248, 264, 265, 414, 415, 416, 418, 489, 
490, 491, 494, 497, 500, 501; agrees to 
subsidiary alliance, 266; and Malwa, 
149; his ineptitude, 409-14; his reign 
of terror, 489; war with Mahadjl’s 
widows, 148, 415-16 and Maratha 

coalition, 494-95; and the English, 
149; and treaty of Surji Anjangaon, 
497; and treaty of Mustafapur, 499 
Daya Bahadur, 24, 80 
Dayaram, 655 

De Boigne, Count Benoit, 148; joins 
Mahaji Sindia’s service 260; defeats 
Rajputs at Patan & Merta, 262, 394, 
402, 403,; 406-7, 409, 418 
Deccan, the, 5, 9, 14 
Deep Singh, 82 

Delhi, 157, 186, 221; battle of, 266 

DeMello, Pedro, 96 

Deogaon, treaty of, 496 

Devachandraji, 652 

Devadurg, 207 

Devanhalli, 207 

Devichandra, 678 

Devji Gauli, 392, 396 

Devarayanadurg, 212 

Dhanaji Jadhav, 47, 48, 228, 231 

Dhar, 84 

Dharrao Sindia, 391 
Dhiro, 654 
Dhodap, 255 
Dharwar, 205 

Dig, 27, 154, 160, 161, 390, 397 
Dilawar ‘Ali Khan, 22 

Diler Khan (leader of the Bangash), 
24 


jjmr ivnan, 

Dinajpur, 107 

Dindigul, 313 

Dod Ballapur, 204, 207 

Dost ‘Ali (Nawab), 180, 241, 312 

Dost Muhammad Rohilla, 87 

Dowson, see under Elliot Dowson 

Drake, English Governor, 112 

Dudrenec, Chevalier, 406 

Dukhi Ram Pal, 722 

Dumas (French Governor), 241, 316 

Duncan, Governor, 290 

Dundas, 412, 413, 434 

Dundi Khan, 136 

Dupleix, 316, 317, 318, 319, 320, 321, 322, 
328, 329, 330, 332; assessment of, 330- 
31; and the Peshwd, 326; also see 
under Anglo-French wars 
Duraha^Sarai, convention of, 24, 91, 97 , 

Durgadas Rathor, 141 
Durjan Sal (of Kotah), 85 
Durlabh Ram, Raja, 340 


848 





INDEX 


Dutch, the, 94, 105, 293, 302, 315, 340; 
unsuccessful invasion of Bengal, 
341-42 

Dutiram Hazarika, 649 

E 

Economic condition, 736-64; artisans 
and agriculturists, 737-39; currency, 
746-47; famines, 748-49; indigenous 
shroffs, 739-41; slavery, 742-45, 762- 
64; social stratification, 736-37; stan¬ 
dard of living, 747-48; village com¬ 
munities and peasant rights, 741-42; 
wages, 745-46 
Elliot & Dowson, 42, 102 
Elphinstone, M., 123, 166, 229, 331 
English, the, 77, 94, 98, 111, 112, 117, 
118, 122, 123, 144, 170, 201, 208, 209, 
210, 216, 218, 219, 220, 221, 235, 328, 
406, 409, 410, 411, 424, 502; adminis¬ 
tration, evolution of, 355-60, 364-78, 
578-81, 581-93, 614-16, 622-35; admi¬ 
nistration in Diwani provinces, 355, 
364-78, 382; administration of justice, 
360-62, 364, 375-78; and Diwani of 
Bengal, 352-54; and illegal trade, 348, 
350, 477-78; and Mudhoji Bhosle, 
247; and Nawab of Bengal, 314, 339- 
54; and Nizam-Maratha conflict, 480- 
82; and SKIh *Alam, II, 368; and sub¬ 
sidiary alliance system, 521-31; and 
the Angrias, 293-98; and the Mara- 
thas, 442-46, 473-74; and the Nizam, 
183, 442-46, 474; and the Peshwd , 183- 
84, 185, 214, 265-66; and the Rohillas, 
367; and Tipu, 427-35, 473-76; and 
Yashwant Rao Holkar, 275-77; and 
Zamindari of Bengal, 339; Anglo- 
French wars, 311-36, 426; Anglo- 

Maratha wars, 44, 147, 149, 425, 493- 
500, 502-07; Anglo-Mysore wars, 208, 
209, 435-42, 460-66, 473-76; Anglo- 

Nepalese war, 530-32; battle of 
Buxar, 115-16, 349; Charter Acts, 
608-09; demoralization of company’s 
servants, 353, 477-78; establishment 

of Municipalities, 616, 618; Nawab 

of Bengal, 314, 339-55; Parliamentary 
interference in Indian affairs, 374-75; 
Pitt's India Act, 602-08; revenue set¬ 
tlements, 363, 626-28, 629-32, 636-37; 
settlement with Nawab-Vazir of 

Awadh, 476-77; the judiciary, 589-91, 
615-21, 632-35; the presidencies, 311- 
36; the Indian Civil Service, 614; the 
Regulating Act (1773), 591-609; their 
religious attitude, 634-35; trial of 

Europeans in India, 615 
Enugu Lakshmana Kavi,. 674 
European Companies in India 311-36 
(also see under the English, Dutch 
& the French, etc.) 

European trade, 315 
Ezhuthachan, 681, 682 


F 

Faizulla Khan, Rohilla, 118, 136, 370 
Fakhr-ud-daulah, 108, 282 
Farangi Mahall School, 694, 695 
Farrukhabad, 521; battle of, 498 
Farrukh-Siyar, 2, 17-20, 40, 66, 104, 113, 
119, 141, 152, 162, 163; accession to 
the throne, 17; and party politics, 18; 
and Sayyid brothers, 19, 57, 58; and 
the Maratha, 58; and the Rajputs, 
141; and the Sikhs, 127 
Fateh Singh Bhosle, 58, 65, 76, 98, 180, 
241 

Fateh Singh Gaikwar, 285, 286, 287, 

288, 312, 501 
Fatti Khan, 136 

Feudalization of Maratha State, 60-61, 
225-28, 550-51 

Firoz (Firuz) Jang, 4, 79 
Fletcher, Colonel, 115 
Forrest, G. W., 101, 103, 223 
Forster, George, 166, 395 
Francis, Philip, 372, 382 
French East India Co., 105 
French, the, 98, 170; and the Anglo- 
French conflict, 311-36, 426; and the 
Deccan, 325-36; and the Marathas, 
428; and the Nawab of Karnatak, 
322; and the Nizam, 182; and Tipu, 
462, 465; trade, 315-16 

G 

Gadadhar Pralhad NirajI (Pratinidhi), 

Gadawal, 207 

Gafran Khan, 131 

Gajendragarh, 430 

Gaikwars of Baroda, 278-91 

Ganesh Sambhaji, 215 

Gangadhar Yashwant Chandrachud, 

204, 270 

Gangaram, 79, 644 
Gangathadi, 98 
Garibdas, 719 

Ghanaram Chakravarti, 640 
Ghasiti Begam, 111 
Ghazi Beg Khin, 130 
Ghazipur, 113 

Ghazi-ud-Din, (son of Nizam-ul-Mulk), 
182, 253, 325 

Ghazi-ud-Din, Vazir, 114, 124, 125, 186- 
7, 191-93, 269 

Ghazi-ud-din Khan Firuz Jang, 10 
Gheria, 296, 305-6 
Ghulam All Azad BilgramI, 700 
Ghulam Murtaza ‘Ali, 312 
Ghulam Qadir, 261, 262, 395, 397, 398, 
399, 418 

Girasias 9 146, 147 

Girdhar Bahadur ( Subahdar ), 22 , 24 . 

81, 139, 143, 144 
Girjoji Yadav, 54 


849 





I 


THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Goa, 94, 96 

Goddard, General, 247, 286 

Godeheu, 329, 330, 332 

Gogulapati Kurmanath Kavi, 674 

Gohad, 217, 218 

Gokla, 3 

Gokul, 155 

Golconda, 5, 11, 58 

Gondwana, 19, 60, 240 

Goordut Singh, 391 

Gopal Bhau, 262, 406, 409, 415 

Gopal Rao Patwardhan, 201, 202, 205, 

Of i pip 

Gopika Bai, 202 
Govalkot, 78 

Govind Pant B.undele, 177, 195 
Govind Rao Gaikwar, 204, 284, 285, 287, 
288 

Govind Singh, Guru , 2, 3, 14, 40, 126, 
161; murder of, 14 
Graham, Major, 239 
Grant Duff, 41, 62, 71, 101, 102, 103, 
222, 223, 224 

Gudipati Kodahdapati, 675 
Gujarat, 4, 9, 23-24, 60, 64, 67, 71, 72, 
73, 74, 85, 86, 98, 121, 141, 142, 173, 
279, 286; chauth of, 280, 281, 282 
Gujarati literature, 649-56 
Gunuguturi Venkata Krishnayya, 677 
Gurudaspur, 18, 126 
Gurrumkonda, 212 

Gwalior, 218; treaty of, 150, 501, 504; 
Sindias of, 251-67 

H 

Hadapsar, battle of, 265, 273, 492 
Hafiz Khidmatgar Khan, 21 
Hafiz Rahmat Khan, 118, 137, 138, 370 
Haibat Rao Nimbalkar, 45, 48, 51, 56 
Haidar ‘All, 122, 123, 203, 210, 211, 214, 
222, 235, 236, 422, 423, 425, 426; and 
Kolhapur Raja, 235; and Madhava 
Rao Peshwd, 203, 204, 207, 208, 209, 
210, 211, 212, 213; and Nizam ‘All, 

206, 457, 458; and the English, 206, 

207, 209, 210, 214, 457-? ; and the 

French, 335, 457; and the Marathas, 
422, 423, 453-54, 455-60; comparison 

between Haidar ‘Ali and Tipu., 466- 
70; death of, 460; estimate of, 466-70; 
his military system, 465-69; his navy, 
470; his rise, 452-55 

Haidar Beg, 120 
Haidar Quli Khan, 56, 142, 28C 
Haji Ahmad, 106, 107, 108, 109; assas¬ 
sination of, 110 
Karimdad Khan, 165 
Hamid Khan, 50, 72; revolt against em¬ 
peror, 281; and Pilaji Gaikwar, 281 
Hamid-ud-din Khan, 9, 39 
Handikere, 211 
Hanway, 28, 42, 103 
Harcharan Das, 34 


Harde Narayan, 138 
Haripant Phadke, 263, 425, 427, 430, 431, 
436, 437, 441 

Harnand Arora, Raja, 134 
Hasanpur, battle of, 23, 120, 153 
Hastings, Lord, Nepal war, 530-32; 
suppression of Pindaris, 504-6, 523- 
24 

Hastings, Warren, 99, 117, 118, 144, 150, 
151, 152, 247, 348, 472, 510, 530-34; 
Amini Commission, 383; and Mughul 
emperor, 388, 389; assessment of, 

385-86; committee of revenue, 384; 
criticism of the Rohilla war, 370-71; 
frontier policy, 366-70; his Bengal 
council, 372; his reforms in admi¬ 
nistration, 358-65, 380-85; First Mara- 
iha war, 426 
Hedayat ‘All, 134 
Helavanakatte Giriyamma, 679 
Hill, S. C., 166 

Himmat Bahadur, alias Anupgir, 392, 
398, 401, 494, 496 
Hindaun, 13 

Hindu Rao Ghorpade, 50 
Hingnes, the, 185 
Hirdesa, 83 

Holkars of Indore, 267-78 
Holwell, 112, 342, 343 
Honaji Bala, 665 
Humayun, 36 

Husain ‘Ali (Amir ul-Umara) 
see Sayyid Husain ‘Ali 
Husain Quli, 109 
Hyderabad, 8, 9, 11, 521 

I 

Ibrahim (Prince), 23 
Ibrahim Khan Gardi, 195, 198 
ijdra system, 104 
Imad-ul-Mulk, 
see Ghazi-ud-Din, Vazir 
Imam Bakhsh, 688 
Impey, Mr., 380 
‘Inayatullah Kashmiri, 19 
Indore, 92, 149; Holkars of, 267-78; 

Holkar-Sindia rivalry, 405-07 
Industry, see under Trade and 
Industry 
Insha Allah, 647 
Intizam-ud-daulah, 155, 187 
Inquisition, 94 
Iradat Khin, 40 

Irvine, William, 6, 39, 40, 41, 42, 101, 
102, 103, 120, 166 

Ishwari Singh, 38, 142, 143, 144, 177, 
178 

Isma‘il Beg, 261, 262, 263, 396, 397, 398, 
401, 404, 405; surrenders to Perron, 
405 

Itimad-ud-Daulah 

(See Qamar-ud-din Khan Vazir) 
Iwaz Khan, 69, 312 


850 



INDEX 


J 

Jagannath Das, 680 
Jagat Raj, 83 

Jagat Seth Fateh Chand, 107, 109 
Jagat Singh, 8, 25, 143, 144, 178 
Jdglr system, 226, 227; also see Saran- 
jam system 

Jagu Bapu, 409, 410, 414, 416 
Jahandar Shah, 16, 66, 163, 396; pro¬ 
claims his accession at Lahore, 17 
Jahandar Shah II seeks English protec¬ 
tion, 389 

Jahangir Khan, 391 

Jahan Khan, 124, 131, 132, 155, 188, 189 
Shah, 16 

Jaipur, 3, 5, 140, 142, 186, 392 
Jaitpur, 83 

Jajau, battle of, 10, 12, 40, 78 
Jalalabad, 29 

Jammu, 161-163; and Kashmir, 161-65 
Janjira, 76, 77, 203; campaign of BajI 
R&o I and its gains, 75-78, 300 
Jankoji Sindia, 189, 191, 192, 193, 214, 
254 255 

Janoji Bhosle, 201, 202, 204, 206, 209, 
210, 211, 214, 244; becomes a feuda¬ 
tory of the Peshwd, 245-46 
Jassa Singh, 128, 129 
Jaswant Rao Sindia, 410 
J as want Ray, 107 

Jats, the, 3, 4, 9, 18, 26, 43, 137, 152- 
61, 186, 219; and die Marathas, 157, 
209, 221; and the RohiUas, 137-38 
Jaunpur, 113 
Javid Khan, 113, 186 
Jawahar Singh Jat, 155, 157-59, 216, 
218; and Nahar Singh, 217; and the 
Marathas, 157, 158, 216-17; and the 

Sikhs, 217; assassination of, 158; oc¬ 
cupies Maratha dominions, 218 
Jawan Bakht, see Jahandar Shah II 
Jawan Mard Khan Babi, 284 
Jayappa Sindia, 185, 190, 252, 253, 387; 
murder of, 254 

Jay Singh (of Amber), 8, 12, 13, 14, 18, 
21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 36, 39, 40, 68, 83, 
84, 85, 86, 87, 89, 91, 99, 140, 141, 142, 
143, 144, 153, 155, 175-76; and Malwa, 
82, 268; appeasement of the Mara¬ 
thas, 81-82, 85 

Jay Singh (of Raghogarh), 147, 149 
Jenkins, Richard, 248 
Jetgi, 207 

Jhanda Singh Bhangi, 163 
Jhansi, 216 

Jija Bai, Rani (wife of Shambhuji of 
Kolhapur), 234 
Jinaharsha, 650 
Jina Sagara, 668 
JinjI, 335 

JIva Gosvamin, 725 


Jivba Dada, Bakhshi, 406, 409 
JivajI Pawar, 84 
Jivdhan, 95 
jizya, 5, 16, 80 
Jnanavimal, 652 
Jodhpur, 12, 13, 24, 142 
Junnar, 75 

K 

Kabul, 1, 29, 38 
Kacheshwar Brahme, 661 
K§da Siddha, 679 
Kagal, 236 

Kalale Nanjaraj, 679, 701 
Kalpi, 24, 25 
Kalyan, 75 
Kamandurg, 95 

Kam Bakhsh, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 24, 48 
Kamgar Khan May!, 108 
Kamraj, 6, 39, 40 
Kamwar Khan, 40, 41 
Kandikere, 211 
Kandila, treaty of, 286 
Kanhoji Angria, 53, 60, 76, 228, 292-99; 
and the English, 315; and the Mara¬ 
tha civil war, 294 
Kanhoji Bhosle, 74, 79, 240 
KanthajI Kadam Bafide, 72, 73, 74, 267, 
280; and Nizam-ul-Mulk, 281; fight 
against Pilajl Gaikwar, 281 
Kapur Singh, 127 
Kamal, 31; battle of, 31-33 
Karnatak, 19, 60, 98, 122, 180, 201, 241, 
311, 335, 525-26; and Anglo-French 

rivalry, 320-36; Madhav Rao Pesh- 
tod’s expedition against, 202-14 
Kashiraj, 198 

Kashi Rao Holkar, 264, 401, 402, 490 
Kashmir, 163-165 

also see under Jammu and Kashmir 
Kasur, 128 

Kasturi Rangakavi, 673 
Kaviraja Chakravarti, 649 
Keatings, Col., 286 
Kenchangudd, 207 
Kesar Bai, 23 
Kesari Singh Jat, 159-60 
Khafi Khan, 40, 41, 62, 102, 121 
Khajuha, 40 

Khalsa (crown land), 104, 105 

Khalsa (sect), 2, 14 

Khande Rao, 204 

Khande Rao Appa, 394 

Khande Rao Dabhide, 56, 72, 228, 279 

Khande Rao Gaikwar, 285 

Khande Rao Holkar, 265, 490, 491 

Khandesh, 45, 49, 58, 60, 67, 72, 80, 90 

Khando Ballal, 47, 52 

Khandwa, battle of, 1, 20 

Khan-i-‘Alam, 4 

Khan-i-Dauran Samsamud-Daulah, 22, 
84, 85, 86, 268 

Kharda, battle of, 247, 446, 479-82; 

treaty of, 447-48 


851 



THE MAEATHA SUPREMACY 


Khed, battle of, 47 
Khichis, the, 147 
Khichiwada, 147 
Khokri, 76 

Khwajah ‘Abdullah Khan, 164, 313 
Khwajah Abid, 125, 132 
Khwajah Haidar ‘Ali Atish, 689 
Khwajah Mir Dard, 686 
Kirkee, battle of, 506 
Kiriti Venkatacharya, 675 
Kirkpatrick, 407, 408, 443, 444 
Kittur, 205, 430 
Kodikonda, 204 
Koh-i-Nur (Diamond), 35, 42 
Koiaba, Angrias of, 291-306 
Kolar, 207 
Kolaras, 84 

Kolhapur, 48; Chhatrapatis of, 230-39 
Kolluri Rajasekhara, 701 
Kora, battle of, 115, 216 
Kota(h), 5, 26, 186 

Koti Raya Raghunatha Tondaiman, 677 
Koura Mai, 130 

Krishnarao, Inamdar of Khatav, 51 
Krishna Sawant, 79 
Krishnoba Chitnis, 409 
Kuchimanchi Jaggakavi, 674 
Kumbher, 154, 160 
Kumsi, 206 

Kundurti Venkatachalapati, 676 
Kunjan. Nambyar, 683 
Kunjpura, 194 
Kurnool, 11 

L 

La Bourdonnais, 317, 318 
Lachman Das, see Banda 
Ladoji Deshmukh, 391, 395 
Lahore, 15, 38, 125, 132, 186 
Lakhba Dada, 261, 396, 409, 410, 413, 
416; his revolt against Daulat Rao 
Sindia, 416; reinstated as viceroy in 
the north, 416-17; second term of 
viceroyalty, 417; settlement with 
Perron, 416-17 

Lake, General, 160, 265, 274, 275, 496 

Lakheri, battle of, 272, 406 

Lakshmakavi, 679 

Lakshml Narayan Shafiq, 697 

Lalaju, see Muhammad Taufiq 

Lai Kunwar, 17 

Lally, CoUnt de, 333, 334, 335 

Lalsot, battle of, 260, 392-95 

Laswari, battle of, 160, 266 

Lenoir, French Governor, 316 

Leyrit, De, 331, 332, 333, 334 

Lingamurty, 675 

Linganna, 680 

Literature 

Arabic, 692-93; Assamese, 648-49; 
Bengali, 640-47; Gujarati, 649-56; 
Hindi, 647; Kannada, 678-81; Mala- 


yalam, 681-85; Marathi, 661-69; Oriya, 
648; Persian, 693-700; Punjabi, 656- 
60; Sanskrit, 700-06; Sindhi, 690-92; 
Tamil, 669-72; Telugu, 672-78, Urdu, 
685-90 

Lodi Khan, 49 
Lohgarh, 15, 18, 126 
Lucknow, 26 

Lutf-ullah Khan Sadiq, 33, 40 

M 

Macaulay, T. B., 39, 42 
Macauliffe, 6 
Me Neil, Captain, 77 
Macpherson, Governor General, 392, 
428, 472 

Madad Khan, 165 
Madakisira, 204 
Madec, Rene, 159 
Madgiri, 207 
Madhavamuni, 662 

Madhav Rao I, Peshwd , 118, 147, 220, 
221; and Anglo-Mysore war, 210; and 
Haidar ‘Ali, 208, 209, 211, 455, 456; 
and Nizam ‘Ali, 201, 202, 203, 207, 
208; and the English, 208, 209; and 
Janoji Bhosle, 245; and Rani JIja Bai, 
235; death of, 222; estimate of, 222- 
23; his character, 222-23; his Kamatak 
expeditions, 202-08, 702; revival of 

Maratha power in India, 214-22 
Madho Singh, 142, 144, 158, 177, 178, 
215, 216, 218, 388; conspires with 

Abdall against the Marathas, 191 
Madras, 317, 318 

Madras Government, see English, the 
Madura, 313 
Mahad, 75 

Mahadji Gaikwar, 24 
Mahadji Sindia, 44, 215, 216, 219, 220, 
221, 235, 236, 255, 256, 388, 389, 418, 
426, 428, 472; and MalwS, 147-48; and 
Nana Phadnis, 259, 261, 400, 401; 

king-maker at Delhi, 258-60; defeats 
Rajputs at Patan and Merta, 262, 
388, 390; and the Jats, 216-20; and the 
Rajputs, 260-63, 392-95, 402-05; and 
the Sikhs, 391, 417-18; death and 
consequences, 407-09 
Mahfuz Khan, 122 
Mahidpur, battle of, 150, 506 
Mahipati Tahrabadkar, Maratha poet, 
663 

Makhowal, 131 
Maksudabad, 240 

Malcolm, Sir John, 102, 167, 199, 251, 
484, 497, 504; his Malwa settlement, 
150-52 

Male Rao Holkar, 269 
Malet (Resident), 229, 287, 429, 432, 434, 
444, 462 

Malhar Rao Holkar, 84, 87, 88, 92, 144, 
149, 150, 157, 178, 185, 186, 188, 190, 


852 




INDEX 


191, 192, 193, 202, 215, 216, 221, 251, 
267, 387, 388; and the Jats, 216-20; 
and the Rajputs, 269; death of, 146; 
his career, 267-68 

Malhar Rao Holkar, II, 272, 406, 490 
Malwa, 4, 9, 24, 25, 41, 64, 67, 71, 72, 
73, 80, 81, 84, 85, 86, 87, 90, 91, 97, 
98, 119, 120, 121, 173, 185, 214, 221, 
251, 268, 279, 387; and Malcolm’s 

settlement, 150-52; and the third 
battle of Panipat, 146; British domi¬ 
nation over, 150-52; conquest of by 
the Marathas, 79-82, 121, 144-50. 
ManajI Angria, and the civil war, 300- 
06; and the Peshwd, 300 
ManajI Gaikwar, 287 
ManajI Paygude, 188 
Mandasor, treaty of, 506 
Mandvi, 95 

Mangalore, treaty of, 460 
Mangrol, battle of, 215 
Manoli, 235, 236, 237, 238 
Man Singh, 8 

Manucci, Niccolao, 6, 43, 62 
Manzur ‘Ali Khan, 394 
Martan^a Varma, 701 
Maratha dynasties (provincial), 225- 
49, 251-306 

Maratha State, administration of, 225, 
226; civil war, 235-39, 256; feudaliza- 
tion of, 225-30, 567-69 
Marathas, the, 4, 5, 9, 15, 16, 23, 24, 
25, 26, 37, 43, 44, 55, 60, 78, 98, 110, 
113, 118, 119, 120, 121, 125, 126, 132, 
137, 143, 144, 150, 152, 155, 157, 158, 
159, 171, 173, 188, 189, 194-97, 202, 
218, 219, 221, 346, 366, 367, 368, 645; 
and Anglo-Mysore wars, 203, 208, 

212, 427-42; and Bundlekhand, 215; 
and Haidar ‘All, 455-57; and Malwa, 
145-52, 267; and Marwar, 268; and 
South Indian States, 422-50; and the 
English, 207-14, 256, 257; and the 
French, 326; and the Jats, 157; and 
the Mughuls, 184, 185, 186, 187, 190, 
253, 257-60; and the Nizam, 180, 182, 
442-50, 461; and the Rajputs, 140-44, 
145, 175, 177, 178, 186, 190, 215, 216, 
254; and the Rohillas, 137-38, 186, 
254; and Tipu, 422-42, 464-66, 

473; and Tulaji Angria, 183-84; civil 
war, 489-83, 509; decline of power, 
486-93, 500-02; causes for 507-17; feu- 
dalization, 567, 569; policies of ex¬ 
pansion and consoldation, 174, 175, 
189; revival of power in northern 
India, 214-22, 387; rivalry between 
Sindia and Holkar, 264-65, 405-07; 

second Anglo-Maratha war, 493-500; 
the economy, 514-15; their adminis¬ 
trative system, 536-62; their Bengal 
expeditions, 192, 242; their military 
organization, 511-14, 562-75; their 


navy, 291, 298-99, 300, 301; their reli¬ 
gious policy, 516; the widows’ war, 
264, 415-16, 490; third Anglo-Mara¬ 
tha war, 502-07; weakness in politics, 
172, 173, 187, 188-89, 410 
Maratha shipping, 75, 291-92 
Marathi literature, 661-69 
Marwar, 5, 18, 142, 144, 253 
Mastani, 96, 97 

Maulana All ‘Bahr al-'U'lum’, 694 

Mayor’s Courts, 311, 312 

Mehdi ‘Ali Khan, 484 

Merta, 13; battle of, 262, 403 

Mewar, 5, 219 

Mewat, 13 

Mihrab Khan, 13 

Minto, Lord, 528-29 

Miraj, 75 

Miran, 342, 343 

Miranpur Katra, battle of, 48, 370 
Mir Fazil, 165 
Mir Ghulam Hasan, 687 
Mir Habib, 107, 241 
Mir Hazar Khan, 165 
Mir Jafar ‘Ali Khan, 111, 339, 340, 341, 
342; and the English, 339-44; re¬ 
instated as navodb , 350 
Mir Jumla, 18, 19, 23, 41 
Mir Madan, 111 

Mir Mannu, see Muin-ul-Mulk 
Mir Muhammad Amin, see Sa‘adat 
Khan 

Mir Muhammad Jafar Khan, 109 
Mir Muhammad Taqi Mir, 686 
Mir Mumin, 124 

Mir Qasim, 115, 345; and the English, 
343-352 

Mir Reza, 207, 208, 210 
Mirza Abu Talib Khan, 698, 699 
Mazhar Jan-i-Janan, 695 
Muhammad Rafi Sauda, 686 
Najaf Khan, 159, 160, 257, 388 
M. Jean Law, 113 
Mohan Lai, 111 
Mohan Singh, 45 
Mohanavijaya, 652 
Moira, Lord, see Hastings Lord 
Momin Khan, 280, 282 
Monson, Colonel, 372, 383 
Moropant (Marathi poet), 664-65, 703 
Mostyn, Thomas, 203, 208, 209 
Moti Talay, battle of, 213, 423 
Mu‘azzam (Prince) see Bahadur Shah 
Mubarak Allah Wadih, 696 
Mubarak-ud-daulah, 359 
Mubariz Khan (Subahdar ), 67, 120 
Mudhoji Bhosle, 240, 244, 246, 429; and 
the Peshwd, 246-47 

Mughalani Begam, 124, 130, 188; in¬ 
vites Ahmad Shah Abdali to invade 
India, 187 

Mughuls, the—disruption, 1-39; and 
Jammu and Kashmir, 161-65; and the 


853 




THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Marathas, 253; 257-60; foreign inva¬ 
sions, 252-53; nobility, 8, 279 
Muhammad ‘Ali al-Faruq, 694 
‘Ali (frawab of Karnatak), 122, 123, 
208, 321, 322, 323, 324, 325, 327, 328, 
484; and the French, 327-36 
JAli Khan, 28 

Amin Khan, 10, 15, 23, 39, 67 
‘Azim-ush-shan, 10 
Baqif ‘Agah; 694 
Beg HamdanI, 389, 394 
Elich Khan, 116 
Ghauth Sharaf al-Mulk, 694 
Had I Kamwar Khan, 40 
Ibrahim Tabrizi, 56 
Ishaq, 22 

Kasim Lahauri, 40 

Khan Bangash, 24, 39, 82, 83, 138, 268 

Khan Turkman, 28 

Murad Kashmiri, 18 

Quli Khan, 340 

Raza, 108, 109 

Reza Khan, 350 

Salih, 134 

Sayyid, 312 

Muhammed Shah (emperor), 21, 23, 27, 
32, 35, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 92, 113, 135, 
141; his estimate, 21, 38-39; political 
situation on his death, 38 
Taqi Khan, 106, 107 
Tauliq, 164 
Tughluq, 6 

Muhkham Singh, Jat, 23, 26, 41, 56, 
153 

Muhtashim Khan, 10 
Mufn-ul-Mulk abas Mir Mannu, 123, 
124, 129, 130, 131, 163; and the Sikhs, 
129, 130 

Mulla Nizam-ud-din, 693 
Rahimdad, 160 
Multan, 37 

Munim Khan (Vaztr), 15, 16, 20 
Munir-ud-daulah, 125 
Munni Begam, 359, 373 
Munro, Major Hector, 115, 349 
Munro, Sir Thomas, survey and settle¬ 
ment, 625 
Muradabad, 119 

Murar Rao (of Gooty), 206, 210, 211, 
212, 321, 324, 327, 455 
Murige Swami, 679 
Murshidabad, 2, 242 
Murshid Quli Khan, 2, 104, 109; and 
the English, 314; his administration, 
104-05; his estimate, 106 
Quli II, 106, 107 
Murtaza ‘Ali, 324, 336 
Murtada ‘All Zabidi, 694 
Mustafa Khan, 110 
Mustafapur, treaty of, 499 
Muzafar Jang, 182, 320, 322, 326; raised 


to masnad of the Deccan, 322, 323; 
surrenders to Nasir Jang, 321 
MuzzafTar Khan (a courtier), 22 

N 

NabhajI, 663 

Nadir Quli, see Nadir Shah 
Nadir Shah, 22; invasion of India, 27- 
37, 92-94, 122, 123; assassination of, 
123; confiscation of treasures, 35; 
effect of his invasion on Indian poli¬ 
tics, 36-37, 134, 184 
Nagamangala, 211 
Naga Sanyasis, 155 
Nagoji Rao, 208 

Nagpur, Bhosle Rajas of, 239-49; and 
Sindia-Holkar rivalry, 405-07; _ suc¬ 
cession struggle and the Peshwd, 244, 
246-47 

Nahar Singh (Jat), 158, 217 
Najib-ud-daulah, 124, 125, 132, 156, 157, 
187, 188, 194, 215-16, 219, 220, 254, 
255, 387; death of, 220; invites Abdali 
to invade India, 191, 192 
Najm-ud-daulah (Nawab of Bengal), 
350; reduced to a figurehead by the 
English, 350-52 

Najmud-din Shah Mubarak Abru, 685 
Nana Phadnis, 237, 259, 286, 397, 486, 
489, 502, 509; and Haidar, ‘All, 286, 
425; and MahadjI Sindia, 260-62; and 
Nizam ‘Ali, 442-50; and the English, 
434, 474; and Tipu, 430, 431, 432, 433, 
460, 461; coalition of Indian powers 
against the English, 425-27; 489 
Nandigarh, 207, 211 
Nandkumar, Maharaja, 350, 638; 

charges and counter charges, 374; re¬ 
moval from chief ministership, 351; 
victimization of by Hastings, 373 
Nandlal, 659 

Nanjaraj (of Mysore), 324, 327, 680; 

and the English, 328 
Narayan Bhattatiri, 682 
Narayan Rao Bakhshi, 415 
Narayan Rao, Peshwd, 222; murdered, 
256 

Narayana Tlrtha, 676 
Narabheram, 654 
Narhat-Samai, 108 
Njamaul, 13 

Naro Shankar, 177, 284 
Narwar, 84 

Nasir Jang, 97, 121, 182; succeeds the 
Nizam, 320, 321; shot, 322, 326 
Nasir Khan, 29, 30, 129 
Nasrullah, 35 

Nawal Singh, 159, 160, 219, 220 
Nawayats, 312 

Nawazish Muhammad Khan, see 
Muhammad Raza 
Neerthadi, 98 
Nemavijaya, 653 


854 





INDEX 


Nemaji Sindia, 4, 45, 48, 55, 79, 251 
Newri, 149 
Nidhu Babu, 643 
Nijgal, 212 

Nijjar Bakshis Singh, 6 
Niku-siyar, raised to Agra throne, 20 
Nilkanth Nagar, 26 
Niranjanadas Ballal, 668 
Niranjanarya, 679 
Niranjan Madhav, 661-62 
Niranta, 654 
Nischintatma, 679 

Nizam ‘AH, 122, 201, 214, 236, 244, 287, 
333, 424, 427, 433, 496; and the EngUsh, 
434, 442-43, 448, 474, 523; and_ the 
French, 329, 448; and the Marathas, 
442-50; and Peshwd Madhav Rao, 
203, 204, 207, 208, 245, 263; and Tipu, 
448, 461, 464-66; forms a triple alli¬ 
ance against Haidar ‘AH, 122; revolt 
of his son, 448 

Nizam-ul-Mulk, 10, 21, 22, 23, 24, 27, 
28, 29, 31, 32, 35, 36, 37, 41, 52, 54, 
55 58, 67, 70, 72, 74, 75, 76, 80, 89, 
90, 92, 93, 97, 98, 119, 120, 121, 179, 
180, 231, 240, 312; and Peshwd Baji 
Rao, I, 121; as vaztr, 67, 280; declared 
as a rebel, 67; his career, 65-66, 119; 
his intrigues with Maratha Sardars, 55, 
281; joins hands with Raja Sham- 
bhuji, 68; revolt against Sayyid 
brothers, 120 
North, Lord, 371, 375 
Nurullah Beg Khan, 109 

O 

Orissa, 2, 37, 104, 107, 109, 177, 243 
Ostend Co., 105, 311 
Oudh, see Awadh 

P 

Padmaraja, 678 

Palkhed, battle of, 69-70, 97, 121, 231 
Palmer, Major, 402, 407, 408, 410, 411, 
487 

Paltudas, 719 

Pandharpur, treaty of, 502 
Pandit Daulatram, 647 
Pangal, treaty of, 434 
Panhala, 48 
Panikkar, K. M., 98 
Panipat, third battle of (1761), 44, 125, 
132, 137, 146, 156, 194-97, 201, 214, 
255, 269, 284, 387, 422 
Parashuram Bhau, Patwardhan, 236, 
238, 425, 435, 437, 438, 446 
Parashuram Pant, Pratinidhi, 47, 51 
Parasnis, D. B., 102, 200 
Parsoji Bho(n)sle, 45, 48, 50, 58, 228, 
248, 501 

Patan, battle of, 402 
Patna, 240 


Patparganj, battle of, 496 
Pattankudi, battle of, 249, 488 
Pay anna, 678 
Pearse, Col. H., 168 
Peixoto, 212, 223 
Penukonda, 204 

Perron, General, 266, 418; settlement 
with Lakaba Dada, 416-17; with the 
British, 496 
Peshawar, 30, 38 

Pilaji Gaikwar, 24, 72, 73, 74, 282; and 
Gujarat, 280-81; his career, 279 
Pilaji Jadhav, 84, DO, 251, 297 
Pillai, Ananda Ranga, 315 
Pillai, Tiruvengadam, 315 
Pindaris, the, 150, 266; and the third 
Anglo-Maratha war, 504; suppression 
of, 150-52, 501, 504, 532-34 
Pinto, Xavier, 96 
Pitt’s India Act of 1784, 382 
Plassey, battle of, 339 
Pohari, 84 
Polygars, 179 
Pondicherry, 315 
Poona, treaty of, 434, 503-04 
Portuguese, the, 75, 76, 94; and the 
Angrias, 300, 301, 302; and the Mara¬ 
thas, 252, 293 
Prananath, 715, 718 
Pratap Singh (Raja of Tanjore), 241, 
320 

Pratap Singh II (Ruler of Mewar), 144 
Prem-Sakhi, 655 
Pritamdas, 653 

Punjab, the, 2, 13, 37-38, 124, 126, 131, 
132, 133, 186, 187, 188, 189, 194, 254, 
387 

Puntanam Nambudiri, 682 

Q 

Qaim Khan Bangash, 37, 83, 137, 139 
Qalandar Khan, 30 

Qamar-ud-dln Khan (Vaztr), 23, 31, 32, 
35, 37, 38, 39, 84, 86, 88, 89, 134 
Qandahar, 27, 29 
Qasim ‘Ali Khan, 109 
Lahauri, 40, 41 
Qazi Idris, 195 

Qutb-ud-din Khan Kheshgi, 162 

R 

Rafi-’ud-Darjat, raised to Delhi throne, 
20 

Rafi-‘ud-Daulah, raised to Delhi throne, 
20 

Rafi-ush-Shan, 16 
Raghoba, see Raghunath Rao 
Raghogarh, 146, 147, 392 
Raghuji Angria, 306 
Raghuji Bhosle, 90, 119, 170, 173, 176, 
180, 240, 241, 244, 336 


855 




THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Raghuji Bhosle, II, 246, 247, 446, 447, 
494; treaty of Deogaon, 496, 501; 

death of, 501; his regime, 248-49 
Raghunath Rao, 125, 155, 185, 186, 188, 
191, 201, 203, 204, 206, 208, 209, 210, 

211, 214, 218, 220, 222, 244, 245, 253, 

269, 284, 285, 387, 388, 423, 424, 455, 

702; and Haidar ‘Ali, 423, 424; and 

murder of Peshwa Narayan Rao, 256, 
424; and Nizam ‘Ali, 202 
Rahmat Khan, 136 
Rahmat-un-NIsa kaki Jiu, 21 
Rahikant Dvija, 649 
Raidurg, 204, 207 
Rai Durlabh, 351 
Raigarh, 75, 78 
Raiji, 662 
Raja Gurudas, 359 
Raja Janaklram, 110 
Raja Raj Ballabh, 359 
Rajaram, 46, 226, 227 
Raja Ramdas, 326 
Raja Ram Mohan Roy, 763 
Raja Ramnarayan, 110, 340, 346 
Rajaramprasadi, 663 
Rajasthan, 5, 12-14, 25-26, 140-44, 145, 
174-75, 185, 214, 221, 387; and Pin- 
dari menace, 533-34 
Raja Sundar Singh, 108 
Rajgarh (of Konkan), 47 
Rajgarh (of Malwa), 81 
Rajmahal, battle of, 144 
Raj poor Ghat, treaty of, 278 
Rajpuri, 76 
Raj Singh II, 144 

Rajputs, the, 5, 8, 16, 43; and the 
Mughuls, 141, 142; and the Marathas, 
140-44, 145, 151,.209, 274, 396, 410 
Rajputana, see Rajasthan 
Rajwad4, V, K., 62, 98, 101, 102, 199, 
200 

Rakhi Singh, 13 

Rakshasbhuvan, battle of, 202, 269, 284 

Ramachandra Amatya, 48 

Ramachandra Baba, Diwan, 178 

Ramachandra Ganesh, 219, 220, 255 

Ramachandra Parashuram, 237 

RamajI Mahadeo, 306 

Ramanuja, 715 

Ramapanivada, 701, 706 

Ramapurattu Varyar, 684 

Rama Raja (of Satara), 172, 181, 282 

Rambhaji Nimbalkar, 50, 119 

Ramdas, Diwan, 182 

Ram Dvija, 649 

Rameshwar Bhattacharya, 640 

Ram Joshi, 666 

Ramprasad Niranjani, 647 

Ramprasad Sen, 642, 715 

Rampur, 118 

Rampura, 81, 146 

Ramrauni, 130 


Ramsakheji, 719 

Ram Shastri, 222 . _ ___ 

Ram Singh (Raja of Jodhpur), 142, 253 
Ram Singh (Raja of Kotah), 12 
Rana Khan, 397 
Rangayya, 679 
Rangna, 48 

Ranjit Deo, Raja, 162, 165 
Ranjit Singh (br. of Ratan Singh of 
Me war), 219 

Ranjit Singh (Jat), 159-61 
Ranjit Singh (of Punjab), 278, 528-29 
Ranoji Sindia, 84, 92, 177, 185, 251, 252, 
267 

Rao Dalpat Bundela, 39 
Raoji Appaji, 289, 290 
Rao Singh Hada, 39 
Ratan Chand, 23 
Ratan Singh Jat, 159, 219 
Ratan Singh Bhandari, 282 
Ratan Singh (of Mewar), 219 
Ratehalli, 205 
Ratnagiri, 75 
Ratno, 654 

Rayaji Patil, 391, 397, 398, 399 
Ray Singh, 391 
Raza Sahib, 324 

Regulating Act, the (1773), 365, 370, 
371-72; defects in, 375-76, 380-82; 

nrAviflpc inrliHarv. 374-82 


Religion, 

Hindu religion, 714-27; Bhakti cult, 
727; fight between Nagas and Vai- 
shnava bairdgis, 715; religious litera¬ 
ture, 715-16, 717, 718, 719, 720, 721, 
723, 724; revival of, 725; Shakti cult, 
716, 725; Sects: Balaramis, 723; Chai- 

tanyites, 721; Darpanarayanis, 724; 

Dhamis, 718; Harischandris, 723; 

Karta-Bhaj as, 721-22; Kishoribhajas, 
722; Paltudasis, 719; Ramasnehis, 
716; Ramavallabhis, 722; Rasika 
sub-sect, 720; Sahebdhanis, 722; Sat- 
namis, 718; Spa^tadayakas, 722; 

Swami Narayan sect 716; Vallabhis, 
716; toleration, 715. 

Islam, 724-34; conversion, 5, 732-34; 
fusion of Muslim communities, 730- 
31; Wahabi movement, 728-30 
Revas, 75, 77, 78 
Reza Khan, 351, 359 
Rohida, 47 

Rohilkhand, 8, 118, 134-38, 253 
Rohillas, the, 37, 86, 118, 133-38, 155, 
159, 186, 194, 220, 221, 254, 367, 368, 
369, 396, 397; expansion of their 

kingdom, 134-35 
Rupa (Jat), 153 
Rupaji Bhosle, 240 
Rustam ‘Ali, 34, 42 
‘Ali Khan, 72, 102, 280, 281 
Dil Khan, 4, 15 
Jang, see Murshid Quli n 


856 





INDEX 


S 

Sa'adat Khan (alias Mir Muhammad 
Amin, also Burhan-ul-Mulk), 23, 26, 
28, 31, 32, 33, 35, 39, 42, 85, 86, 88, 
89, 92, 93, 113, 153, 268; commits sui¬ 
cide, 34, 113; his career, 113 
Sa‘adat Khan Afridi, 132 
Sa‘adatullah Khan, 312, 320 
Sabaji Bhosale, 244, 246 
Sabaji Sindia, 189, 192 
Sabhk Chand, 17 
Sachal, 690, 691 
Sadashiv Bhaskar, 492 
Sadashiv Malhar, 408, 409 
Sadashiv Rao Bhau, 156, Udgir cam¬ 
paign, 183, 185, 192, 193, 194; and the 
third battle of Panipat, 194-99 
Sadashiv Rao Bhau (impostor), 424 
Sadat ‘Ah, 482 
Sadhaura, 14, 15 
Sadullah (Rohilla), 136 
Safdar ‘Ali, 312, 316, 336 
Safdar Jang Abu’l Mansur, 22, 37, 38, 
113; 114, 129, 135, 136, 155, 186, 187, 
190; civil war with emperor, 113-14; 
death of, 114 
Sagauli, treaty of, 532 
Sahajananda, 717 
Sahaji Bai, 719 
Sahidganj, 130 

Said Ahmad Khan, see Aga Muham¬ 
mad Said 

Saifat Allah ibn Madinat Allah, 694 
Saif Khan, 139 
Saif-ud-Din Khan, 56 
Sakharam Bapu, Bokil, 201, 202 
Salbai, treaty of, 257, 287, 426, 449, 460, 
472 

Salabat Jang, 182, 201, 323, 325; and 
the French, 326, 327, 332, 333; recon¬ 
ciliation with Bussy, 332 
Salsette, 94, 95, 96, 202 
Sambhaji Angria, 95, 300; and the 
English, 301 
Sami, 690, 691, 692 
Sambhar, 13 
Sambhoo, 108 

Samukham Venkata Krishnappa, 676 
Samru, 159 

Samsam-ud-daulah (Khan-i-Dauran), 
140, 152 

Samsher Bahadur, 254 
Sanskrit literature, 700-711 
Santaji Bhosle, 79 
Santaji Ghorpatfe, 48 
Sarangpur, 81 

Saranjam system, introduction and 
working of, 226-30 

Sarbuland Khan, 23, 35, 58, 72, 73, 74, 
113, 280; and the Peshwd, 281 
Sarbuland Khan Bamzai, 165 
Sardar Khan, 110, 136 


Sardeshmukhi, 15, 19, 49, 58, 60, 64, 80, 
91, 171, 174, 231, 279 
Sharza Khan, 37, 106, 108, 109, 241 
Sarfoji, Raja, 312, 526, 700 
Sarje (Sarza) Rao Ghatge, 149, 490; 
his atrocities, 264, 414-15, 489; his 
violent end, 266; in power 414-17; 
fall from power, 499 
Satara, 4, 60, 231 
Satvoji Jadhav, 89 
Satwas, 149 
Savant of Wadi, 303 
Savanur, 205 
Savnur, Nawab of, 210 
Sawai Madhav Narayan, Peshwa, birth, 
424 * death 449 

Sayyid Abdullah, 17, 18, 19, 20-23, 67, 
138, 153; faU of, 22-23 
Sayyid brothers, 17-23; and the Raj¬ 
puts, 141, 142; fall of, 22-23, 120; also 
see under Sayyid ‘Abdullah and 
Sayyid Husain ‘Ali 
Sayyid Himmat Khan Barha, 20 
Sayyid Husain ‘Ali, 17, 18, 19, 20-23, 26, 
40, 56, 57, 64, 67, 120, 141; and the 
Peshwd, 19; assassination of 23, 
120; comes to terms with Raja 
Shahu, 56-57 

Sayyid Insha Allah Khan Inshah, 688 
Sayyid Jamal-ud-din Khan, 130 
Sayyid Lashkar Khan, 326 
Sayyid Muhammad Amin, 23 
Sayyid Naj mud-din ‘Ali Khan, 81 
Sayyid Niyaz Khan, 34, 35 
Sekhoji Angria, 77, 299-300 
Seringapatam, see Srirangapatam 
Seven years’ war, 331 
Shadak$ha ra, 679 
Shah (poet), 690, 691 
Shah ‘Abdul Aziz Dehalavi, 693, 695 
Shah ‘Abdul Ghaffar, 21 
Shahabad, 108 
Shahaji Nimbalkar, 51 
Shah ‘Alam II, 114, 117, 125, 163, 210, 

257, 349, 350, 352, 366, 367, 388, 700; 

and Mahadji Sindia, 388-90; and the 
English, 412 
Shah Hatim, 685 

Shah Jahan (Emperor), 5, 10, 24 
Shah Jahan H, see Rafi-‘ud-Daulah 
Shahmuni, 667 

Shah Nizam-ud-din, 395, 409, 419 
Shahu Raja, 15, 19, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 
49, 50, 57, 58, 63, 67, 78, 81, 97, 101, 
102, 119, 170, 171, 172, 179, 228, 230, 

231, 241, 279, 282, 297, 300, 312; and 

release from Delhi and home com¬ 
ing, 45; struggle for the Maratha 
throne L 46-48, 50; and Balaji Rao 
Peshwd, 171-72, 173; and Chandrasen 
Jadhav’s revolt, 50-51; and Tara Bai, 
46-48; claims Swaraj, Chauth and 
Sardeshmukhi from the emperor, 49; 


857 



THE MARATHA SU1PREMACY 


and Delhi treaty, 58-59, 279; and 
Nizam-ul-Mulk, 121; and Sham¬ 
bhuji of Kolhapur, 232-33; campaign 
against Janjira, 75-78; estimate of, 
181; reconciliation with Shambhuji, 
71; 

Shahu II (Chhatrapati of Satara), 487 
Shahu, Raja of Tanjore, 320 
Shah Wali-ullah, 692, 695, 727, 728 
Shahzada, 341, 342, 344, 345 
Shahzada Humayun Shah, 396 
Shaikh Ahmadullah, 694 
Muhammad Ali Hazin, 699 
Qalandar Bakhsh Jur’at, 688 
Qutb-ud-din, 136 
Saalyada Krishnaraj, 680 
Shamal, 653 

Shambhuji Raja (of Kolhapur), 46, 57, 
64, 66, 97, 231; and Balaji Rao, 

Peshwa, 233; and Raja Shahu, 232, 
233; joins Nizam against Raja Shahu, 
67, 70, 121; treaty with Raja Shahu, 
71 

Shambhuji (son of ShivajI), 227, 230 
Shamsher Bahadur, 496 
Shamsher Khan, 110 
Shams Khan, 162 
Shankarjl Malhar, 57 
Shankarji Narayan, 47 
Shankaraji Phadke, 96 
Shantidas, 715 
Sharf-ud-din Mazmun, 685 
Sharza Rao Ghatge, see Sarje Rao 
Ghatge 

Shaukat Jang, 111, 112 
Sher Singh (Khichi), 147 
Shirhati, 205 
Shirza Khan, 29 

ShivajI, 4, 225; his administration, 225; 

centralised govt., 227 
Shivaji (son of Tara Bai), 231 
Shivaji II, 234, 238; his reign, 239 
Shivaji HI, 488 
Shivayoglshwara, 679 
Shiv Narayan, 718 
Shivneri, 202 

Shore, Sir John, 442, 446, 475, 479, 483, 
484 

Shrdvana Dakshand, 75 
Shuja‘at Khan, 72, 280 
Shuja Khan, 314 

Shuja-ud-daulah, 114, 116, 117> 118, 
joins Abdali, 193-94; 215, 216, 218; 
and Mir Qasim, 349; and the battle 
of Buxar, 115-16; and the English, 
117-18, 216, 366, 367, 368, 369, 370; and 
the Marathas, 215; as Vaztr, 115; esti¬ 
mate of, 114; his anti-English acti¬ 
vities, 117; his war with the Rohillas, 


Shuja-ud-din Muhammad Khan, 106-08; 

estimate of, 107 
Shukartal, 192 
Siddoji Rao Nimbalkar, 238 
Siddiq Beg Khan, 131 
Sidi of Janjira, 49, 75-78; and Angria6, 
291-303; and the English, 300, 301, 
304; joins Raja Shahu, 295 
Sidi Sa‘at, 76, 78 
Sidoji Gujar, 293 

Sikhs, the, 2, 3, 14-15, 16, 24, 43, 124, 
125, 126-33, 170, 186, 188, 218, 259, 
390, 413, 483; and Ahamad Shah 

Abdali, 126-33; and Jammu, 163; 
effects of Nadir Shah’s invasion on, 
128; revolt against the Marathas, 417- 
18; war of independence, 126-33 
Sindhi literature, 690-92 
Sindias, 251-67 
Sindkhed, battle of, 254 
Sira, 204, 207 

Siraj-ud-daulah, 110; and the English, 
333, 339; and rupture with the 

English, 111-12 
Sirhind, 14, 15, 38, 126, 18f 
Sirohi, 5 
Sironj, 4 

Sitabaldi, battle of, 506 
Sivpuri, 84 
Singaracharya, 679 
Siraj-ud-din Ati Khan Arzu, 699 
Smith, General Joseph, 122 
Smith, Richard, 117 

Social condition—education, 751-54, 

religion, 750-51; slavery, 762-64; 

social life, 754-62 
Sonda, 205, 455 
Srinagar, 163 
Srinivasan, C. K., 103 
Sripat Rao, Pratinidhi, 65, 119 
Srirangam, 323 

Srirangapatan, 207, 211, 213, 312, 437, 
battle of, 466 
Subhankar Kavi, 649 
Subsidiary alliance system, 521-32 
Sukhjlwan Mai, 164; and Ahamad Shah 
Abdali, 164-65; estimate of, 164-65 
Sultanji Rao Nimbalkar, 68 
Sukumar Barkath, 649 
Suraj Mai Jat, 154-57, 168, 194; and the 
Marathas, 156, 193, 253; his assess¬ 
ment, 156-57 

Surat, 141, 280, 521, 526, 632; treaty of, 
635 

Surji Anjangaon, treaty of, 497 
Surman, John, 105, 312 
Suryakhari Daivajna, 649 
Swami Narayan, 715 
Swaraj, 49, 58, 64, 279 
Syed Dildar ‘All Lakhnawi, 695 
Syed Ghulam ‘All Azad, 694 
Syed Tufail Muhammad, 694 
Sylveria, Martinho De, 96 


858 







INDEX 


T 

Taffadul Husain Khan Kashmiri, 695 
Tahamasp Khan Jalair, 33, 93 
Tamil literature, 669-72 
Tanaji Jagtap, 49 
Tandulwadi, 95 

Tanjore, 58, 324, 328, 521, 526 
Taqarrub Khan, 11 

Tara Bai (regent), 45, 172, 173, 181, 230, 
282; and Raja Shahu, 46-49, 50, 231; 
conspiracy against Raja Shahu, 50-51 
Telugu literature, 672-80 
Temple, Sir Richard, 103 
Thai, 75, 77, 78 
Thaneshwar, 14, 15 
Thayumanavar, 670 
Third Maratha war, 
see under Marathas 
Thomas, George, 418 
Thornton, 157, 330 
Thun, 18, 27, 153 
Tiloi, 26 

Tilsit, treaty of, 528 
Timmakavi, 673 
Timmamatya, 679 

Timur Shah, 124, 131, 132, 188, 396, 404 
Tipu Sultan, 211, 426, 441, 486; and 
Maratha-Nizam coalition, 461-62; and 
Nizam-Ali, 430, 448, 460; and the 

English, 434, 435, 436, 437, 459-60; and 
the Marathas, 429, 430, 431, 432, 433, 
434, 445, 460; surrenders half of his 
territories to the allies, 465; compari¬ 
son between Tipu and Haidar, 466- 
70; death of, 466; estimate of, 466- 
70; his embassies, 462; his military 
system, 468-69; his navy, 470 
Tod, 167 
Torna, 47 

Trade and industry—6, 767-95; British 
conquest and economic factors, 779- 
82; Company’s monopoly and coer¬ 
cion, 790-93; decline of, 773-79; ex¬ 
ports, 784-90, 793-95, inland trade and 
transport, 771-73; piracy, 782-84 
Trichinopoly, 58, 241, 312, 323-24, 327, 
331, 463 

Trimbakji Dengle, 507 
Trimgak Rao Dabhade, battle of 
Dabhoi, 71-75, 119, 279 
Trimbak Rao Pethe, 204, 212, 213, 423 
Tukoji (Raja of Tanjore), 701 
Tukoji Holkar, 148, 189, 219, 261, 262, 
270, 297, 399, 400, 401, 403, 405, 406, 
430, 431, 446, 490 
Tukoji Pawar, 84 
Tukoji Sindia, 255 

Tulaji Angria, 183-84; and Raja Shahu, 
303; and Tara Bai (regent), 304; 


and the English, 304; and the Pesh¬ 
ied, 303; and the Portuguese, 304; 
destruction of navy, 305-6 
Tulaji Sitole, 54 

Tulsa Bai, murdered, 278, 500, 501 
Turrabaz Raushan-ud-Daulah Zafar 
Khan Panlpati, 22 
Tyagaraja, 676, 708 


UdajI Pawar, 72, 74, 84, 267, 280 

lldayaraj Singh, 40 

Udayratna, 651 

Udgir campaign, 183, 201 

Ujjain, 92, 149, 252 

Umaji Bhosale, 234 

Ummed Singh, 142 

Unnayi Varyar, 681, 682 

Upehdra Bhknja, 648 

Urdu literature, 685-90 

V 

Vad, G. C„ 199, 223 
Vali Shah, 241 

Vansittart, Henry, 342, 343, 346, 348 

Varada Vithal, 679 

Vazir ‘AH aHas Mirza ‘Ali, 482 

Velldinala Venkatapati, 673 

Venkamatya, 681 

Venkata Narasimhacharya, 675 

Ver, 154 

Vidyabhushana, 715 
Vijaya Dasa, 679 
Vijaygarh, 77 

Vijayaranga Chokkanath, 676 
Vijay Singh, 40 

Visaji Krishna, 219, 220, 221, 255 
Vishwas Rao, 193; death of, 196 
Vithal Shivdeo, 189, 284 
Vithal Sundar, 202 
Vithoji Holkar, 491 
Vrindavan, 155 
Vyankatrao Ghorpade, 96 

W 

Wakinkhera, 11 
Wali Muhammad Nazeer, 687 
Walker, Major, 290 
Walpole, Sir Robert, 311 
Walter, Captain, 168 
Wandiwash, 331, 335 
Waris Shah, 660 
Warna, treaty of, 71, 231-32 
Watson, Admiral, 112, 329, 330 
Wazir Khan, 126 

Wellesley, Arthur (Duke of Welling¬ 
ton), 274, 419, 441; battle of Assaye, 
494-96, 498, 510, 521; and Holkar and 
Bhosle, 494-97 


859 



THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 


Wellesley, Marquess of and Earl of 
Mornington, 272, 412, 426, 494; sub¬ 
sidiary alliances, 521-31 
Wendel, 223, 224 
Wilks, Mark, 206, 211, 432 

Y 

Yahya Khan and the Sikhs, 128 
Yakub ‘Ah, 215 
Yakub Shaikhji, 76 
Yashvant Rao Dabhade, 282 
Yashwant Rao Holkar, 148, 150, 160, 
265, 273, 274, 417, 490, 491, 492, 493, 
494, 495, 497, 498, 499; and civil war, 
488-93; and Sindia, 273; and the 
English, 149, 274; attempt to raise a 
coalition of Indian rulers against the 
English, 497, 500; his last phase, 499- 
500; treaty of Rajpurghat, 499 
Yashwant Rao Pa war, 254 


Yashwant Rao Potnis, 76 

Yasin Khan, 49 

Yogananda, 679 

Yvon, Mr., 431 

Z 

Zabita Khan, 221, 255 

Zain-ud-din Ahmad, 109; assassination 
of, 110 

Zakariyah Khan (Governor), 30, 37, 
128, 162 

Zaman Shah Abdali, 410, 411, 413, 483, 
484 

Zamindari, 355, 373 

Zia-ud-din Khan, 104; his administra¬ 
tion, 104 

Zu’ifiqar ‘AH Khan, 394 

Zu’ifiqar Beg, 56 

Zu’ifiqar Khan, 12, 15, 16, 17, 20, 39, 
45, 49, 66, 78, 312 


l 


860 








, OF THE ' 
INDIAN PEOPLE 


This is the first history of India, written 
exclusively by her own people, bringing to bear on 
the problems a detached and truly critical 
appreciation. A teanrof over sixty scholars of 
repute presents herein a comprehensive and up-to- 
date account of the political, socio-economic and 
cultural history of the Indian people. 






VOLUME I 
THE: VEDIC AGE 
(up to 600 B.C.) 


VOLUME II 
THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 
(600 B.C. to 320 A.D.) 





VOLUME III 
THE CLASSICAL AGE 
(320-750 A.D.) 


: 


VOLUME IV 




(750-1000 A.D.) 




VOLUME V 
3GGLE FOI 
(1000-1300 A.D.) 


' < - 


' VOLUME VI 
THE DELHI SULTANATE 
(1300-1526 A.D.) 


■ ■ '■ 



VOLUME VII 
THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 
(1526-1707 A.D.) 


' i'4 


Si 


VOLUME VIII 


(1707-1818 A.D.) 


VOLUME IX 



INDIAN 


.) PART I 




■ 


VClLUME X 




- 


a 


VOLUME XI 









VOLUME X; THE VEDIC AGE 

"This history unlike its predecessors is first and foremost a history of India and of 
her people rather a history of those who have from time to time invaded her.... The 
standard, in a wbrd, is very high. .." 

The Times Literary Supplement, London 

".....Distinguished, historians contribute and they are. not only learned but also very 
' readable ... . It contains much new information.. 

The Manchester Guardian, Manchester 

VOLUME IITHE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY • 

It is safe to say that these volumes will transform the study of Indian history in 
* our times; their authors are not only writing history, they themselves are making history, 
a whole new history of knowledge and education,...’’ 

1 The Illustrated Weekly of India, Bombay 



VOLUME III: THE CLASSICAL 

"... Jt maintains the leading trait of the series viz. to devote more attention to the 
social and cultural aspects of the story than to the purely political side, and the narrative of 
dynastic struggles and wars.... The ■political history is generally complete and up-to-date 
and a great amount of authentic information on social and economic history has'been 
culled and presented systematically for the first time...." W-M 

K. A, Niiakanla Sastri in Journal of Indian History 

VOLUME IV : THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

"....This is a magnificent piece of exact and unbiased scholarship.... Its pages are 
alive with the spirit of the modern Indian Renaissance; freedom has animated Indian 
learning and this is one of its finest achievements....this new Indian history is not 
concerned merely, or even mainly, with war and politics. Two thirds of the book deal with 
cultural and social matters...." The Statesman, Calcutta 

VOLUME V : THE STRUGGLE.FOR EMPIRE ,. 

"....Like all the preceding volumes its treatment.is detailed and comprehensive 

and is based upon the highest standards of scholarship. The contributors have made the 
best use of all the available.source material and the important previous works on the 
subject....From every point of view it will be accepted as the standard and authoritative 
work on the history of India in the age of transition from ancient to medieval times...." 

The Hindustan Times, New Delhi 

VOLUME VI: THE DELHI SULTANATE 


’’....Voluminous publication....piecing together all relevant material....easily stands 
out-as one of the most outstanding and comprehensive treatises so far brought out on this 
period of Indian history....surpasses them all...being written,...from an entirely new angle 
of vision. ..is indeed a significant contribution....this comprehensive and detailed work is 
really a very valuable addition to the existing literature on the subject....” 

: J; : ■■ The Power, Lucknow 

VOLUME VII t THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 
"....A comprehensive and balanced history of a momentous period; an exacting task 
ably fulfilled... .A notable volume in a notable series, the work is a finely integrated and 
well brought*out history of a remarkable time...." Nagpur Times, Nagpur 

VOLUME VIII: THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 
"....The editors have done a commendable job in bringing out this volume in which 
the political history of the period has been dealt with in a scholarly manner....” 

The National Herald, New Delhi 


VOLUME IX : BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND 
INDIAN RENAISSANCE, PART I 

’’....The volume is an exhaustive study of the British rule....Its impact on the 
cultural, social and educational life in the country....This is an important publication for 
students of Indian history...." The Hitavada, Nagpur 

VOLUME X : BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND 
INDIAN RENAISSANCE, PART II 

"....This volume, like its predecessors, is a mine of information and brings to light 
numerous significant facts and developments in the last century....It maintains the high 
standards set by the earlier volumes...." v - Sunday Standard, Bombay 

VOLUME XI: STRUGGLE FOR FREEDOM 
"....The present volume covers the momentous period 1905-1947. It gives a detailed 
account'not only of political developments, but also of such other essential topics as 
administration, education, art and literature...,” 

"Unique in the annals of modern Indian scholarship....” 

Sunday Standard, Bombay 


