
1 
k 

1 
1 
k 

k 
k 

k 

k 

k 

i 
$ 

1 

(Q£ 


BHAVAN’S BOOK UNIVERSITY 


THE HISTORY AND CULTURE 

OF THE 

INDIAN PEOPLE 

BRITISH 

PARAMOUNTCY 

AND 

INDIAN 

RENAISSANCE 

PART II 

★ 

BHARATIYA VIDYA BHAVAN 

MUMBAI 

Agartala * Agra * Ahmedabad * Allahabad * Amritsar * Andheri * Aurangabad 
Bagalkot * Bangalore * Baroda * Belgaum * Bellary * Bharuch * Bharwari 
Bhatpara * Bhimavaram * Bhopal * Bhubaneshwar * Bhusawal * Chandigarh 
Chatrapur (Bhatti Mines) * Chennai * Coimbatore * Dakor * Dehradun * Guntur 
Guruvayur * Guwahati * Haldia, * Hazira * Hosur * Hubli-Dharwad * Hyderabad 
Indore * Irinjalakuda * Jabalpur * Jaipur * Jalgaon * Jammu Tawi * Jamnagar 
Jodhpur * Kakinada * Kammam * Kanchipuram * Kannur * Kanpur * Khor * Kochi 
Kodagu * Kodaikanal * Kodinar * Kodungallur * Kolhapur * Kolkata * Kollam 
Korba * Kosamba * Kota * Kottayam * Kozhikode * Kurkunta * Kutch * Lucknow 
Machilipatnam * Madurai * Malkhed * Mangalore * Mankapur * Modipuram 
Mukundgarh * MUMBAI H.O. * Mysore * Nadiad * Nagercoil * Nagpur * Nasik 
Noida * Navi Mumbai * New Delhi * Ottappalam * Palakkad * Panchkula * Patna 
Ponnani' * Pune * Puthucode * Raipur * Ramachandrapuram * Ramanattukara 
Ratangarh * Reddipalayam * Renukoot * Roorkee * Rourkela * Salav * Satna 
Secunderabad * Serampore * Shimoga * Siliguri * Suchindram * Surat 
Tadepalligudam * Thaliparamba * Thirunavaya * Thiruvananthapuram * Thrissur 
Tirupati * Udipi-Manipal * Ujjain * Valanchery * Varanasi * Visakhapatnam 
Wadakkancherry * Wardha * Wayanad : Overseas Centres * London * New York 
Toronto * Mexico City Lisbon * Durban * Sydney * Singapore. 


m 

i 

k 

% 

k 

k 

k 

I 


m 












I The ninth volume of this series deals with the 
political history and economic condition of India 
from A.D. 1818 to 1905. This, the tenth volume, 
deals with the other important aspects of the 
history of the Indian people during the same 
period, laying special emphasis on the 
Renaissance in the 19th century which has 
transformed India from a Medieval to a Modern 
country. It begins with a short account of the 
general condition of the Indian people at the 
beginning of the 19th century and then proceeds to 
show how English education was gradually 
introduced into India in spite of the opposition of 
early British rulers. It then describes the great 
impact of English education and the Western 
ideas, transmitted by it, upon almost all important 
aspects of Indian life. The momentous results of 
this impact on religious and social ideas, the 
growth of modern Indian literatures and the rise 
and development of the Indian Press are described 
in detail. It then traces how these changes led to 
the growth of political ideas and political 
organizations and the birth of patriotism and 
nationalism. This leads to the discussion of the 
somewhat complicated questions of the social and 
political relations between the Indians and the 
British on the one hand and that between the 
Hindus and Muslims on the other. A detailed 
critical study of the Indian and Muslim political 
ideas and organizations, on separate lines, 
culminating in the Indian National Congress on 
the one hand and the Muslim League on the other, 
is a special feature of the book, as it seeks to 
remove many current but erroneous views on the 
subject. Another special feature of this volume is 
the detailed account of the coolies in the tea- 
gardens in Assam and the indentured Indian 
labourers in the British Colonies whose lot was 
hardly better than that of the serfs or slaves whom 
they replaced. Indian History, even the 
comprehensive Cambridge History of India, has 
so far either ignored these topics or dealt with 
only a few of them and that also in the most 
casual way. This volume deals with the history of 
the Indian people and of the great movements and 
personalities in India during the nineteenth 
century in a manner such as has not been 
attempted in any previous history of India. 

The writers of this volume include, besides the 
Editor Dr. R. C. Majumdar, Dr. K. M. Munshi, 
Dr. K. K. Datta, Dr. M. Wahid Mirza, Dr. S. K. 
Chatterjee, Sri K. P. Kulkarni, Dr. S. V. Joga Rao, 
Sri S. Srikantha Sastri, Sri. T. K. Parameswaran 
Nair, Dr. K. R. Srinivasa Iyengar, and Sri V. N. 
Datta. 


Rs. 500/- 














3Tr^t^r: srg few: 

Let noble thoughts come to us from every side 


Rigveda, l-89-i 


BHAVAN'S BOOK UNIVERSITY 


THE HISTORY AND CULTURE OF THE INDIAN PEOPLE 

VOLUME X 

BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY 

AND 

INDIAN RENAISSANCE 


PART II 





Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
Public.Resource.Org 


; 




https://archive.org/details/britishparamount10bhar 


BHAVAN'S BOOK UNIVERSITY 


The History and Culture of the Indian People 

Volume X 

BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY 

AND 

INDIAN RENAISSANCE 

PART II 

GENERAL EDITOR 
R. C. MAJUMDAR, m.a., ph.d., 

Vice-President of International Commission for a History of the 
Scientific and Cultural Development of Mankind set up by 
UNESCO; Honorary Fellow of the Asiatic Society, 

Calcutta; Honorary Fellow of the Royal Asiatic 
Society of Great Britain and Ireland; 

Honorary Fellow of the Asiatic 
Society of Bombay; 

Hon. Head of the Department of History, 

Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Bombay; 

Formerly Vice-Chancellor, University of Dacca, 

Principal, College of Indology, Hindu University, Banaras, 
and Visiting Professor of Indian History, Universities 
of Chicago and Pennsylvania (U.S.A.) 

ASSISTANT EDITORS 

A. K. MAJUMDAR, m.a., d. phil., 

Joint Director, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Bombay 

AND 

D. K. GHOSE, M.A., D. PHIL., PH.D. (London) 

Reader in History, Burdwan University 



2007 

BHARATIYA VIDYA BHAVAN 

Kulapati K. M. Munshi Marg 
Mumbai-400 007 






All Rights reserved by the Publishers 


© Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan 
Kulapati K. M. Munshi Marg, Mumbai - 400 007 


1st Edition 

1965 

2nd Edition 

1981 

3rd Edition 

1991 

4th Edition 

2007 


Price Rs. 500.00 


PRINTED IN INDIA 

By Atul Goradia at Siddhi Printers, 13/14, Bhabha Building, 13th Khetwadi Lane, 
Mumbai - 400 004, and Published by P. V. Sankarankutty Dy. Registrar (Publications), 
for Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Kulapati Munshi Marg, Mumbai - 400 007. 

E-Mail : brbhavan@bom7.vsnl.net.in • Web-site : www.bhavans.info 



CONTRIBUTORS 


K. M. MUNSHI 

BA., LL.B., DXITT. 
President, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan 


R. C MAJUMDAR 

M.A., PH.D., FAS., FAS.B., F.R.A.S. (HONY.) 

K. K. DATTA 

Vice-Chancellor, Magadh University 


M. WAHID MIRZA 

M.A., PHD. 

Professor and Head of the Department of Arabic, 
Lucknow University (Retired) 


S. K. CHATTERJI 

M.A., D.L1TT. 

President, Bengal Legislative Council and 
Professor Emeritus, University of Calcutta 


K. P. KULKARNI 

J.P., MA, B.T. 

Head of the Marathi Department, Elphinstone College, Bombay 
Chairman of the Maharashtra State Language Advisory Board 


S. V. JOGA RAO 

MA, PH.D. 

Lecturer, Andhra University 


$. SRIKANTHA SASTRI 

Professor of History, Mysore University (Retired) 


P. K. PARAMESWARAN NAIR 

Supervisor, Malaycdam Lexicon, University of Kerala 


K. R. SRINIVASA IYENGAR 

m.a., D.Lrrr. 

Professor and Head of the Department of 
English, Andhra University 


V. N. DATTA 

MA, LL.B., M.LTTT. (CANTAB) 
Reader in History, Kurukshetra University 
















■; 

( 






■ 


. . 
















■ 









■ 



CONTENTS 


CHAPTER I (XXXIX)* 


Page 

THE INDIAN PEOPLE AT THE BEGINNING OF THE 

NINETEENTH CENTURY 1 


By R. C. Majumdah, m.a.. 


I’H.D,, F.A.S., F.A.S.D., 


F.R.A.S. (HONV). 


CHAPTER II (XL) 

ENGLISH EDUCATION 
By It. C. Majumdar, K. K. Datta, m.a., rii.n.. 

Vice-Chancellor, Magadh University . 
And V. N. Datta, m.a., ll.b., m. lht. (Cantab). 
Reader in History, Kurukshetra University. 


I. Beginnings of English Education in Bengal up to 

1835 .. .. .. .. .. ». 31 

II. Aims and objects of English Education .. .. 34 

III. British policy towards Education up to 1835 . . 42 

IV. General policy and progress of English Education 

(1835-57) . 48 

V. General policy and progress of English Education 

(1858-1905) ..- .. .. 52 

VI. Vernacular and Primary Education . . . . 60 

VII. Female Education .. .. .. .. .. 65 

VIII Progress of Education in different Provinces . . 67 

1. Bengal .. .. .. .. . . 67 

2. Bombay . .. .. .. . . 70 

3. Madras .. .. .. .. .. 72 

4. Uttar Pradesh .. .. .. .. 74 

5. The ‘Punjab . . .. .. .. 77 

6. Chiefs* Colleges . . .. . . 78 

IX. Muslim Education .. .. .. .. 79 

Appendix 

Controversy between the “Orientalists** and “Angli¬ 
cists** and Macaulay’s Minute on the same .. 81 


CHAPTER III (XLI) 

IMPACT OF WESTERN CULTURE .. 89 

Hv It. C. Ma JVM PAH 


•The figures within brackets indicate the serial number of Chapters in continuation of 
those in the preceding volume (Vol. IX). 


VII 






THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—IT 


CHAPTER IV(XLII) 

NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


By R. C. Majumdar 

Section VIII By Prof. M. Wahid Mirza, m.a., ph.d. 
Professor and Head of the Department of Arabic, 

Lucknow University 

Page 


L The Brahma Samaj 97 

1. Rammohan Roy . .. 97 

2. Devendra-nath Tagore .. .. .. 101 

3. Keshab-chandra Sen . 102 

II. The Prarthana Samaj .. .. .. .. 106 

III. The Arya Samaj .. .. .. .. .. 107 

1. Dayananda Sarasvati 107 

2. The Arya Samaj 110 

3 The great split .. .. .. .. Ill 

IV. Neo-Hinduism 115 

V. Ramakrishna Math and Mission .. .. .. 116 

1, Ramakrishna Paramahamsa . 116 

2. Svami Vivekananda .. .. .. 123 

VI. Theosophical Society .. 131 

VII. Minor Religious Movements 134 

VIH. Muslim Religion & Society 140 

IX. Christianity 150 


CHAPTER V (XLHI) 

LITERATURE, 


I. Introduction by R. C. Majumdar. 

1. Languages . . 

2. General Survey of the Character of the Litera¬ 
tures in Modem Indian Languages 

II. Sanskrit—by B. C. Majumdar . 

[H. Bengali—by R. C. Majumdar . 

1. Growth of Bengali Prose .. .. .. 

2. Poetry . 

3. Novels .. . 

4. Drama . 

5. Miscellaneous 

IV. Assamese~~by Dr. S. K. Chatterji, M.A., D.Litt., 
F.A.S., President, Bengal Legislative Council and 
Professor Emeritus, University of Calcutta, and 

R. C. Majumdar . 

V. Oriya—by R. C. Majumdar 

VI. Hindi—by S. K. Chatterji and R. C. Majumdar 

VII. Marathi—by (late) K. P. Kulkami, J.P., M.A.B.T. 
Head of The Marathi Department, Elphinstone College , 

Bombay. 

VIII. Gujarati—by K. M. Munshi, B.A. LL.B. D.Litt., 

President, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan. 

1. 1818-1852 . 

2. 1852-1886 .; .. ,» .. .. 

3. 1886-1905 


160 

160 

162 

163 

166 

166 

171 

173 

175 

176 


178 

179 
181 
184 


190 

190 

191 

192 


vm 




















CONTENTS 


Page 

IX. Tamil—by K. B. S. Iyengar, M.A., D.Litt., .. 195 

Professor of English, Andhra University 

X. Telugu—by S. V. Joga Bao, M.A., Ph.D., .. .. 198 

Lecturer, Andhra University . 

XI. Kannada—by Prof. S. Srikantha Sastri .. .. 200 

(Retired) Professor of History, Mysore University . 

XII. Malayalam—by P. K. Parameswaran Nair, .. .. 202 

Supervisor, Malayalam Lexicon, University of Kerala 

1. The age of Swathi Thirunal .. .. .. -202 

2. Impact of English Education .. .. .. 203 

3. Prose Literature .. .. • .. .. 204. 

4. The Novels .. . .. 205 

5. Drama and Poetry .. .. .. .. 205 

6. Literary Criticism ,. .. .. .. 207 

7. Translations . 207 

XIII . Indian Contribution to Arabic Literature—by M. W. 

Mirza .. .. ... .. .. 208 

(Retired) Professor of Arabic , Lucknow University. 

XIV. Indian Contribution to Persian Literature—by M. W. 

Mirza .. . < .. «. ». 21i 

XV. Urdu—by S. K. Chatterji . 214 

XVI. Indo-Anglian Literature—by K. B. Srinivasa 

Iyengar, M.A., D.Litt., .. .. .. 215 

Professor of English, Andhra University 

XVII. Scripts in India of the present day—by S. K. Chatterj i 218 

CHAPTER VI(XLIV) 

THE PRESS 
By R. C. Majitmdar 

I. Growth of Indian Press up to 1857 .. . . .: 222 

II. The Government and the Press .. .. .. 228 

III. The Press during the outbreak of 1857-58 .. .. 237 

IV. The Press after 1858 240 

CHAPTER VII (XLV) 

SOCIAL REFORM 
By R. C. Majumdar 

I. Principles of reform .. .. .. .. .. 256 

II. General Review .. .. .. .. .. 260 

HI.' Sati . 268 

IV. Infanticide .. .. .. .. .. .. 275 

V. Remarriage of widows .. .. .. .. 276 

VI. Slavery 278 

VII. The Emancipation Act .. .. .. .. 280 

VIII. Post-Mutiny Reforms 281 

IX. Education of Women .. .. .. .. 284 


ix 













THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


CHAPTER VIII (XLVI) 
MUSLIM COMMUNITY 
By R. C. Majumdar 


Page 

I. Muslim politics before the Aligarh Movement .. 295 


II. The Aligarh Movement . 305 

III. Divide and Rule .. .. 320 

IV. Hindu-Muslim relations .. . 325 

Appendix 

Hindu-Muslim riots .. .. .. .. 332 

1. Thana (Bombay) riots (1837) .. .. .. 332 

2. Broach riot (1857) .. .. .. .. 332 

3. Janjira riots (1877) .. .. .. .. 333 

4. Anti-kine-killing riots in Bihar (1893-94) .. 333 

5. Calcutta riots (1897) .. .. .. .. 334 


CHAPTER IX(XLVH) 

SOCIAL RELATION BETWEEN 
ENGLISHMEN AND INDIANS .. 337 

By R. C. Majumdar 

CHAPTER X (XLVm) 

BRITISH POLICY TOWARDS INDIA .. 381 

By R. C. Majttmdar 

CHAPTER XI (XLIX) 

THE ATTITUDE OF INDIANS 
TOWARDS BRITISH RULE .. 410 

By R. C. Majumdar 


CHAPTER XII (L) 

GROWTH OF POLITICAL IDEAS 
AND POLITICAL. ORGANIZATIONS 
(UP TO 1858) 

By R. C. Majumdar 

I. Introduction .. .. . 431 

n. Bengal .. .. .. .. .. .. 434 

III. Political ideas and associations outside Bengal .. 456 

A. Bombay .. .. .. .. .. 456 

B. Madras .. - .. .. .. .. 462 

CHAPTER XIII (U) 

BIRTH OF NATIONALISM .. 465 

Bv R. C. Majumdar 

« 






CONTENTS 


CHAPTER XW(UI) 

DEVELOPMENT OF POLITICAL IDEAS 
AND ORGANIZATIONS (1858-85) 

By It. C. Majumdar 


I. Bengal ., 

II. Bombay and Madras 

III. Political Propaganda in England 
Appendix: 

Sarvajanik Sabha—Poona 


Page 

m 

515 

518 

521 


CHAPTER XV (LID) 

THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 
By It. C. Majumdar 

I. The Genesis 

II. The first twenty sessions of the 

Congress (1885-1904) . 

III. The British reaction to the Indian 

National Congress. . 

IV. Political work in England 

V. The relation of the Indian National Congress 
with the old political associations 


524 

536 

551 

562 

565 


CHAPTER XVI (UV) 

THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT 
IN POLITICS 

By It. C. Majumdar 

I. Rise of the Nationalist Party .. .. .. 570 

II. Beginnings of militant nationalism . . .. 580 

CHAPTER XVII (LV) 

INDIAN SERFS AND SLAVES IN THE 
BRITISH EMPIRE 

By It. C. Majumdar 


In India 

Tea-garden labourers in Assam 

• • 

9 • 

595 

1. The history of the coolies in Assam tea-gardens 

595 

2. System of recruiting coolies 

3. Condition of the coolies in the 

• • 

• • 

598 

Assam tea-gardens 

• * 

• • 

602 

4. Brutality of the tea-planters 




admitted by the highest British 
officials 

• • 

' • • 

610 

a. General review 

• • 

• • 

610 

b. Miscarriage of justice 

• • 

• • 

611 


xi 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


II. Outside India 

1. The indenture system 

2. The Island of Mauritius 

3. The Indians in South Africa 
Bibliography 

Chronology 

Index 


Page 

611 

613 

617 

626 

647 

669 


\ 


ABBREVIATIONS 

Cf. Vol. IX, pp. xxxv-xxxviii. The following additional abbre¬ 
viations are used:— 

B P P Bengal Past and Present. 

s g History of Bengal , Vol. II, Edited by Sir Jadu- 

nath Sarkar, Dacca. 

Hammohan Rammohun Roy , The Man and His Work. 

Edited by Amal Home and Published by the 
Rammohun Centenary Committee. Calcutta, 
1933 (also referred to as Centenary Volume). 


XU 





PREFACE 


By Dr. R. C. Majumdar 
General Editor 

This volume really forms a part of Vol. IX, and was originally 
planned as such; but as the achievement of independence made it 
possible as well as necessary to give a more detailed and critical 
history of the period from 1818 to 1905, Vol. IX exceeded the 
normal size and was split up into two parts. For the convenience 
of reference the two parts have been treated as separate volumes, 
with separate numbering of pages and chapters; but, to indicate 
the continuity, the original number of chapters in the undivided 
volume has been indicated within brackets in this volume. 

The relation between the two parts, i.e., Vols. IX and X, has 
been explained in the Preface to Vol. IX. While VoL IX deals with 
the political and economic history of India from 1818 to 1905, this 
volume treats of the other aspects of Indian life during the same 
period with the Renaissance as its central theme. It accordingly 
begins with a short account of the general condition of the Indian 
people at the beginning of the nineteenth century (Ch. I) and then 
describes the introduction of English education and its general 
impact on Indian people (Chaps. II, III), leading to what is justly 
regarded as the Renaissance of India. A detailed account is then 
given of some of the prominent aspects of the Renaissance, such as 
the change in religious and social ideas, the growth of new types 
of literature, and the rise of the Press as an important factor in 
Indian life (Chs. IV-VII). The most important aspect of the 
Renaissance, namely, political organization and the development of 
nationalism which distinguished the period under review from all 
preceding epochs in Indian history, is dealt with in five chapters 
(XII-XVI), preceded by four chapters (VIII-XI) which supply the 
background of political evolution. 

A few words are necessary to indicate the scope, object, and 
necessity of the concluding chapter which marks a departure from 
the current books on the modem history of India, written both by 
the Indians and Englishmen. It deals with the state of slavery 
and semi-slavery to which a large number of Indians were reduced, 
both at home and abroad, by Englishmen who uprooted the plant 
of slavery elsewhere in their dominions only to grow and nurture 
it on Indian soil. The depth of degradation to which these Indians 

• • • 

XIII ' 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


were condemned, and the brutalities to which they were often 
subjected, with the full knowledge, and sometimes tacit consent, of 
the British Government, is a sad commentary on the oft-expressed 
anxiety of the British rulers of India to guard the interests of her 
common people, who formed the bulk of the population, as against 
the microscopic minority of the educated middle class. There is, 
however, no cloud without a silver lining. The miserable lot of 
the Indian slaves overseas served as an incentive to India’s struggle 
for freedom. How deeply it stirred the emotions of the politically 
conscious Indians may be gathered from the resolutions on the 
subject .passed year after year at the annual meetings of the Indian 
National Congress. Apart from this aspect, the stolid, almost crimi¬ 
nal, indifference of the British to the indescribable misery and utter 
humiliation of the Indian labourers and free citizens in the Colonies 
is mainly responsible for the barbarous and universally condemned 
policy (or impolicy) of ‘apartheid’ now adopted by the White People 
of South Africa and their general attitude to the coloured inhabitants 
of the country. 

The materials for the study of the aspects of history dealt with 
in this volume are not as varied and ample as is the case with the 
political and economic history which forms the subject-matter of 
Vol. IX. The official records, except in a few particular cases, do 
not directly throw much light on the various topics discussed in this 
volume. The British authors of Indian history, like the court 
chroniclers of the Medieval period, were mostly interested in the 
British conquests and administration, and seldom concerned them¬ 
selves with the people except as adjuncts to the political and 
administrative history which constituted their main and central 
theme. The Cambridge History of India, for example, allots less 
than a dozen pages to the topics (except English education and 
Sati) dealt with in this volume, and does not refer, even once, to 
the Renaissance that changed the face of India, though an entire 
volume of 680 pages is devoted to the history of sixty years covering 
the period from 1858 to 1918. The sanie thing is more or less true 
of the volumes of Indian history written by earlier British authors, 
mentioned in the Preface to Vol. IX (p. xxiii) as important sources 
of political history. 

Although there is no historical work dealing with the subject, 
as a whole, treated in this volume, the materials for writing it are 
not very scanty. Valuable data for studying the development of 
various aspects of Renaissance in India lie scattered in the periodicals 
and literary works—specially memoirs on particular topics and 
biographies or autobiographies of eminent persons. Unfortunately, 


XIV 


PREFACE 


much of these materials could not be utilized in the present volume, 
mainly for two reasons. In the first place, old periodicals are not 
easily available. Secondly, many of these as well as other literary 
works are written in regional languages, and there is no English 
translation. No historian knows all the Indian languages, and 
co-operative effort such as has been adopted in the chapter on 
literature could not be extended to others for very obvious reasons. 
It is therefore. inevitable that the literary evidence in Bengali 
language, with which the author of these chapters is familiar, has 
been more extensively used than that in other languages. This 
was further facilitated by the fact that two Bengali scholars have 
performed the laborious task of collecting and classifying useful 
extracts from a few old Bengali periodicals. If similar studies 
be undertaken with reference to old periodicals in other regional 
languages, it would be possible to give fuller and better accounts 
of modern India. Fortunately, many good books—memoirs, bio 
graphics, essays and studies on special topics—have been written 
in English in different parts of India, throwing valuable light on the 
progress of Renaissance in these regions. These enable us to draw 
up the general outline of this development which must suffice for the 
present, leaving the details and illustrative examples for the future. 

The delineation of the Hindu-Muslim and Indo-British relations 
(Chs. VIII-XI) presents a peculiar difficulty to which reference 
has been made in the Prefaces to Vol, VI (pp. xxix-xxxii) and Vol. IX 
(p. xxxiii) of this series, and the editor has nothing to add to what 
has been said there. The editor once more reminds the readers 
that though many unpleasant, sometime* even painful, remarks 
have been made for the sake of historical truth, the writer bears 
malice to none and goodwill to all. The history of mankind is 
largely a tale of woe and misery, brought about by the greed, 
cruelty and selfishness of men, and India has been no exception to 
the rule. Still that history has to be told, not merely for the sake of 
truth, but also for the edification of, and warning to, posterity. 
To ignore or belittle historical truth, with a view to promoting 
peace, harmony or goodwill, may be of immediate advantage, but 
certainly does great harm in the long run. Courage to face truth, 
however unpleasant, paves the way for better understanding in 
future. The editor has kept this in view while depicting the relations 
between the Hindus, Muslims and the British in India during the 
period under review. 

Of tlie development of political ideas and organizations in 
general, and of nationalism in particular, there are abundant mate¬ 
rials. It has been treated in detail as it forms the background of 


xv 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

India’s struggle for freedom which forms the central theme of the 
next volume in this series. Though some of the nationalist ideas 
reached their maturity and found full and formal expression only 
after 1905, their beginnings may be traced before that year, and 
hence they have been noticed in this volume, particularly as their 
impact upon political movement was felt even before that year was 
over. 

It is as difficult to fix a definite date for the development of a 
new idea as to draw up a chronological chart for the different phases 
of the development of literature. , One merges into the other so 
naturally and in such slow and gradual stages that it is not easy to 
fix any chronological boundary between them. This difficulty has 
been conspicuously felt in chapter V dealing with regional literature, 
and it has been aggravated by the fact that the natural divisions in 
the growth of a literature may not always agree with the different 
epochs of political history according to which the different volumes 
of this series have been arranged. As a result, the end of some sec¬ 
tions in literature may appear to be somewhat abrupt. Sometimes 
the literary activities of one and the same author extend fairly over 
many years both before and after 1905, with which this volume 
closes, and it is difficult to decide whether to include him in the 
present volume and anticipate his later career, or to reverse the 
process, leaving a gap in the present volume. The case of Rabindra¬ 
nath Tagore offers a good illustration. His literary career will be 
dealt with in the next volume though some of his good works were 
published long before 1905. Even such arbitrary choice appeared 
to be preferable to the division of his career into two halves to be 
treated in two separate volumes. 

A still greater difficulty of the same kind faces us in the domain 
of art. It is very remarkable that the Renaissance in India was not 
marked by an efflorescence of art such as we notice in Europe. 
The nineteenth century in India, so rich in literature at least in 
Bengal, did not bring about any revival of art tradition even in that 
Province before the very end of the period under review. The 
Bengal School of painting founded by Abanindra-nath Tagore has 
justly been described by Dr. Coomaraswamy as *a phase of the 
national re-awakening’. But its real development by him and his 
pupils took place only in the present century. So far as the nine¬ 
teenth century is concerned, we find either the last glowing embers 
of the Kangra School represented by Kapur Singh, or imitations 
of European oil-painting by Raja Ravi Varma, Alagiri Naidu, Rama- 
swamy Naidu and others. As it would be more appropriate to 
include the last phase of Kangra art in Vol. VIII, and the develop- 


XVI 


PREFACE 


ment of national as well as Europeanized School of art in Vol. XI, 
Art as a subject has been altogether omitted in this volume. It 
may be added that this decision was further influenced by the fact 
that there has been no significant development in the other two 
branches of art, viz., architecture and sculpture, in the nineteenth 
century. The fine stone or bronze images which we find in different 
parts of India were almost all imported from Europe, and the few 
buildings which may claim any architectural excellence are based 
on European model and mostly designed by European architects. 
Perhaps no epoch in Indian history has been so poor in artistic 
achievement as the period of British rule in India. 

The editor begs to draw the attention of the readers to the 
policy and principles enunciated in pp. xxxiii-xxxiv, and the method 
of execution described in p. xxx of Vol. IX, which are equally appli¬ 
cable to this volume. Like Vol. IX, the editor himself is the author 
of all the chapters of this volume except a small section in the Chap¬ 
ter (IV) on religion, major part of the chapter (V) on literature, 
and a part of the chapter (II) on English Education. The reasons 
in both cases are the same and have been stated in p. xxx of Vol. IX. 
It is needless to add that the general observations in the Preface 
to Vol. IX, particularly those in pp. xxx ff., are more or less appli¬ 
cable to this volume also. 

For reasons stated in the Preface to Vol. IX diacritical marks 
have generally been omitted except in Chapters IV and V. 

The editor notes with deep regret the death of Dr. D. C. Ganguly 
who contributed several chapters to Vols. IV and V, and of Dr. 
K. M. Panikkar who wrote a section of Ch. XXX of Vol. IX. The 
editor also notes with deep sorrow that Prof. K. P. Kulkarni, M.A., 
who wrote the section on Marathi Language and Literature in 
chapter V of this volume passed away on 12 June, 1964, when it 
was in the press. The editor takes this opportunity of placing on 
record his appreciation of the great services rendered by all the three 
to the cause of Indian history and culture. 

Both Dr. A. K. Majumdar and Dr. D. K. Ghose have rendered 
valuable service as Assistant Editors to this volume and the editor 
thanks them both. He also conveys his thanks to the contributors 
of chapters II, IV and V, and expresses his deep obligation to Dr. S. 
K. Chatterji, M.A., D.Litt., F.A.S., for his valuable help and sug¬ 
gestions regarding the chapter on Literature. 

The next and the last volume of this series will cover the period 
from 1905 to 1947 and is expected to be out before the end of the 
next year. 

xvii 


















' 










. 






1*^ 

. 

. • 

. 

V 


. 




. 

' 

. 





















































































CHAPTER I (XXXIX) 


THE INDIAN PEOPLE AT THE BEGINNING 
OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY 

The most powerful effect and enduring result of the British rule 
in India is the intellectual development of the people on an entirely 
new line, and the consequent changes in their political, social, reli¬ 
gious, and economic outlook. It may be said without much exag¬ 
geration, that during the period of less than a century, covered by 
this volume, India passed from the medieval to modern age. 

This great transformation took place first in Bengal where the 
British rule had been the longest, and then in other parts of India, as 
the British rule came to be established over their people more and 
more thoroughly. The process of development followed more or 
less the same line everywhere, but it is easier to trace it irom begin¬ 
ning to end more minutely and definitely in Bengal than in any 
other province. 

Besides, there is another good reason why this study should 
begin with Bengal. This is forcefully expressed by Sir Jadu-nath 
Sarkar in the following words: 

“If Periclean Athens was the school of Hellas, the eye of Greece, 
mother of arts and eloquence, that was Bengal to the rest of India 
under British rule, but with a borrowed light which it had made its 
own with marvellous cunning. In this new Bengal originated every 
good and great thing of the modern world that passed on to the 
other provinces of India. From Bengal went forth the English- 
educated teachers and the Europe-inspired thought that helped to 
modernise Bihar and Orissa, Hindustan and Deccan. New literary 
types, reform of the language, social reconstruction, political aspi¬ 
rations, religious movements and even changes in manners that 
originated in Bengal, passed like ripples from a central eddy, ac- 
cross provincial barriers, to the furthest corners of India”. 1 

In order to understand, therefore, the nature and magnitude 
of the great transformation it is better to concentrate attention 
mainly on that region. It will be convenient to begin with a general 
description of the people of Bengal at the beginning of the nineteenth 
century before they received any impact from the West, laying spe¬ 
cial emphasis on those aspects which were more vitally affected by 
the force of that impact. 

Although the British became virtually rulers of Bengal after 
the battle of Plassey in 1757, it took some years for the people of 

BJU.R.--1 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

Bengal to realize the change. For, to a large extent, the old frame¬ 
work of administration, centring round the titular Nawab of Mur- 
shidabad, continued for some years and the real transference of 
power from his hands to the British Governor in Calcutta was effect¬ 
ed very slowly and by degrees. The establishment of the New 
Council and Supreme Court in Calcutta and the appointment of 
Warren Hastings as Governor-General in 1774 must have first 
brought home to the people that there was a real change in political 
authority. During the twenty-six years that followed, the establish¬ 
ment of British supremacy was not only*an accomplished fact, but 
was generally recognized to be so by the people of Bengal. 

It would be interesting to know the first reaction of the people 
to this great change. The contemporary literature is, howeVer, too 
scanty to enable us to form a correct idea of the situation. But there is 
nothing to show that apart from families or individuals who were 
directly affected, the middle class or the masses took any serious view 
of this change from a political point of view. The economic conse¬ 
quences were, of course, disastrous to the people, and they suffered 
terribly; but there is no indication that there was any general outcry 
against the alien rulers as such, far less any idea of organized resist¬ 
ance against them. 

One of the reasons for the comparative indifference of the Ben¬ 
galis to the momentous events of 1757 seems to be the occurrence 
of similar political changes in recent times. Alivardi Khan, whose 
grandson and successor Siraj -ud-daulah was defeated by the British 
at Plassey (Palasi) in 1757,* had himself usurped the throne by a 
similar coup d’etat only 17 years before, and Mir Jafar, who owed 
his throne to the English, could claim as good a title to the allegiance 
of the people as the rulers he succeeded. To-day it is customary to 
look upon the victory of the British at Plassey as an epoch-making 
event in Indian history, and regard it as marking the foundation of 
British rule in India. The people of Bengal had neither reason nor 
justification to view it in this light. They looked upon the acces¬ 
sion of Mir Jafar as one usurper and traitor succeeding another, 
and it was beyond their wildest dreams to see in this event the be¬ 
ginning of British rule in Bengal, far less in India. 

There was another reason which operated against the normal 
feeling of aversion to, or repulsion against, foreign rule. To the 
Hindus, who formed the majority of the population of British do¬ 
minions in Bengal, it ,.was the replacement of one foreign rule by 
another, and not the loss of independence for the first time. The 
most convincing evidence in this respect is furnished by the court- 
life during the rule of the last Nawabs of Bengal. 


2 






INDIAN PEOPLE AT BEGINNING OF NINETEENTH CENTURY 

In this respect we have the evidence of Colonel Scott who had 
probably more intimate knowledge of the court and people of Ben¬ 
gal than any other Englishman. The opinion he expressed some 
time about 1754 is thus summarised by C. F. Noble in a letter to the 
Select Committee, Fort Saint George, dated 22 September, 1756: 

“By what Colonel Scott observed in Bengal the jentue rajahs 
(i.e. the Hindu chiefs) and inhabitants were very much disaffected 
to the Moor Government, and secretly wished for a change and op¬ 
portunity of throwing off their tyrannical yoke. And was of opi¬ 
nion that if an European force began successfully, that they would 
be inclined to join them if properly applied to and encouraged, 
but might be cautious how they acted at first until they had a pro¬ 
bability of success in bringing about a Revolution to their advant¬ 
age.^ 2 

This opinion proved to be only too true. With the exception 
of a very few, all the Hindu politicians disliked Siraj-ud-daulah and 
joined in the conspiracy of 1757 against the Nawab. Mir Jafar was 
also not on good terms with the Hindu officers and similar was the 
case with Mir Qasim. Had Mir Qasim been ably supported by Shitab 
Rai and his party, the history of Bengal might perhaps have been 
different. The cause of the English was greatly furthered by the 
assistance of Shitab Rai, his son Kalyan Singh, and others. Shitab 
Rai spared no pains to poison the mind of the English against the 
Nawab and was greatly instrumental in bringing about his down¬ 
fall. Kalyan Singh has himself related ( Khulasat-ut-Tawarikh) in 
plain words his own activities and those of his father and others in 
favour of the English. They greatly popularised the English cause at 
the courts of the Delhi Emperor and of the Nawab Wazir of Oudh, and 
persuaded the Emperor to grant the Diwani to the East India Com¬ 
pany on 12 August, 1765. The supporters and partisans of the English 
were almost all Hindus. The English refugees at Fulta in 1756 were 
helped greatly by Raja Nabakrishna and some of the merchants 
of Calcutta, though Nawab Siraj-ud-daulah had passed strict orders 
against helping them in any way. 3 

Seven hundred years of foreign rule had sapped the political 
vitality of the Hindus and uprooted whatever national consciousness 
they ever possessed. This explains, though it does not excuse, their 
indifference to the new foreign conquest and attempt to turn it to 
their own advantage. Lord Clive, after his victory at Palasi (Plas- 
sey) made a triumphal entry into the capital city of Murshidabad 
at the head of 200 Europeans and 500 sepoys. He observed “that 
the inhabitants, who were spectators on that occasion, must have 
amounted to some hundreds of thousands; and if they had an incli- 


3 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

nation to have destroyed the Europeans they might have done it 
with sticks and stones”. 4 One, imbued with modem ideas, may 
feel surprised that the inhabitants of Murshidabad showed no such 
inclination. But it is hot difficult to offer an adequate explanation 
of their attitude. In modern age the people conceive the State 
to be their own with recognized rights and duties, and hence they are 
ready to defend it with the last drop of their blood. But we cannot 
expect the same thing in a State which the majority of the people 
did not look upon as their own, and in which they possessed no right 
whatsoever. As Seeley has observed, ‘where the Government ceases 
to rest upon right, the State loses its right to appeal to patriotism'. 
The following observation by the same writer seems to reflect cor¬ 
rectly the state of things in India and offers a good explanation 
of the conduct of the Hindus of Bengal in those days. 

“We regard it as the duty of a man to fight for his country against 
the foreigner. But what is a man’s country? When we analyse 
the notion, we find it presupposes the man to have been bred up in 
a community which may be regarded as a great family, so that it is 
natural for him to think of the land itself as a mother. But if the 
community has not been at all of the nature of a family, but has been 
composed of two or three races hating each other, (and one of which 
has denied the others elementary and most valuable rights of a citi¬ 
zen), if not the country, but at most the village has been regarded as 
a home, then it is not the fault of the natives of it that they have ho 
patriotism but village-patriotism. It is one thing to receive a foreign 
yoke for the first time, and quite a different thing to exchange one 
foreign yoke for another.” 6 

It is therefore easy to understand why the British could win 
over political authority in Bengal, practically without any opposi¬ 
tion from the Hindus. 

When the British rule was firmly established in Bengal, the anti- 
Muslim and pro-British sentiments of the Hindus went on increasing. 
This is evident from the statement of Raja Rammohan Roy. He was 
a great scholar in Arabic, Persian and Muslim learning, and, as will be 
shown later, regarded the Muslims as superior to the Hindus in many 
respects. Nevertheless, he regarded the British rule in India as a 
benign act of Providence. 6 * In his famous “Appeal to the King in 
Council” against the Press Regulation he contrasts the advantages 
and disadvantages of the people under their former Muhammadan 
rulers with those under the British rule, and refers to the “despotic 
power of the Mogul Princes who formerly ruled over this country”. 6 
Elsewhere the Raja says, with reference to the religious bigotry 
and proselytisation of the Muslims, that “we have been subjected to 


4 





INDIAN PEOPLE AT BEGINNING OF NI NETEE NTH CENTURY 

such insults for about nine centuries”. 7 Some of his other utter¬ 
ances on the same line will be quoted later in this chapter. Even 
early vernacular periodicals contrasted the period of the Hindu Ra¬ 
jas with that of the Musalmans. The view of Muslims as alien 
rulers persisted throughout the nineteenth century among the Hin¬ 
dus, and is reflected in later periodicals and literary works. The 
great Bengali writer Bankim-chandra Chatterji, who died in A.D. 
1894, gave forceful expression to it in many of his writings. 

The attitude of the Muslims towards the British rule in Bengal 
is more difficult to judge. That there was a sullen resentment 
against the imposition of British rule in Bengal and Bihar appears 
clear from the later Wahabi movement and its offshoots which had 
a strong centre in this region. But there was no active resistance 
at the moment. This seems to be due to some of the general causes 
mentioned above, such as change of ruling dynasties in recent times 
and absence of a national feeling or consciousness of political rights. 
But the chief reason seems to be that the Muslims formed a minority 
in Bengal and were generally less advanced in all spheres of life. 
More important still, they did not possess an aristocratic class which 
supplied the natural leaders to the people in those days. On account 
of the prolonged resistance of the local chiefs, the Mughul Emperors 
could effectively establish their suzerainty in Bengal only after a 
great deal of difficulty extending over a long period. Hence, to 
secure their hold, they followed the policy of appointing Governors 
and high officials in this province from among men of Upper India 
who retired to their own home after the end of their term of 
service. It was Murshid Quli Khan (died A.D. 1727) who for the first 
time established a ruling family in Bengal, and appointed local men 
as high officials. But the usurper Alivardi Khan, who wrested the 
throne from his family in 1740, made it a policy to appoint Hindus 
to high offices by way of a check against the Muslim adherents of the 
late ruling family. Thus there was no Muslim aristocracy, either* 
of birth or of service, of long standing, which could organise an 
open resistance against the British. 

It is thus quite intelligible why the establishment of British 
supremacy in Bengal did not evoke any general protest or resent¬ 
ment, far less any active revolt, among the Hindus. The Muslims, 
who formed a minority, cherished a feeling of bitter resentment, but 
it found no outward expression. 

Whatever might have be4n the first reaction of the Hindus 
against the British rule, there is no doubt that they not only recon¬ 
ciled themselves to it, but grew friendly, or even devoted, to the 
new rulers. Here, again, we may quote the views of Raja Rammohan 

5 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

Hoy. In his autobiographical sketch, written in the form of a letter 
to a friend, the Raja says that at the age of sixteen (c. A.D. 1790) 
he cherished “a feeling of great aversion to the establishment of the 
British power in India”. “But”, he continues, “when I had reached 

the age of twenty.I first saw and began to associate with 

Europeans, and soon after made myself tolerably acquainted with 
their laws and form of government. Finding them generally more 
intelligent, more steady and moderate in their conduct, I gave up 
my prejudice against them, and became inclined in their favour, 
feeling persuaded that their rule, though a foreign yoke, would lead 
more speedily and surely to the amelioration of the native inhabi¬ 
tants.” 0 It must be noted in. this connection that the change in 
Rammohan’s feeling cannot be attributed to English education. For 
he only began to learn English at the age of 22 (A.D. 1796) and as 
John Digby, under whom he served, tells, us, even in A.D. 1805 he 
(Rammohan) “could merely speak it well enough to be understood 
upon the most common topics of discourse, but could not write it with 
any degree of correctness.” 9 

This friendly attitude of the Hindus towards the British rulers 
brings to the forefront the general cleavage between the Hindus and 
Muslims in Bengal. In a written memorandum on the * Judicial 
System of India’ which Raja Rammohan Roy submitted before a 
Committee of the House of Commons, we find the following questions 
and answers:— 

Q. What is your opinion of the judicial character and conduct 
of the Hindu and Muhammadan lawyers attached to the 
courts? 

A- Among the Muhammadan lawyers, I have met with some 
honest men. The Hindu lawyers are in general not well 
spoken of and they do not enjoy much of the confidence 
of the public. 

In other answers, also, he contrasts the Hindus with the Muslims, 
and elsewhere he writes:—“I have observed with respect to distant 
cousins, sprung from the same family and living in the same district, 
when one branch of the family had been converted to Mussalmanism, 
that those of the Muhammadan branch living in a freer manner, 
were distinguished by greater bodily activity and capacity for exer¬ 
tion, than those of the other branch which had adhered to the Hindoo 
simple mode of life”. 10 

Hie questions and answers show that the Hindus and the Mus¬ 
lims were regarded both by the British and the Indians as two 
separate communities with distinct cultures and different physical, 
mental, and moral characteristics: 


6 




INDIAN PEOPLE AT BEGINNING OF NINETEENTH CENTURY 


In the vernacular newspapers of the first quarter of the nine¬ 
teenth century we find the Muslims referred to as ‘yavana-jati’ and 
a clear distinction is made between them and the Hindus. In 1833 
two students of the Hindu College were appointed teachers of the 
Murshidabad School. It is reported in a vernacular paper dated 
February 13, 1836, that one of these died shortly after his arrival 
and the other, though highly qualified, was not liked by the Muslims 
simply because he was a Hindu. So he resigned in May 1835. 11 In 
general, we find among the regulations of the new schools, that it 
was open to all communities, Christians, Hindus and Muslims, but 
the Hindu College was open to the Hindus alone. Indeed such dis¬ 
tinction is tacitly accepted, and even as late as 12 August, 1869, 
a long article on the Muslims in the Amritabazar Patrika begins with 
the statement that the population is divided into two classes, namely, 
the Hindus and the Muslims, and traces the origin of the majority 
of the Muslims to the conversion of low class Hindus. 12 Through¬ 
out the nineteenth century this sharp distinction between the Hindu 
and Muslim communities is reflected in Bengali literature, and there 
was good reason for it. In order to explain this a brief reference 
must be made to the position of the Muslims vis-a-vis the Hindus at 
the beginning of the nineteenth century. 

The loss of political power and prestige made the Muslims less 
arrogant towards the Hindus, and considerably curtailed their anti- 
Hindu activities inspired by religious bigotry. The long residence 
as neighbours, for nearly six centuries, must have brought them 
closer together in ordinary affairs of daily life, and there must 
have been some assimilation in thoughts and ideas. Above all, the 
common subjection to an alien rule awakened a sort of fellow-feel¬ 
ing which adversity shared together seldom fails to develop. All 
these factors brought about a more harmonious and friendly relation, 
removed many of the angularities, and to a large degree blunted 
the edge of ill feeling or hostility between the two communities. But 
the fundamental and basic differences, to which reference has been 
made above, 13 still remained and operated as a barrier between 
them almost as strong as before. While the radical differences in re¬ 
ligious and social ideas and practices had not been modified to any ap¬ 
preciable extent, the historical traditions, another potent factor which 
kept the two communities separate, gathered force with the ex¬ 
pansion and stability of Muslim rule in India. It is interesting to 
note how, apart from social and religious institutions which created 
a permanent cleavage between the two, even the differences in less 
important matters continued without any visible sign of diminution. 

The literary and intellectual traditions of the two communities 
ran on almost entirely different lines. They were educated in dif- 


7 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 

ferent institutions, To Is and Madrasas. The Muslims drew their in¬ 
spiration from Arabic and Persian literature. A small number of 
Hindus knew Persian, and only a few learnt Arabic, but the Hindu 
mind was nurtured from the boyhood on Sanskrit, particularly reli¬ 
gious, literature like the Epics and the Puranas, to which the Muslims 
were almost strangers. It is a strange phenomenon that although 
the Muslims and Hindus had lived together.in Bengal for nearly 
six hundred years, the average people of each community knew so 
little of the other’s history, literature, ideas and traditions. 

The Hindus believed that the majority of the Muslims in Ben¬ 
gal were converts from the lowest strata of Hindu society. How 
far this belief is historically correct has been discussed above. 14 
But, right or wrong, the belief was there, 1 5 and there is no doubt 
that the upper class Hindus treated the Muslim masses in many res¬ 
pects like the low castes of their own society. Even in the closing 
years of the nineteenth century, in most villages, the Muslims, who 
visited a caste Hindu’s house, had, with rare exceptions, to sit in 
the verandah on a mat or even on bare ground, and were not admitted 
inside a room, or given any seat which should be offered to a man 
of equal status. Nevertheless, it is interesting to note that, general¬ 
ly speaking, there was no rancour, animosity, or ill-feeling on that 
account between the two communities, so severely kept asunder by 
religious and social barriers. 

There was no social intercourse between the two communities 
as we understand the term to-day, for a Hindu would not take food 
or even a glass of water touched by a Muslim, and would lose his 
caste and religion if he did so. This did not, however, prevent a 
Hindu from being a guest at the house of a Muslim or vice versa . 
Each would scrupulously respect the feelings and sentiments of the 
other, and provide for the food agreeable to him. Many respect¬ 
able Muslims maintained a permanent kitchen under Hindu manage¬ 
ment for their Hindu guests, and Hindus would either do the same 
or arrange with a Muslim neighbour for the food of their Muslim 
guests. 

Many popular beliefs, even superstitions, reverence for holy 
saints and festivals of the other community, folk-songs and popular 
pastimes, and even some social etiquette and customs were shared in 
common by the two communities. But although these were signs 
of the growth of good feeling, they were after all minor features and 
did not touch the essentials of life. In all matters vitally affecting 
life and culture, the Hindus and Muslims lived in almost two water¬ 
tight compartments. Unlike other foreign conquerers—Greeks, 
Sakas, Kushanas and Hunas in India, or Angles, Saxons, Danes and 


8 


•> 



INDIAN PEOPLE AT BEGINNING OF NINETEENTH CENTURY 

Normans in England—the Muslims were never fused with the con¬ 
quered people, and there was no prospect of it even in distant fu¬ 
ture. Reference may be made in this connection to the following 
extract from the Siyctr-ul-Mutakherin , whose author Sayyid Ghulam 
Husain Khan lived towards the close of the eighteenth century. 

'‘And although the Gentoos seem to be a generation apart and 
distinct from the rest of mankind, and they are swayed by such 
differences in religion, tenets and rites, as will necessarily render 
all Musulmen aliens and profane, in their eyes; and although they 
keep up a strangeness of ideas and practices, which beget a wide 
difference in customs and actions; yet in process of time, they drew 
nearer and nearer; and as soon as fear and aversion had worn away, 
we see that this dissimilarity and alienation have terminated in 
friendship and union, and that the two nations have come to coalesce 
together into one whole, like milk and sugar that have received a 
simmering. In one word, we have seen them promote heartily each 
other’s welfare, have common ideas, like brothers from one and the 
same mother, and feel for each other, as children of the same 
family”. 16 

Ghulam Husain’s analysis of the fundamental differences- bet¬ 
ween the Hindus and Muslims is in agreement with the view men¬ 
tioned above. His reference to the amity between the two com¬ 
munities may be accepted as generally true, but he undoubtedly 
exaggerates its extent when he says that “the two nations coalesced 
together into one whole, like milk and sugar”. Indeed this is con¬ 
tradicted by the first part of his own observation, and also by un¬ 
challenged facts. The Hindus looked down upon the Muslims as 
unclean, and even for the slightest contact with them, in violation 
of orthodox rules, a Hindu was condemned to a perpetual exclusion 
from his society. If a Hindu took food from a Muslim house, even 
unknowingly, or a Hindu woman was touched by a Muslim, the 
entire family was driven out of the Hindu fold and forced to take 
up the Muslim faith. These rigours and restrictions, which hardly 
fit in with the theory of coalescence, gradually increased the number 
of the Muslims in Bengal, so much so that while they formed only 
one-third of the population of Bengal at the middle of the nineteenth 
century, 17 their number increased to more than half in course of a 
hundred years. Thus, though the Hindus and Muslims formed two 
water-tight compartments to begin with, water soon began to leak 
from one into the other, but not vice v&rsa. The Hindu society 
had wide exits but no entrance. To use Ghulam Husain’s meta¬ 
phor, Hindu sugar was dissolved in the Miuslim milk and it was 
the absorption of the Hindus by Muslims, and not a coalescence or 
fusion of the two communities. 


m 


9 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

In spite of good neighbourly feeling the fundamental differences 
between the two were never ignored, far less forgotten, by either 
side. On occasions, though fortunately rare, there were tensions 
between the two, generated by religious and social differences and 
historical traditions. The spirit of ill will and hatred even led to 
ugly communal riots to which reference will be made later. But 
these quarrels were soon made up, and the even tenor of life was 
resumed by both. During the early period of British rule the dif¬ 
ferences were levelled down to a considerable degree by the common 
subjection to a foreign rule, but they, reappeared with the growth 
of political consciousness. The fundamental and basic difference 
was patent to all, and the English rulers took full advantage of it 
by playing one against the other. But though the English exploited 
the difference between the two communities, it was in no sense 
created by them. It was always there, and they merely used it to 
maintain or advance their own interests. The fundamental diffe¬ 
rences were briefly described as follows, by way of justifying the 
view that the Hindus and Muslims were two distinct nations, by one 
who first mooted the idea of Pakistan in 1930: “Our religion, culture, 
history, tradition, literature, economic system, laws of inheritance, 
succession and marriage are fundamentally different from those of 
the Hindus. These differences are not confined to the broad basic 
principles. They extend to the minute details of our lives. We, 
Muslims and Hindus, do not interdine; we do not intermarry. Our 
national customs and calendars, even our diet and dress, are diffe¬ 
rent.” 17ft It would be difficult to deny that this statement was 
as true in A.D. 1800 (or 1200) as in 1930. 

Though in contrast with the Muslims the Hindus may be re¬ 
garded as forming a single separate community, it lacked internal 
cohesion on account of the numerous castes which sub-divided it. 
It is true that except in matters of intermarriage and interdining, 
the so-called higher castes had not any basic difference among them¬ 
selves, but there was an almost insuperable barrier between the 
caste-Hindus and the untouchables. The latter were treated as 
distinctly inferior in every respect by the rest, who not only refused 
all kinds of social intercourse with them but, in some parts of India, 
even regarded their very sight as unclean. Though they were all 
included in the same religious fold, these classes were refused entry 
into the temples and the service of the Brahman priests. These 
details are too well-known to be repeated, but the rigidity of the 
caste system among the Hindus must be borne in mind in forming 
an estimate of the national feeling among the people of India. 

What has been stated above, in respect of Bengal, applies more 


10 



INDIAN PEOPLE AT BEGINNING OF NINETEENTH CENTURY 


or less equally to all other parts of India. There can be hardly any 
doubt that the cleavage between the Hindus and Muslims, and the 
caste-distinctions among the former, were great obstacles to the 
formation of a national consciousness, even among-the people of a 
single province like Bengal. It is hardly necessary to point out that 
there was no consciousness of unity among the peoples of India as 
a whole. The memory and tradition of the eighteenth century, 
when every man’s hand was against his neighbour, persisted still 
in creating a wide gulf between the different regions of India. 

The liberal character of British rule, specially its judicial ad¬ 
ministration and “the literary and political improvements which 
are continually going on”, 18 made a very favourable impression upon 
the Hindus who contrasted it with the decadent system of Muslim 
rule in the eighteenth century, so strongly marked by inefficiency, 
corruption, and exactions to an almost incredible degree. This is 
specially true of the upper classes and intelligentsia among the 
Hindus. Anyone who even cursorily glances through the journals 
or public addresses of prominent Hindu leaders in Bengal during the 
first half of the nineteenth century will be surprised at the violent 
denunciation of the Muslim rule and the enthusiastic, almost rap¬ 
turous, applause of the British administration which supplanted it. 

The most important and interesting testimony in this respect 
is furnished by Raja Rammohan Roy whose deep erudition in 
Muslim learning and general bringing up preclude the idea of any 
bias against the Muslim community. He mentions both the merits 
and defects of Muslim rule in the following passage of his ‘Appeal 
to the King in Council’: “Your Majesty is aware, that under their for¬ 
mer Muhammadan Rulers, the natives of this country enjoyed every 
political privilege in common with Mussulmans, being eligible to the 
highest offices in the state, entrusted with the command of armies 
and the government of provinces, and often chosen as advisers to 
their Prince, without disqualification or degrading distinction on 
account of their religion or the place of their birth. They used to 
receive free grants of land exempted from any payments of revenue, 
and besides the highest salaries allowed under the Government they 
enjoyed free of charge large tracts of country attached to certain 
offices of trust and dignity, while natives of learning and talent 
were rewarded with numerous situations of honour and emolument. 
Although under the British Rule, the natives of India have entirely 
lost this political consequence, your Majesty’s faithful subjects were 
consoled by the more secure enjoyment of those civil and religious 
rights which had been so often violated by the rapacity and in¬ 
tolerance of the Mussulmans; and notwithstanding the loss of 


II 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCB—II 

political rank and power, they considered themselves much happier 
in the enjoyment of civil and religious liberty than were their an¬ 
cestors;. . ,” 19 

It may be mentioned in passing that the blessings of Muslim 
rule mentioned by the Raja may be said to be true of only a very short 
period of Muslim rule, roughly extending from the middle of the 
sixteenth to the close of the seventeenth century A.D., in other words 
for less than 150 years, out of more than 800 (according to the calcu¬ 
lation of the Raja). Nevertheless the Raja leaves no doubt where 
his sympathies lay. In para 3 of the same Appeal he says: 

“The greater part of Hindustan having been for several cen¬ 
turies subject to Muhammadan Rule, the civil and religious rights 
of its original inhabitants were constantly trampled upon, and from 
the habitual oppression of the conquerors, a great body of their sub¬ 
jects in the southern Peninsula (Dukhin), afterwards called 
Marhattahs, and another body in the western parts now styled Sikhs, 
were at last driven to revolt; and when the Mussulman power be¬ 
came feeble, they ultimately succeeded in establishing their inde¬ 
pendence; but the Natives of Bengal wanting vigor of body,* and 
adverse to active exertion, remained during the whole period of 
the Muhammadan conquest, faithful to the existing Government, al¬ 
though their property was often plundered, their religion insulted, 
and their blood wantonly shed. Divine Providence at last, in its 
abundant mercy, stirred up the English nation to break the yoke of 
those tyrants, and to receive the oppressed Natives of Bengal under 
its protection”. 20 

The Raja concludes his “Appeal to the Christian Public” with 
the following words: “I now conclude my Essay by offering up 
thanks to the Supreme Disposer of the events of this universe, for 
having unexpectedly delivered this country from the long-con¬ 
tinued tyranny of its former Rulers, and placed it under the govern¬ 
ment of the English,—a nation who not only are blessed with the 
enjoyment of civil and political liberty, but also interest themselves 
in promoting liberty and social happiness, as well as free inquiry 
ihto literary and religious subjects, among those nations to which 
their influence extends”. 21 But Rammohan Roy was not alone in 
bolding these views; younger contemporaries of Rammohan pro¬ 
ceeded even further. Almost all the evils from which the country 
was suffering were attributed to the Muslim rule. Thus Dwarka- 
nath Tagore, by no means an orthodox Hindus, wrote in a letter to 
the Englishman, dated 6 December, 1838: “The present charac¬ 
teristic failings of natives are—a want of truth, a want of integrity, 
a want of independence. These were not the characteristics of for- 


12 


INDIAN PEOPLE AT BEGINNING OF NINETEENTH CENTURY 

mer days, before the religion was corrupted and education had dis¬ 
appeared. It is to the Mahomedan conquest that these evils are 
owing, and they are the invariable results of the loss of liberty and 
national degradation. The Mahomedans introduced in this country 
all the vices of an ignorant, intolerant and licentious soldiery. The 
utter destruction of learning and science was an invariable part of 
their system, and the conquered, no longer able to protect their 
lives by arms and independence, fell into opposite extremes of 
abject submission, deceit and fraud. Such has been the condition 
of the Natives of Hindustan for centuries.” 22 Dwaraka-nath 
Tagore also expressed his conviction that the happiness of India 
was best secured by her connection with England. Prasanna-kumar 
Tagore openly declared that he would prefer English government to 
any other, even to a Hindu government. 23 

The same sentiment is expressed in the Memorial to the Supreme 
Court against the Press Regulation, signed by Rammohan, Dwara- 
ka-nath, Prasanna-kumar and three other prominent citizens of Cal¬ 
cutta. The following para may be quoted as a specimen. 

“During the last wars which the British Government were 
obliged to undertake against neighbouring Powers it is well known 
that the great body of Natives of wealth and respectability, as well 
as the Landholders of consequence, offered up regular prayers to 
the objects of their* worship for the success of the British arms from 
a deep conviction that under the sway of that nation, their impro¬ 
vement, both mental and social, would be promoted, and their lives, 
religion, and property be secured. Actuated by such feelings, even 
in those critical times, which are the best test of the loyalty of the 
subject, they voluntarily came forward with a large portion of their 
property to enable the British Government to carry into effect the 
measures necessary for its own defence, considering the cause of the 
British as their own, and firmly believing that on its success, their 
own happiness and prosperity depended.” 23 * 

It is interesting to note that this spirit was deliberately en¬ 
couraged by the British to serve their own interests. Thus Reginald 
Heber, Lord Bishop of Calcutta, wrote on 1 March, 1824: “It is 
desirable that the Hindoos should always be reminded that we did 
not conquer them, but found them conquered, that their previous 
rulers were as much strangers to their blood and to their religion as 
we are, and that they were notoriously far more oppressive masters 
than we have ever shown ourselves. ,,23b 

But this anti-national and pro-British sentiment was by no 
means confined to the Bengali Hindus. The Marathas sought alliance 
with the English against the Nawab of Bengal in 1757. Shah Alam 


13 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


negotiated with Clive against Mir Jafar and the Vizier of Oudh 
(Awadh), and sent a firman to Hoi well, offering a carte blanche to the 
British in Bengal provided they drew their forces off from Mir Jafar 
and bring them under his standard. 24 Even at the very end of the 
eighteenth century, when the danger of British domination over 
India should have been patent to all, the Marathas and the Nizam 
joined the British in exterminating the power of Tipu Sultan. 
There was no cohesion among the Maratha Chiefs, who fought with 
one another and could not take any concerted action against the 
British even in the war, waged by them at the beginning of the nine¬ 
teenth century, which sealed their fate. It would be hardly any 
exaggeration to say that almost every Indian ruler bore grudge and 
intrigued against his neighbour and was ever ready to aggrandise 
himself at his cost, even with the help of the alien British, if need 
be. So far as the common people were concerned, their vision 
seldom extended beyond the narrow horizon of their own petty 
State. If they knew anything of other Indian peoples, they main¬ 
tained supreme indifference, or even felt aversion, towards them. 
The Bengalis and the Rajputs remembered the horrors of the raid 
by the Marathas and cherished intense hatred against them. 
Similar feelings existed, for similar reasons, among other groups of 
Indian people. But even apart from such reasons, hardly any Indian 
ever regarded himself as a citizen of India owing allegiance to her, 
even as against any alien power. This is best evidenced by the fact 
that an Indian soldier was ready to fight against any Indian power, in¬ 
cluding his own province or State, on behalf of any other power, 
which was willing to pay him for his service. This enabled the 
British to conquer India with the help of the Indians themselves. 

This statement holds good throughout the history of the British 
up to the end of the nineteenth century. It is on record that the 
Sepoys of Upper India, who under British leadership defeated the 
'Sikhs, felt proud of their achievement and looked down upon them. 
The Sikhs reciprocated the sentiment and there was no love lost bet¬ 
ween the twoi This difference was fully exploited by the British 
during the outbreak of 1857. If, as some Britishers proudly claim, 
they conquered India by the sword, it is only fair to remember that 
three-fourths of these swords were wielded by Indian hands. 

In addition to the Hindus and Muslims, the English formed a 
distinct community in Bengal, particularly in Calcutta and neigh¬ 
bouring towns. Their numerical weakness was more than made up 
by the prestige attaching to the ruling community. Three classes 
could be distinguished among them, viz., officials, non-officials, and 
missionaries. In general, there was more familiar social intercourse 


14 


INDIAN PEOPLE AT BEGINNING OF NINETEENTH CENTURY 

between them and the Bengalis at the beginning than was the case 
after 1818, Sympathy with the political aspirations of the people 
was also more in evidence in the earlier period than in later years. 
This can be accounted for by two reasons. In the first place, the 
long journey to England before the opening of the Suez Canal made 
the Englishmen more reconciled to their abode in a foreign land. 
Being debarred from frequent intercourse and quick communica¬ 
tion with home, and having no big society of their own in Calcutta, 
many of them turned to the society of Indians with a more friendly 
attitude than their successors. They imbibed many Bengali customs 
like smoking in a hookah , and took part in dances, music and re¬ 
ligious festivals in Bengali homes. 

Another cause which operated in the same direction was the 
fact that the English settlers had not yet,come to regard themselves 
as the ruling race. The political authority was vested in the East 
India Company, which was after all a private trading corporation 
and did not represent England as a whole. So there were many 
Englishmen who strongly criticised the Government and the officials, 
and some of them were deported by the Government out of India. 
As will be shown later, some Englishmen shared the political aspira¬ 
tions of the Indians and openly joined in their activities. On the 
whole, some of them seem to have taken a real and genuine interest 
in promoting the welfare of the people. 

The official class was also generally sympathetic towards the 
Bengalis and mixed freely with them. Many officials were quite 
familiar with the languages and customs of the people and there 
was more friendly intercourse between the two than was the case 
later in the century. 

The missionaries played a very large and important part in the 
life of Bengal. At first there were many restrictions to the immigra¬ 
tion of English Christian Missionaries into India. But these were 
all removed by the Charter Act of 1813. Henceforth they came in 
large number and became an important feature of the society. 

They were, generally speaking, more sympathetic towards the 
Indians than other classes of Europeans, and were noted for many 
beneficent activities to which reference; will be made in connection 
with relevant topics. They were not, however, very scrupulous in 
regard to their proselytizing methods, nor restrained in their denun¬ 
ciation of Hindu religion. They created an ill-feeling towards them 
which is referred to in dignified language by Raja Rammohan Roy 
in his Preface to the Brahmanical Magazine (1821) from which the 
following extract is quoted: “But during the last twenty years, a 
body of English gentlemen, who are called missionaries, have been 


13 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—]! 

publicly endeavouring, in several ways, to convert Hindoos and 
Mussulmans of this country into Christianity. The first way is that 
of publishing and distributing among the natives various books, 
large and small, reviling both religions, and abusing and ridiculing 
the gods and saints of the former: the second way is that of stand¬ 
ing in front of the doors of the natives or in the public roads to 
preach the excellency of their own religion and the debasedness of 
that of others: the third way is that if any natives of low origin 
become Christians from the desire of gain or from any other motives, 
these gentlemen employ and maintain them as a necessary en¬ 
couragement to others to follow their example. 

'It is true that the apostles of Jesus Christ used to preach the 
superiority of the Christian religion to the natives of different coun¬ 
tries. But we must recollect that they were not of the rulers of those 
countries where they preached. Were the missionaries likewise to 
preach the Gospel and distribute books in countries not conquered 
by the English, such as Turkey* Persia, &c., which are much nearer 
England, they would be esteemed a body of men truly zealous in 
propagating religion and in following the example of the founders 
of Christianity. In Bengal, where the English are the sole rulers, 
and where the mere name of Englishman is sufficient to frighten 
people, an encroachment upon the rights of her poor timid and 
humble inhabitants and upon their religion, cannot be viewed in 
the eyes of God or the public as a justifiable act. For wise and 
good men always feel disinclined to hurt those that are of much less 
strength than themselves, and if such weak creatures be dependent 
on them and subject to their authority, they can never attempt, 
even in thought, to mortify their feelings”. 24 * 

On the whole, the Bengalis looked with favour upon the 
English community and many even looked forward to the coloniza¬ 
tion of Englishmen in this country on a large scale. There was a 
public movement, led by men like Rammohan Roy and Dwaraka T nath 
Tagore, to facilitate the permanent settlement of Englishmen in 
Bengal. 23 

Having given a general view of the different elements of the 
people of Bengal we may now try to form some idea of their intellec¬ 
tual and moral character as well as social and religious ideas. The 
memorandum of Raja Rammohan Roy, from which some questions 
and answers have been quoted above, also contains the following: 

Q. What degree of intelligence exists among the native in¬ 
habitants? 

A. The Mussulmans, as well as the more respectable classes 
of Hindus, chiefly cultivated Persian literature, a great 


16 


INDIAN PEOPLE AT BEGINNING OF NINETEENTH CENTURY 

number of the former and a few of the latter also extend¬ 
ing their studies likewise to Arabic. This practice has 
partially continued to the present time, and among those 
i who enjoy this species of learning, as well as among those 
who cultivate Sanskrit literature, many well-informed and 
enlightened .persons may be found, though from their 
ignorance of European literature, they are not naturally 
much esteemed by such Europeans as are not well versed 
in Arabic or Sanskrit. 26 

On the whole, it would be hardly any exaggeration to say that 
higher education in Bengal, both among thb Hindus and the Muslims, 
followed a stereotyped course during the half-millennium ending 
in A.D. 1800. Some Special branches of Sanskrit literature such as 
NcLvyc^Nydya f Smxiti , and grammar were more favourite sub¬ 
jects of study among the Hindus. But, in general, the trend and 
method of learning and its contents did not differ in any remarkable 
degree from that which prevailed at the time of Muslim conquest, 
save a growing interest in Persian, specially in North India. 
Similarly the Muslims confined their studies to Arabic and Persian. 
While many Hindus (probably more in number than Muslims) stud¬ 
ied Persian, and a few even Arabic, the Muslims rarely cultivated 
Sanskrit. In' addition to the traditional higher learning imparted 
in numerous fols, chatushpafhis, maktabs and madrasas through 
Sanskrit, Arabic and Persian, elementary education was provided 
in a number of Primary schools. 

We may form a fairly accurate idea of the state of elementary 
education in Bengal at the beginning of the period under review 
from Mr. Adam’s report, 27 based on a very detailed investigation 
of different localities throughout the province. It is not necessary 
to deal with it elaborately; it will suffice only to emphasize the 
following points: 

1. Bengali was the medium of instruction. It was the “language 
of Mussalman as well as of the Hindu population” and though the 
“Hindustani or Urdu” was the current spoken language of the edu¬ 
cated Mussalmans of Bengal and Bihar, it was never employed in the 
schools as the medium or instrument of written instruction. 

2. The schools were most often held in some rooms in private 
houses and not unoften in the open. There were very few school 
houses built exclusively for this purpose, and they were mostly 
thatched cottages each of which, in addition to the personal labour 
of the pupils, was constructed at a cost averaging Rs. 1/4 to Rs. 10. 

3. As regards the teachers, only a very few gave their instruc- 


BJU.B.—* 


17 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

tions gratuitously because they had independent means of support. 
But, in general, the salary of the teachers was very poor. The 
average monthly professional income of the vernacular teachers of 
Bengal and Bihar was about Bs. 3/-, less than half of what was usual¬ 
ly given in Calcutta to the lowest menials or domestic servants. The 
teachers, as could be expected, were mostly ignorant and absolutely 
unsuited for their task.. They could hardly exercise any moral in¬ 
fluence over their pupils. 

4. The number of pupils was overwhelmingly Hindu. Where¬ 
as the Hindu population was to the Mussalman in the proportion of 
rather more than 2 to 1, the Hindu scholars enjoying the benefit of 
elementary indigenous education were to the Mussalman scholars 
in the proportion of about 19 to 1. 

5. The subjects of instruction consisted mostly of reading, 
writing and some amount of arithmetic to enable the pupil to keep 
accounts. The students generally spent about six to seven years to 
learn these things. Some students continued beyond this for a 
period of two years. The accounts briefly and superficially taught 
in the preceding stage were now taught more thoroughly and at 
greater length, and these were accompanied by the composition of 
business letters, petitions, grants, leases, acceptances, notes or bonds 
etc. together with the forms of addresses appropriate to the different 
grades of rank and station. 

6. The use of printed books was almost wholly unknown. In 
many old thanas, even manuscript text books were unknown. All 
that the scholars learnt was acquired from the oral dictation of the 
master. The literary texts mostly consisted of hymns addressed to 
different gods and goddesses, and stories, based on the epics, like 
D&takarna. 

7. The scheme of discipline may be truly characterized as 
a reign of terror. Kindness, patience, generosity, love,—all were 
alike unknown in the schools. Fear was the first and last and the 
only motive brought into play; punishment, the first and last and 
the only stimulant. Caning was the most normal, while open palm 
and clinched fist were also vigorously applied to the back, cheek 
and the head. Other ingenious modes of punMnnent were also 
followed. The school was regarded by the pupils as a sort of dun¬ 
geon or grievous prison house to escape from which was the chiefest 
of all things and the desire to do so was the most powerful of all 
instincts. 

8. The aggregate average number of the pupils for all the dis¬ 
tricts was less than eight per cent., and the aggregate average of 


18 






INDIAN PEOPLE AT BEGINNING OF NINETEENTH CENTURY 

adult population who could read or write was no more than five and 
a hall per cent. 

9. As regards female education, it was practically unknown 
and there was no public institution for this purpose. There was a 
superstitious idea that a girl taught to read and wlrite would soon 
after marriage become a widow. In the whole district of Murshida- 
bad, Adam only found nine women who could read or write or who 
could merely decipher writing or sign their names. “In all the 
other localities of wheh a census was taken, no adult females were 
found to possess even the lowest grade of instruction,” a few pro¬ 
bable exceptions being the daughters of zamindars or those belong¬ 
ing to some religious sects. 

In addition to the elementary instruction given in regular 
schools, there was a kind of traditional knowledge of written 
language and accounts, preserved in families and passed on from 
father to son. Then, there were higher schools of Hindu and Muslim 
learning. In Hindu schools, studies were confined to general litera¬ 
ture, law and logic. General literature consisted mainly of gram¬ 
mar, lexicology, poetry, drama and rhetoric. Grammar was the 
favourite study and, among other works, Pacini and Kaldpa received 
attention. In lexicology the Amarakosha; in verse the Bhaft i- 
Kavya, Magha-K&vya (on the war between &i£upala and Kj-ishaja), 
Naishadha^Kdvya (the love of Nala and DamayantI), the Sakun- 
tala episode etc.; in law Manu, the Mittikshara, the Ddydbhdga and 
the Dattakamtmdmsd and the treatises of Raghunandana; in logic 
Mathuri commentary of Vy&pti-Panchaka and in mythology, 
Bhdgavata Pur&na or other works of the same class appear to have 
been in wide use and were frequently quoted. 

William Adam thought that in his time probably the Alankara 
Sastras and Tantras were more generally studied. The Committee 
of Public Instruction noted that the chief study at Nadia was Nyaya 
(logic). The Brahmans showed skill in astronomy, constructed 
almanacs and calculated eclipses. To the philosophical theology of 
the Vedas, the ritual of modem Hinduism, and astrology, was. added 
medicine (of the Ayurveda system). An old woman in Pumeah 
had become well known for extracting stones from the bladder, 
an operation which she performed after the manner of the ancients. 
In certain districts were found several scholars of keen and versa¬ 
tile intellect, adepts in the subtleties of grammar and skilled in its 
practical uses. In the district of Burdwan was found a scholar, by 
name Raghunandana, who had written no less than 37 books, includ¬ 
ing treatises on prosody, a compilation from works on the treatment 
of diseases, commentaries on ancient law-givers, a life of Rama and 

19 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

a eulogy on the Raja of Burdwan. A scholar of Hindu learning was 
normally a grammarian, who was absorbed in the meaning of words 
and their forms, competent to interpret ancient authorities, able to 
appreciate the logicalities and fine distinctions of ancient learning, 
and who invariably indulged in disputations. Many of these 
scholars lived very simple lives and were perfect examples of plain 
living and high thinking. Students from remote parts of India 
gathered at Nadia (Bengal); they spoke Sanskrit, the language of the 
cultivated intellect all over India, with great fluency. 

Muslim learning was of two types, Persian and Arabic. Studies 
pursued in Persian were forms of correspondence, legal processes 
and legendary tales. The didactic and poetical works of Saadi 
(Gulistan and Bostan), the letters of Abul Fazl, the Pande- 
namath, Sikandarnamah and other poetical works, like Yusuf and 
Zulekha, Bahar Danish 9 Laila and Majnun, were read. At Rajshahi, 
the Persian course commenced with 'ali/ be 9 and proceeded to the 
formal reading of the Qur’an. At Murshidabad poems of Urfi, Hafiz, 
etc., the law of inheritance, the fundamentals of Islam, the unity of 
God, and natural philosophy were studied. Works produced in 
Persian comprised treatises on theology and medicine. Arabic 
studies, which were preceded by a course of Persian reading, were 
confined to grammar, logic, law (especially of inheritance) and 
religion, and included Euclid’s geometry, Ptolemy’s astronomy and 
some mutilated extracts from the writings of Aristotle and Plato. 
Among other aspects, grammar covered Munshaib (Etymology), 
Mizan (Prosody), Zubda (Permutation), and Tasrif (Inflection). 

The most notable development in the intellectual field during the 
Muslim rule was the rise of Bengali language and literature. From 
its doubtful beginnings in the tenth or eleventh century A.D., it had 
developed into a rich literature by A.D. 1800. The Muslims also 
cultivated it and we know the names of a few well-known texts 
composed by them. But the Bengali literature of A.D. 1800 was 
mainly religious in character. All the books were written in poetry 
and the prose style was hardly developed at all. Excepting a few 
letters, business documents and missionary texts of the nature of 
catechism, we have no specimens . of Bengali prose written before - 
A.D. 1800 The first attempt to evolve a prose style was made at the 
beginning of the nineteenth century AiD. by the teachers of the Fort 
William College and Raja Rammohan Roy. 27 * But Bengali prose 
had not yet grown up as a suitable vehicle of literary expression on 
any matter, religious or secular. This point must be borne in mind 
when we think of the wonderful outburst of literary activity in 
Bengali prose during^ the nineteenth century. The progress which 


20 



INDIAN PEOPLE AT BEGINNING OF NINETEENTH CENTURY 

Bengali prose made, alike in style and contents, in course of a single 
century, has probably had few parallels in the history of the world. 

The influence of Arabic and Persian upon the development of 
Bengali literature during the six hundred years of Muslim rule has 
been much exaggerated. Although Bengali vocabulary has been 
much enriched by loan-words, the Bengali literature bears no de¬ 
finite imprint of the spirit of either Arabic or Persian literature. Nor 
have Muslim traditions or beliefs exercised much influence on it. It 
bears the distinct stamp of Hindu religion and mythology, and is 
profoundly moulded by Sanskrit literature, in spite of occasional or 
very casual references to Pirs, Paygambar or isolated Muslim 
creeds. On the whole, the Bengali literature was far more power¬ 
fully affected by western influence during the nineteenth century 
than by the Muslim influence during the six hundred years that 
preceded it. 

The same thing may be said of the social and religious institu¬ 
tions. The general framework of the Hindu society and religion 
in A.D. 1200 did not undergo any radical change during the six 
hundred years that followed. The Hindus at the beginning of the 
nineteenth century exhibited the same fundamental characteristics 
as in the thirteenth. A deep-rooted belief in a number of gods and 
goddesses, universal practice of image worship, a rigid caste system 
with its attendant restrictions about touch, food, and marriage, 
child-marriage and the strict prohibition of the remarriage of 
widows, preference, among high-class Hindus, of vegetarian diet, and 
horror of beef-eating, indicate in no uncertain manner how Islam 
had failed to touch even the fringe of Hindu society. This was un¬ 
derlined especially by the untouchability and the old iniquitous at¬ 
titude towards the lower castes which afforded a striking contrast 
to the social equality of the people in Muslim community. 

So far as the Hindu masses were concerned, religion meant 
only an unending series of rituals and ceremonies, performed in 
strict accordance with scriptural rules. Many obnoxious rites were 
practised by the common people, and immoral customs, with belief 
in witchcraft and sorcery, were in vogue. These were, at least 
partly, legacies of Tantric beliefs and practices which had a strong 
hold in Bengal. Religion, as a source of moral purity and spiritual 
force, exercised little influence over a large section of the common 
people. 

There was undoubtedly a general deterioration in Hindu society. 
Long subjection to alien rule, lack of contact wth the progressive 
forces of the world, and a stereotyped system of education leading to 
knowledge which was based upon blind faith impervious to reason,— 


21 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNT*?? AND INDIAN RENAISSANCB—II 

all these told upon the mental and moral outlook of men and society. 
Nothing so forcibly illustrates the degrading character of the age as 
its callousness to women. It was seriously debated in Bengali per¬ 
iodicals throughout the first half of the nineteenth century whether 
the Hindu scriptures were in favour of, or against, female education. 
The custom of Sati or burning of a widow along with the body of her 
dead husband is well known. In Calcutta and its neighbourhood alone 
there were 253, 289 and 441 cases of Sati , respectively, in 1815,1816 
and 1817. 88 Not only was it tolerated .by all classes of people, but 
when the practice was forbidden by law, a largely signed petition was 
presented to the Government against it. The signatories numbered 
1146 including 120 Pandits and many prominent leaders of Hindu 
society in Bengal. A number of letters also appeared in the news¬ 
papers in support of the abominable practice. It seems as if there 
was a paralysis of moral sensibilities and utter lack of humane feel¬ 
ings among the Hindus, or at least a large section of them. 

Another social evil was the marriage of Kulin Brahmans. 
Owing to old conventions a few Brahman families in Bengal were 
regarded as superior in respect of social prestige and obtained high 
dowries in marriage market. The result was that these Brahmans 
married a large number of wives, sometimes as many as fifty or 
sixty, or even more. These wives lived in their fathers’ houses and 
many of them scarcely saw their husbands after their marriage. The 
evil was heightened by the fact that many girls, according to social 
usage, could be married only to Kulins and therefore had to remain 
unmarried until death. Cases were not rare when a number of such, 
girls, varying in age from 20 to 50, were all married to a single old 
man, at one sitting, just to remove their maidenhood, which was 
considered a disgrace. It is hardly necessary to point out the great 
moral evils resulting from this practice, but it was tolerated in spite 
of protests and did not disappear till quite late in the century. 

i 

Callousness to human sufferings, arising out of blind adherence 
to old practices, seems to have been the order of the day. The 
number of cruel practices associated with charaka-pujd (Hook-swing¬ 
ing) furnish another illustration. Men were tied to a rope attached 
to a wheel and rapidly whirled round, while in some cases, iron 
pikes or arrows were inserted into the back, legs or other parts of 
their bodies. Sometimes the rope snapped and the body was thrown 
to a distance of 25 to 30 yards, reduced to a shapeless mass. In all 
cases the men were all but dead when brought down from the 
wheel. 

As* regards the Muslims, it will appear from the evidence of 
Raja Rammohan Roy, quoted above, that in some respects, their 


22 


INDIAN PEOPLE AT BEGINNING OF NINETEENTH CENTURY 


middle class was superior to the Hindus. But the upper class or 
aristocracy was rotten to the core, and the masses were poor and 
ignorant Referring to the beginning of the British rule the 
eminent historian Jadu-nath Sarkar observes: “When Clive struck 
at the Nawab, Mughal civilization had become a spent bullet. Its 
potency for good, its very life was gone. The country's administra¬ 
tion had become hopelessly dishoneslt and inefficient, and the mass 
of the people had been reduced to the deepest poverty; ignorance and 
moral degradation by a small, selfish, proud, and unworthy ruling 
class. Imbecile lechers filled the throne, the family of Alivardy did 
not produce a single son worthy to be called a man, and the women 
were even worse than the men. Sadists like Siraj and Miran made 
even their highest subjects live in constant terror. The army was 
rotten and honey-combed with treason. The purity of domestic 
life was threatened by the debauchery fashionable in the Court and 
the aristocracy and the sensual literature that grew up under such 
patrons. Religion had become the handmaid of vice and folly." 29 

About the general character of the Bengali people, widely 
different views have been expressed by contemporary Englishmen. 
Warren Hastings wrote in 1764 that “a few years ago most of the 
Englishmen regarded the Indians almost as barbarians, and though 
the feeling has decreased it has not entirely disappeared." The 
truth of this statement is proved by a book written in 1792 by Charles 
Grant, an officer of the Company, in which the Bengalis are painted 
in the blackest colour, and are described as ‘inferior to the most 
backward classes in Europe. Dishonesty and corruption were ram¬ 
pant, specially in law courts, and the people were selfish and devoid 
of conscience. Patriotism was a thing unknown to them’. 30 About 
the same time Lord Cornwallis, the Governor-General, said: “Every 
native of Hindustan, I verily believe, is corrupt." 31 Macaulay’s 
famous diatribe against the Bengali character, of which perjury and 
forgery are said to have formed as integral a part as the horn of the 
rhinoceros and the beauty of a Greek woman, has become classical. 

Many others have written in the same strain. But more chari¬ 
table views are also not wanting. Bishop Heber, who travelled over 
the whole of Northern India in 1624-5, has recorded his impression 
of Indian character ifi Various places in his diary and letters. He 
was more intimately acquainted with Bengal, as he was the Lord 
Bishop of Calcutta. His earliest reference to the Bengalis is in the 
following terms: “I have, indeed, understood from many quarters, 
that the Bengalees are regarded as the greatest cowards in India; 
and that partly owing to this reputation, and partly to their inferior 
size, the Sepoy regiments are always recruited from Bihar and other 


23 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

provinces.” 32 Elsewhere he says: “The term Bengalee is used 
to express anything which is roguish and cowardly; such as they 
are, however, I am far from disliking them.” 33 Heber, however, 
notes that the general view that the Hindus were gentle and timid 
“is doubtless, to a certain extent, true of the Bengalees,” but the 
people of Upper India, “despising rice and rice-eaters, feeding on 
wheat and barley bread”, were decidedly of martial character and 
“equal in stature and strength to the average of European nations.” 34 
Heber entertained a very favourable view of the Hindus in general. 
“I do not,” says he, “by any means assent t<j pictures of depravity 
and general worthlessness which some have drawn of the Hindoos.” 36 
...“On the whole they are a lively, intelligent, and interesting 
people: of the upper classes, a very considerable' proportion learn 
our language, read our books and our newspapers, and shew a desire 
to court our society; the peasants are anxious to learn English.” 36 
“They are men of high and gallant courage, courteous, intelligent, 
and most eager after knowledge and improvement with a remarka¬ 
ble aptitude for the abstract sciences, geometry, astronomy, &c. and 
for the imitative arts, painting and sculpture.. They are sober, in¬ 
dustrious, dutiful to their parents, and affectionate to their children, 
of tempers almost uniformly gentle and patient.” 37 At the same 
time Heber refers to many of their vices “arising from slavery, from 
an unsettled state of society, and immoral and erroneous systems of 
religion.” 36 But he pays a great tribute to the character and at¬ 
tainments of the Indians. A few lines may be quoted from a long 
passage: “But to say that the Hindoos or Mussulmans are deficient 
in any essential feature ofca civilized people, is an assertion which I 
can scarcely suppose to be made by any who have lived with them. 
Their manners are, at least, as pleasing and courteous as those in 
the corresponding stations of life among ourselves.. Nor is it true 
that in the mechanical arts they are inferior to the general run of 
European nations... Their goldsmiths and weavers produce as 
beautiful fabrics as our own...they shew an anxiety to imitate 
our models, and do imitate them very successfully. The ships built 
by native artists at Bombay are notoriously as good as any which 
sail from London or Liverpool. The carriages and gigs which they 
supply at Calcutta are as handsome, though not as durable, as those 
of Long Acre. In Monghyr I had pistols, double-barrelled guns,... 
which in outward form nobody but perhaps Mr....could detect 
to be of Hindoo origin.” 39 

Reverend James Long makes the following observations in 
respect of Bishop Heber: 

“He was far from adopting a notion then prevalent that the 


24 


INDIAN PEOPLE AT BEGINNING OF NINETEENTH CENTURY 

whole of the Hindus were a kind of moral monsters. Ward’s account 
of the Hindus has contributed to foster this view. Many of Mr. 
Ward’s remarks respecting the cruelties and immoralities among the 
Hindus are no more applicable to the body of the people than a des¬ 
cription of Billingsgate and the Old Bailey in London would be to 
the inhabitants of the west end of the town. Bishop Heber makes 
the following remarks on this subject: 

‘They are a nation, with whom whatever their faults, I, for one, 
shall think it impossible to live long without loving them—a race 
of gentle and temperate habits, with a natural talent and acuteness 
beyond the ordinary level of mankind, and with a thirst of general 
knowledge which even the renowned and the inquisitive Athenians 
can hardly have surpassed or equalled.” 40 

Subsequent history has fully vindicated the penetrating insight 
of Bishop Heber into the character of the Indians including the 
Bengali people. Perhaps a fairer estimate was formed by Raja 
Rammohan Roy. In his statement before the Select Committee of 
the House of Commons in 1831, he gave the following answer to the 
question—What is the moral condition of the people? 

“From a careful survey and observation of the people and in¬ 
habitants of various parts of the country, and in every condition of 
life, I am of opinion that the peasants and villagers who reside at 
a distance from large towns and head stations and courts of law, 
are as innocent, temperate and moral in their conduct as the people 
of any country whatsoever; and the further I proceed towards the 
North and West, the greater the honesty, simplicity and independence 
of character I meet with.... 2ndly, The inhabitants of the cities, 
towns or stations who have much intercourse with persons employ¬ 
ed about the courts of law, by Zamindars, etc., and with foreigners 
and others in a different state of civilization, generally imbibe their 
habits and opinion. Hence their religious opinions are shaken with¬ 
out any other principles being implanted to supply their place. Con¬ 
sequently a great proportion of these are far inferior in point of cha¬ 
racter to the former class, and are very often even made tools of in 
the nefarious work of perjury and forgery; 3rdly, A third class con¬ 
sists of persons who are in the employ of landholders (Zamindars) or 
dependent for subsistence on the courts of law, as attorney’s clerks, 
and who must rely for a livelihood on their shrewdness; not having 
generally sufficient means to enter into commerce and business. 
These are for the most part still worse than the second class ^ more 
especially when they have no prospect of bettering their condition 
by the savings of honest industry, and no hope is held out to them 
of rising to honour or affluence by Superior merit. But I must con- 

25 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 

fess that I have met a great number of the second class engaged in 
a respectable line of trade, who were men of realmerit, worth and 
character. Even among the third class I have known many who 
had every disposition to act uprightly and some actually honest in 
their conduct. And if they saw by experience that their merits were 
appreciated, that they might hope to gain an independence by honest 
means, and that just and honourable conduct afforded the best pro¬ 
spect of their being ultimately rewarded by situations of trust and 
respectability, they would gradually begin to feel a high regard for 
character and rectitude of conduct; and from cherishing such feelings 
become more and more worthy of public confidence, while their 
example would powerfully operate on the second class above noticed, 
which is generally dependent on them and under their influence”. 41 

But whatever we might think of these views, the facts so far 
known seem to indicate that the moral character and cultural life 
of the Bengalis, at least in certain respects, had reached a very low 
ebb indeed. The life in the capital city may be taken as a fair index 
of the character of at least that section of the people which guides 
their destiny. So far as can be gleaned from contemporary litera¬ 
ture and such other evidence as we possess, the moral life of Cal¬ 
cutta was very low according to our present standard. Wine, 
women, and duel were the chief diversions of the small European com¬ 
munity. The rich Bengalis did not lag behind, and spent their time 
in a round of joyous festivities throughout the year. The dancing 
girls formed the chief attraction in many religious ceremonies and 
social functions, and Europeans and Indians alike,—both high and 
low, from the Governor-General and Raja Rammohan Roy to the 
men in the street—felt no scruple in enjoying in public the charms 
and arts of the youthful beauties. Sexual immorality was rampant 
among all classes, particularly the wealthy section. Wine and 
women formed the principal items of their merriment with occa¬ 
sional breaks caused by vulgar types of dramatic performances and 
poets’ contests and such innocuous but costly frivolities as the 
marriage of dolls, bird-fighting, kite-flying and rain-gambling. Huge 
sums were spent on the occasion of the Durga Pujfi, the national 
festival in Bengal, and such socio-religious ceremonies like marriage 
and Sraddha. 

The social relation between the Europeans and the Indians was 
already marked by those symptoms which made it worse and worse 
with the progress of the nineteenth century. Heber writes: 
“Neither the civil nor military officers have much intercourse with 
the natives, though between officers and magistrates of a certain 
rank, and the natives of distinction, there is generally an occasional 

26 


INDIAN PEOPLE AT BEGINNING OF NINETEENTH CENTURY 

interchange of visits and civilities”. 42 Heber refers to the “distance 
and haughtiness with which a very large proportion of the civil and 
military servants of the Company treat the upper and middling 
class of natives.” He observes that the French, under Perron and 
De Boigne, had a great advantage over the British in this respect, 
“and the easy and friendly intercourse in which they (French) lived 
with natives of rank, is still often regretted in Agra and the Dooab”. 
“This is not all”, continues Heber. “The foolish pride of the English 
absolutely leads them to set at nought the injunctions of their own 
Government.” He points out that under the standing orders of the 
Council and of the Army the Tahsildars and Subahdars should have 
always chairs offered them in the presence of their European 
superiors. “Yet there are hardly six Collectors in India who 
observe the former etiquette; and the latter, which was fifteen years 
ago never omitted in the! army, is now completely in disuse”. 
Heber remarks that the Tahsildars and Subahdars know the regula¬ 
tions and feel themselves aggrieved every time these civilities are 
neglected, and men of old families are kept out of their former 
situation by this and other similar slights.” 43 

The racial arrogance and exclusiveness had one good effect. 
Connection with native women was very common at the beginning 
of the nineteenth century, but when Heber wrote (1824), it ceased 
to be a fashionable vice among the younger servants, either civil 
or military, of the Company. 44 One of these had the hardihood to 
remark that he was repelled by the obnoxious odour of the native 
women’s body. 46 

It is, however, apparent that the Englishmen were affected by 
the ideas of oriental pomp and grandeur, almost as much as the 
Indians were attracted by British fashions. Heber observes: “The 
state in which the high officers of Government appear, and the sort 
of deference paid to them in society are great, and said to be neces¬ 
sary in conformity with native ideas and example set by the first 
conquerors, who took their tone from the Mussulmans whom they 
supplanted. All members of Council, and others, down to the rank 
of Puisne Judges inclusive, are preceded by two men with silver- 
sticks, and two others with heavy silver-maces.” 46 

Similarly Heber tells us that “at present there is an obvious 
and increasing disposition” on the part of the Indians “to imitate the 
English in everything”. 47 Referring to the wealthy natives? of 
Bengal, Heber says: “None of them adopt our dress.. .But their 
houses are adorned with verandahs and Corinthian pillars; they 
have very handsome carriages, often built in England; they speak 
tolerable English, and they shew a considerable liking for European 

27 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCB-H 

society, where (which unfortunately is not always the case) they are 
encouraged or permitted to frequent it on terms of anything like 
equality”. 48 Referring to a country-house of the Tagore family, 
Heber comments: “This is more like an Italian villa, than what one 
should have expected as the residence of Hurree Mohun Thakoor. 
Nor are his carriages, the furniture of his house, or the style of his 
conversation, of a character less decidedly European.” 49 “Among 
the lower orders the same feeling shews itself more beneficially in 
a growing neglect of caste—in not merely a willingness, but an 
anxiety, to send their children to our schools, and a desire to learn 
and speak English”. 60 

The horizon of the Bengalis, like the peoples of the other parts of 
India, was limited by the frontiers of their own Province, and they 
felt no concern for the rest of the country. An armed robbery in the 
Dhurrumtollah street excited greater interest in Calcutta than the 
battles of Assye and Argaon in 1803. As noted above, every succes¬ 
sive British victory over an Indian State served as an occasion of 
thanksgiving to the Divine Providence for the success of the British 
arms, from which the Bengalis derived a sort of vicarious glory. But 
the Bengalis were by no means more culpable in this respect than 
others. Writing in 1824, Heber says that the Bengalis were regarded by 
the Hindostanees as no less foreigners than the English. 61 This paro¬ 
chial spirit was due mainly to historical traditions and the difficulties 
of communication between different parts of India. The devastations 
caused by the Marathas all over Hindusthan, particularly in Bengal 
and Rajputana, within living memory, made them odious to the 
inhabitants of these regions, and the dread of the Bargis (Maratha 
soldiers) supplied theme to lullaby songs in Bengal. 

The problem of communication was also no less important. To 
an Indian of the twentieth century it would require an effort to 
visualize the mode of journey from Bengal to Delhi, Madras or 
Bombay. Men had to negotiate these long distances through a diffi¬ 
cult terrain full of dangers from wild animals and still more feroci¬ 
ous Pindaris, Thugs or other classes of robbers. Except where 
boats could ply, one had to walk or use a bullock-cart, horses and 
other carriages being too costly for an ordinary man. Except for 
pilgrimage or urgent business, journeys to distant lands were very 
uncommon. Then there was the difficulty of languages. Neither 
Hindi nor Urdu could serve as a lingua franca in a considerable 
part of India, and Persian was no longer as popular in the nineteenth 
as it was in the eighteenth century. The whole country was divided 
into a very large number of self-contained units, almost mutually 
exclusive in character, and the conception of India as a common 


28 


INDIAN PEOPLE AT BEGINNING OF NINETEENTH CENTURY 


motherland was still in the realm of fancy. There was no India as 
it is understood today. There were Bengalis, Hindustanis, Mara- 
thas, Sikhs, etc., but no Indians, at the beginning of the nineteenth 
century. There was, however, a complete revolution of ideas at the 
end of that century. One who speaks of an Indian nation at the 
beginning of the nineteenth century does as much violence to 
historical facts as those who refuse to recognize it at the end of that 
century. 


1. HBS, 498. 

2. S.C. Hill, Bengal in 1756-7, HI. 328. 

3. K. K. Dutt, Bengal Subah, I, 102-06. 

4. Basu—I, 96. 

5. Seeley, Expansion of England (1904), p. 236. The words within bracket are not 
in the original. 

5a. Rammohan— Works, 476. 

6. Ibid, 465. 

7. Ibid, 146. 

8. Ibid, 224. 

9. Rammohan Centenary Volume , 33. 

10. Rammohan— Works, pp. 245, 295. 

11. Banerji, B.N., HI. 217. 

12. Bagal—I, 174 ff. 

13. Vol. VI, pp. 615 ff. 

14. Ibid, fxi., la. 

15. “The people of this country are divided into Hindus and Musalmans” (Trans¬ 
lation of a Bengali passage in the Amritabazar Patrika dated 12 August, 1869. 
Quoted in Bagal—I, 174.) 

16. ' English translation published by R. Cambray 8c Co., III. 188-9. 

17. Bagal—I. 176. 

17a. R. C. Majumdar, History of the Freedom Movement in India, Vol. m, p. 573. 

18. Rammohan— Works, 439. 

19. Ibid, 462. 

20. Ibid, 445-6. 

21. Ibid, 874. 

22. Kishorichand Mitra, Memoir of Dwarkanath Tagore, p. 60. 

23. Majumdar, B., 187. 

23a. Rammohan— Works, 439. 

23b. Heber, I. 89. 

24. These will be fully discussed in'Vol. VIII with full references. Cf. Vansittart, 
Narrative, I. 51; Scrafton, Reflections, 82-3,119,124; Malleson, Clive, 299; Verelst, 
A view of the Rise, Progress and Present State of the English Government in 
Bengal, p. 46, f.n. 

24a. Rammohan— Works, 145-6. 

25. The idea was not, however, favourably received by many. Majumdar, B., 72 
if., 93 ff., 194-5. 

26. Rammohan Centenary Volume, 81. 

27. Adam, W., Reports on Vernacular Education etc. 

27a. These will be discussed in detail in Vol. VIII. 

28. This will be discussed in detail in Chapter XLV. 

29. HBS, 497. 

30. Bengal—II, 3. 

31. Spear, 137. 

32. Heber, I. 85. 

33. Heber, m. 316. 

34. Ibid, 348. 

35. Ibid, 253-4. 


29 






THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 


Ibid, 261. 

Ibid, 333, 389. 

Ibid, 333. 

Ibid, 351-2. 

Long, J, Handbook of Bengal Mission*, p. 40 footnote. 
Rammoban— Works, 296-7. 

Heber, HI. 335. 

Ibid, 337-8. 

Ibid, 373. 

Chailley, J., Administrative Problems of British India , p. 195. 
Heber, HI. 228. 

Ibid, 252. 

Ibid, 232. 

Ibid, 234, 

Ibid, 252. 

51. Heber, I. 440. 



30 


CHAPTER II (XL) 

ENGLISH EDUCATION 


I. BEGINNINGS OF ENGLISH EDUCATION IN BENGAL 

UP TO 1835. 

If we have to choose one single factor which helped more than 
others in bringing about the great transformation in India in the 
nineteenth century, we can, without any hesitation, point to the in¬ 
troduction of English education. The English education, and the 
Western ideas which flowed along with it, formed the foundation of 
all the wonderful progress that we witness in Bengal during the 
British rule. 

Exigencies of administration and commercial intercourse forced 
the Indians, particularly the residents of Calcutta, Bombay, and 
Madras to cultivate the knowledge of English in the eighteenth 
century, or even earlier. But English was neither spoken nor under¬ 
stood by, the Indians to any larger extent till the close of the eigh¬ 
teenth century. Even in Bengal where the.British wielded the politi¬ 
cal power, there was no regular arrangement for teaching English 
to the Indians. There is evidence, however, that some Indian ruling 
chiefs at the close of the eighteenth century had fair knowledge of 
English. Heber says that Nawab Sadat All of Avadh spoke English 
like a native and Nawab, Shamsudaula of Dacca, whom he met, 
‘‘speaks and writes English very tolerably, and even fancies himself 
a critic in Shakespeare”. 1 But with the opening of the nineteenth 
century there was a growing appreciation of the value of English 
as a medium of culture on the part of the educated Bengalis, specially 
the Hindus. The more they came into contact with the educated 
English people the more they understood the nature and importance 
of their distinctive culture and realized the necessity of imbibing its 
spirit through the knowledge of English. Schools for teaching English 
were accordingly founded in Calcutta and its neighbourhood. A 
school was established at Bhawanipore, a suburb of Calcutta, in A.D. 
1800, and another in 1814 at Chinsura by its Magistrate, Mr. Forbes. 
It is not, however, till the year 1817 that we find a concerted attempt 
for the diffusion of English education in Bengal/particularly in 
Calcutta and its immediate neighbourhood. Two notable institu¬ 
tions which did yeoman’s work in this direction were—1. Calcutta 
School Book Society, 12 and 2. Hindu College, both founded in 1817. 
The object of the former was to make available good text-books, both 

31 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

in English and in Indian languages, suitable for schools. The Society 
undertook to prepare such text-books and to print and publish them. 
They were sold at a cheap price and sometimes distributed free.- The 
publication of religious books was beyond its purview. 

Soon after the establishment of this Society, the members of 
the Committee felt the need of good schools for teaching English. 
As a result of their efforts, a meeting was held for this purpose in 
the Town Hall of Calcutta on 1st September, 1818. It was resolved 
in this meeting to establish a separate society named the Calcutta 
School Society. Its object was defined to pe to help and improve the 
schools already existing in Calcutta and to establish new schools 
according to need. It was also one of its objectives to establish 
higher educational institutions where the students passing from the 
existing schools could continue more advanced studies and thus make 
themselves suitable as teachers for its schools. David Hare was a 
member and European Secretary, and Raja Radha-kanta Dev was 
the Indian Secretary of the Society. 

But by far the most important institution that helped the spread 
of English education in Bengal was the Hindu College, established 
in Calcutta on January 20, 1817. As there is a great deal of mis¬ 
conception regarding the foundation of this college, it is necessary 
to refer briefly to the circumstances which led to it as authenticated 
by contemporary documents. 3 It appears that about the beginning 
of May, 1816, a Brahmin of Calcutta saw Sir Hyde East, Chief Jus¬ 
tice of the Supreme Court of Calcutta, and informed him that many 
of the leading Hindus were desirous of forming an establishment, for 
the education of their children in a liberal manner as practised by 
Europeans, and desired him to hold a meeting for this purpose. 
Accordingly Sir Hyde East, with the permission of the Governor- 
General and the Supreme Council, called a meeting at his house 
on 14th May, 1816, at which fifty and upwards of the most respect¬ 
able Hindu inhabitants of rank or wealth attended, including also 
the principal Pandits, when a sum of nearly half-a-lakh of Rupees 
was subscribed and many more subscriptions were promised. 

The above account is taken almost verbatim from a letter, 
dated 18th May, 1816, written by Sir Hyde East to his friend, Mr. 
J. Harrington) a brother-judge, then in England. Hie Brahmin who 
first suggested to him about the Institution is not named in the 
letter, but Sir Hyde East says that he knew him. It has been 
generally supposed that this person is no other than Raja Rammohan 
Roy, and consequently he has been regarded as the founder or pro¬ 
moter of the Hindu College^ This view is, however, certainly 

32 







ENGLISH EDUCATION 


wrong, for later in the same letter Sri Hyde East categorically says 
that he did not know Raja Rammohan Roy. The Brahmin who 

*. it 

saw Sir Hyde East seems to be no other than Baidyanath Mukherjee, 
a well-known citizen of Calcutta at that time. 

The meeting decided to establish a college, housed in its own 
building, with the object of teaching Bengali, Hindustani and 
English languages; and then Persian, if desired; arithmetic, history, 
geography, astronomy, mathematics; and in time, as the fund in¬ 
creases, English belles-lettres, poetry, etc. Stress was also to 
be laid on teaching the English system of morals. 

i 

Sir Hyde East observes: “One of the singularities of the meet¬ 
ing was that it was composed of persons of various castes, all com¬ 
bining for such a purpose, whom nothing else could have brought 
together; whose children are to be taught, though not fed, together. 

“Another singularity was, that the most distinguished Pandits 
who attended declared their warm approbation of all the objects 
proposed; and when they were about to depart, the head Pandit, in 
the name of himself and the others, said that they rejoiced in having 
lived to see the day when literature (many parts of which had for- 
merly been cultivated in their country with considerable success, 
but which were now nearly extinct) was about to be revived with 
greater lustre and prospect of success than ever.” 

Any one who goes through the newspapers of the period cannot 
fail to be struck with the genuine enthusiasm which the foundation 
of these schools evoked in the mind of the public, and a sincere de¬ 
sire to multiply their number in order to meet a keenly felt need for 
liberal education. There were no less than twenty-five such schools 
in Calcutta alone before 1835, when the Government ultimately 
decided to extend its patronage to English education. Large 
numbers of such institutions were also founded outside Calcutta. 
Macaulay, writing in 1836, stated that he had found in one town 
alone, in Bengal, 1400 boys learning English. 4 

“The excitement,” Duff wrote at the time, “for Western educa¬ 
tion continued unabated. They pursued us along the streets; they 
threw open the doors of our palankeens; they poured in their sup¬ 
plications with a pitiful earnestness of countenance which might 
have softened a heart of stone”. 6 

The institutions were all founded by private efforts, and both 
Englishmen and Indians co-operated in this work. 

The Christian missionaries founded the Baptist Mission College 
at Serampore in 1818. They also founded several schools, one of 
which was named after Rev. Duff, and its expenses were met out 
of endowments for Scottish Churches, Some schools were founded 

33 

B.P.I.R.—8 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-II 

by private individuals, both Indian and European. David Hare, Raja 
Rammohan Roy and G. A. Turnbull each founded a school. The 
Lord Bishop of Calcutta established a college in 1820. The Oriental 
Seminary was founded in 1828 by Gaurmohan Auddy.’ 

The students of the Hindu College took a leading part in establi¬ 
shing new schools, and in 1831 there were six morning schools in 
different parts of Calcutta, founded and managed by them. 

There are occasional references to various subjects taught in 
these schools. These included, besides a knowledge of English 
literature and grammar, mathematics, astronomy, geography, 
chemistry (both theoretical and practical), philosophy (both Indian 
and European), history (ancient and modern), painting, handwriting 
and various arts and crafts. 

II. AIMS AND OBJECTS OF ENGLISH EDUCATION 

There is a general impression in India that the English educa¬ 
tion was introduced by the British rulers for their administrative 
convenience and the course was deliberately designed to make the 
Indians only fit for clerks. There appears to be little justification 
for this view. 

As will be shown in the next section, the Government did not 
encourage English education, far less took any active part in pro~ 
moting it, till nearly twenty years after the foundation of the Hindu 
College. But before turning to that topic, it is necessary to get a 
clear idea of the aims and objects with which English education was 
promoted by non-Govemment agencies. 

The most lucid exposition of the liberal ideas which lay at the 
root of the demand for English education is to be found in a letter 
which Raja Rammohan Roy wrote in December, 1823, and forwarded 
to Lord Amherst, the Governor-General, through R. Heber, Lord 
Bishop of Calcutta. 6 It contains a strong protest against the Gov¬ 
ernment proposal to establish a Sanskrit school under Hindu 
Pandits. Rammohan exposes the uselessness of such an institution 
in the following words: 

“This seminary (similar in character to those' which existed in 
Europe before the time of Lord Bacon) can only be expected to 
lead the minds of the youth with grammatical niceties and meta¬ 
physical distinctions of little or no practical use to the possessors or 
to society. The pupils will there acquire what was known two 
thousand years ago with the addition of vain and empty subtleties 
since then produced by speculative men, such as is already common¬ 
ly taught in all parts of India”. 7 He points out at length how the 
young students of this seminary would merely waste a dozen years 


34 


ENGUSH EDUCATION 


of the most valuable period of their lives by acquiring the niceties 
of Sanskrit grammar, speculative philosophy of Vedanta, obsolete 
interpretations of Vedic passages in Mlmaihsa, and the subtleties of 
the Nyaya Sastra. He then continues: 

“In order to enable your Lordship to appreciate the utility of 
encouraging such imaginary learning as above characterized, I beg 
your Lordship will be pleased to compare the state of science and 
literature in Europe before the time of Lord Bacon with the progress 
of knowledge made since he wrote. 

i 

“If it had been intended to keep the British nation in ignorance 
of real knowledge, the Baconian philosophy would not have been 
allowed to displace the system of the schoolmen which was the best 
calculated to perpetuate ignorance. In the same manner the 
Sanskrit system of education would be the best calculated to keep 
this country in darkness, if such had'been the policy of the British 
legislature. But as the improvement of the native population is 
the object of the Government, it will consequently promote a more 
liberal and enlightened system of instruction, embracing Mathema¬ 
tics, Natural Philosophy, Chemistry, Anatomy, with other useful 
sciences, which maybe accomplished with the sums proposed by 
employing a few gentlemen of talent and learning educated in 
Europe and providing a College furnished with necessary books, 
instruments and other apparatus'’. 6 

In this letter the Raja gave a very forceful expression to the 
view which was held by a large number of Indians and Europeans 
both before and after him. This is proved not only by the large 
number of schools, referred to above, which were designed to meet 
this need, but also by similar views expressed in contemporary per¬ 
iodicals. Reference m?y be made in this connection to an article, 
published in a Bengali journal named Sudh&kctr on 7 September, 
1833. Its leading ideas may be summed up as follows: “The Govern¬ 
ment pays no heed to the newspaper articles on the spread of 
education. It no doubt spends a lakh of Rupees on education 
through Education Society, but we are at a loss to understand the 
benefits accruing from it. The amount spent on Sanskrit College 
or School is of no benefit to the people in general, for only Brahman 
students are admitted there. Besides, institutions for teaching 
Sanskrit were never wanting in this country, and Sanskrit education 
would not have suffered much even if Government had not extended 
its patronage to it. It is further to be remembered that Sanskrit 
learning only enables a man to prescribe Sastric rules, and serves 
no other useful purpose. Therefore the Government should sow 
the seeds, all over the country, of that type of learning which can 


35 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-11 

remove the darkness of ignorance and makes a man fit for adminis¬ 
tration and other public activities. It is necessary to establish an 
English school for this purpose in every village. This would involve 
a huge cost and to meet this we suggest that the Government orders 
each villager to pay a subscription according to his ability ranging 
from one to four annas. The balance may be met out of the funds 
placed at the disposal of the Education Society’. 9 _ 

This article puts in a nutshell the view prevailing among the 
Indians regarding the nature and object of the English education 
they had in view. It was primarily intended to be a liberal educa¬ 
tion which would “remove the darkness of ignorance/’ but was also 
looked upon as a means to enable one to take part in the adminis¬ 
tration of the country and public activities for the benefit of the 
people. 

Although there is no basis, therefore, for the contention that the 
English education was introduced by the British rulers with the 
sole object of turning out clerks, it must be noted that different 
sections desired it from different points of view. The twofold 
objects which the enlightened Hindus had in vietf were liberal 
education and participation in administration, as noted above. The 
Christian missionaries regarded the liberal education imparted 
through English schools as the most fruitful means for the conversion 
of Indians to Christianity by making them conscious of their super¬ 
stitions. As one of them put it in the Calcutta Journal of March 11, 
1822, Indians “now engaged in the degrading and polluting worship 
of idols shall be brought to the knowledge of the true God and Jesus 
Christ whom He has sent.” But this view was by no means confined 
to the missionaries. Macaulay himself wrote to his father: “It is 
my firm belief that if our plans of education are followed up, there 
will not be a single idolater among the respectable classes in Bengal 
thirty years hence. And this will be effected without efforts to 
proselytize; without the smallest interference with religious liberty; 
merely by the natural Operation of knowledge and reflection.” David 
Hare also expressed similar views. 

It is interesting to note that similar hopes were entertained 
even by a section of the Indians. In this connection attention may 
be drawn to a remarkable letter written on 8 October, 1831, by 
Madhab-chandra Mallik, a teacher of the Hindu Free School. He 
categorically states that the object of the institution Is to impart 
that kind of knowledge which is calculated to make man fit for 
public life and remove darkness of ignorance, particularly religious 
prejudices and superstitions. “If”, says he, “we intended to per¬ 
petuate the irrational religious ideas that have fettered our mind 

36 



ENGLISH EDUCATION 


for such a long time, we would never have established the Hindu 
Free School”. 10 

Another probable effect anticipated from the education imparted 
in these English schools was the growth of ideas of liberty and free¬ 
dom from British yoke. Macaulay’s famous speech on this subject 
in the House of Commons is well-known to everybody. He thought 
that “having become instructed in European language, they 
(Indian) may, in some future age, demand European institutions”, 
and concluded by saying that “whenever it comes, it will be the 
proudest day in English history.” But similar sentiment was ex¬ 
pressed by others, too. Reference may be made in this connection 
to the evidence given before the Select Committee of the House of 
Commons by Major-General Lionel Smith, K. C. B., on October 6, 
1831. He was emphatically of opinion that the Western education 
would make them “feel the value of governing themselves”, and 
therefore “the effect of imparting education will be to turn us out 
of the country.” But he wojjld not regret it, for “America has been 
of more value to us separate than as a colony.” Mountstuart 
Elphinstone held the same view. “Lt. General Briggs, visiting his 
camp one day and observing in his tent a pile of printed Marathi 
books, asked what they were for. ‘To educate the native/ said 
Elphinstone, ‘but it is our highroad back to Europe”. 11 

On the other hand, diametrically opposite views were enter¬ 
tained by others who believed that the English education was the 
only means of reconciling the Indians to the British rule. These 
were forcefully explained by Trevelyan, in the following statement 
before the Select Committee of the House of Commons in 1853. 

“Familiarly acquainted with us by means of our literature the 

Indian youth almost cease to regard us as foreigners.As long as 

the natives are left to brood over their former independence, their 
sole specific for improving their condition is the immediate and 

total expulsion of the English.It is only by the infiision 

of European ideas that a new direction can be given to national views. 
The young men brought up in our seminaries turn with contempt 
from the barbarous despotism under which their ancestors groaned 
to the prospect of improving their national institutions on the 
English model..They have no notion of any improve¬ 

ment but such as rivets their connection with the English and makes 
them dependent on English protection and instruction.” 

These views are quoted at some length in order to prove that 
there was a general belief in the liberalising effects of the English 
education, and although people differed widely about the objects 
and probable effects of this education, no one seriously advocated it 


37 





THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


merely for the purpose of turning out a set of clerks. Such an idea 
was repudiated by the Indians themselves. The following comments 
appeared in a Bengali Weekly, on January 26, 1828: “Formerly the 
English believed that the Indians pick up a smattering of English 
just enough for serving as clerks. But it now transpires that they 
are learning English like their own language”. 12 The same paper 
again wrote on March 7, 1829: “The efforts made during the last five 
or six years for spreading English language and learning in this 
country are really remarkable. Formerly we heard that the Indiana 
only learnt a little English for securing jobs as clerks. But we now 
find with surprise that Indian boys venture to study the most ad¬ 
vanced texts and most abstruse subjects in English and have 
mastered even the most difficult branches of English learning” 13 . 

Another Bengali periodical, the Sambad Kaumudi , writes in its 
issue of August 7, 1830: “It is true that formerly, i.e. both during 
Hindu and Muslim rule, there was cultivation of learning in this 
country, but the organization for the spread of useful knowledge 
among the people in general, such as we find during the British rule, 
was unknown before. There is as wide a difference between the old 
and present state of things in this respect as between heaven and 
the nether world. The number of students in Calcutta and its suburbs 
alone exceeds ten thousand and the provision of cheap text-books 
for their use is a sure means of spreading this education.” 

The unanimously expressed view about the liberal character 
and the high cultural value of English education is fully supported 
by what is known of the achievements of the students of those days. 
For this purpose, we may give a short account of the Hindu College, 
the premier institution of those days and the only one of which we 
possess some detailed knowledge. 

The memory of the Hindu College is indissolubly bound up with 
its famous teacher, Henry Louis Vivian Derozio, a half-caste Portu¬ 
guese. He joined the Hindu College as a Lecturer in 1826 at the age 
of seventeen and served there for a period of three years only. But 
even during this short period, this young gifted teacher moulded the 
entire lives of a number of brilliant students and made a deep im¬ 
pression on them. His views were, however, too radical for the age f 
and the authorities of the Hindu College dispensed with his services. 
He died at the age of twenty-three. The following tribute of respect 
was paid to, him in a periodical entitled Bengal Spectator , started by 
some of his students: “About this time the lamented Henry Derozio 
by his talents £nd enthusiasm, by his unwearied exertions in and 
out of the Hindu College, by his course of lectures at Mr. Hare's 
school, by his regular attendance and exhortations at the weekly 

38 


ENGLISH EDUCATION 


meetings of Academic Institution, and above all by his animating, 
enlightening and cheerful conversation had wrought a change in the 
mind of the native youth, which is felt to this day, and which will 
ever be remembered by those who have benefited by it”. 14 

Peary-chand Mitra in his Life of David Hare says of Derozio: 
*‘He used to impress upon them the sacred duty of thinking for them¬ 
selves—to be in no way influenced by any of the idols mentioned by 
Bacon—to live and die for truth—to cultivate all the virtues, shun¬ 
ning vice in every shape. He often read examples from ancient 
history of the love of justice, patriotism, philanthropy and self-abne¬ 
gation; and the way in which he set forth the points stirred up the 
minds of his pupils. Some were impressed with the excellence of 
justice, some with the paramount importance of truth, so ne with 
patriotism, some with philanthropy.” 16 

The students of the Hindu College held most advanced and some¬ 
times radical views on political, social and economic subjects, and 
some of them were deeply stirred by patriotic fervour. These will 
be referred to in detail in Chapter XII. It will suffice here to quote 
the following extract from the Englishman (May, 1836): 

“In matters of politics, they are all radicals, and are followers 
of Benthamite principles. The very word Tory is a sort of ignominy 
among them;.. .They think that toleration ought to be practised by 
every government, and the best and surest way of making the people 
abandon their barbarous customs and rites is by diffusing educa¬ 
tion among them. With respect to the questions relating to Political 
Economy, they all belong to the school of Adam Smith. They are 
clearly of opinion that the system of monopoly, the restraints upon 
trade ,and the international laws of many countries do nothing but 
paralyse the efforts of industry, impede the progress of agriculture 
and manufacture, and prevent commerce from flowing in its natural 
course”. 16 

Under the influence of Derozio, the Hindu College students drew 
their inspiration from Voltaire, Locke, Bacon, Hume, and Tom Paine, 
among others. A story published in a contemporary Bengali Weekly 
may be referred to in this connection. An Indian book-seller got 
100 copies of Tom Paine’s Age of Reason, and advertised them for 
sale at Re. 1/- per copy, hut the demand for the book among the 
Hindu (College students was so great that it was sold at Rs. 5/-. per 
copy. Soon after a part of this book was translated into Bengali 
and published in a Bengali paper. 17 

The advanced ideas on social and political reform held by the 
Hindu College students were discussed and propagated through their 


39 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-II 

associations and periodical publications. The first of these associa¬ 
tions was the “Academic Association or Institution/’ established in 
1828 under the inspiration of Derozio. The subjects discussed in 
this Association included the following: 

: V 

“Free will, free ordination, fate, faith, the sacredness of truth, 
the high duty of cultivating virtue, the meanness of vice, the 
nobility of patriotism, the attributes of God, and the arguments for 
and against the existence of the Deity as these have been set forth 
by Hume on the one side, and Reid, Dugald Stewart and Brown on 
the other, the hollowness of idolatry and the shams of the priest¬ 
hood”.^ 

Another Association, started in 1838, was the “Society for the 
Acquisition of General Knowledge”. Its main object was to acquire 
and disseminate useful knowledge about the condition of the 
country. 

A third Association, namely, “The Hindu Theophilanthropic 
Society”, was started in the fourth decade of the nineteenth century 
under the inspiration of Dr. Duff. 

The Hindu College students also published several magazines 
during the period from 1828 to 1843. These were: The Parthenon 
(1830), Gyananneshun (1831 to 1844), Hindu Pioneer (1838), and The 
Bengal Spectator (1842). Three other papers were run by the Dero- 
zians, namely, theTfespenis, Inquirer and The Quill. 

These magazines dealt in a general way with the condition of 
the country, scienqe of politics, science of government and juris¬ 
prudence, European colonization in India, female education, etc. The 
Hindu Pioneer published articles on “Freedom”, “India under 
Foreigners” , and the like. An extract from the latter article quoted 
in Chapter XII shows the spirit of the students. 

This brief sketch of the activities of the Hindu College may be 
fittingly concluded with an account of a meeting of the “Society for 
the Acquisition of General Knowledge” held on the 8th February, 
1843, in the Hindu College Hall under the chairmanship of Tara- 
chand Chakravarti, a student of the Hindu College. In this meet¬ 
ing, Dakshina-ranjan Mukhopadhyay began to read a paper on. “The 
Present State of the East India Company’s Criminal Judicature, and 
Police under the Bengal Presidency”. When he had but read half 
of his essay, Captain D. L. Richardson, Principal of the College; In¬ 
terrupted him by observing that “he could not permit it (the College 
Hall) to be converted into a den of treason, and milst close the doors 
against all such things”. 


40 


ENGLISH EDUCATION 


Then Tarachand, as President of the Society, said: “Captain 
Richardson! with due respect, I beg to say that I cannot allow you 
to proceed any longer in this course of conduct towards our Society, 
and as President of the Society, and on behalf of my friend Babu 
Dukhin, I must say, that your remarks are anything but becoming. 
I am bound also to add that I consider your conduct as an insult to 
the Society, and that if you do not retract what you have said and 
make due apology, we shall represent the matter to the Committee 
of the Hindu College, and if necessary, to the Government itself. 
We have obtained the use of this public, hall by leave, applied for 
and received from the Committee, and not through your personal 
favour. You are only a visitor on this occasion, and possess no right 
to interrupt a member of this Society in the utterance of his opinions. 
I hope that Captain Richardson will see the propriety of offering an 
apology to my friend, the writer of the essay, and to the meeting”. 10 

This is a remarkable instance of the sturdy spirit of indepen¬ 
dence by which the students of Hindu College were inspired, and it 
may be doubted whether similar spirited words of protest have ever 
been uttered in any academic meeting of an Indian College against 
its Principal. 

Even the brief record of the Hindu College students culled above 
is sufficient to indicate the nature and value of the Western system 
of education which was introduced in Bengal during the first half 
of the nineteenth century. Whatever our views may be about the 
ultimate effects of this education, there can be no gainsaying the 
fact that it was not originally conceived in any narrow 
spirit, only with a view to serve utilitarian purpose. It was planned 
on a broad basis, as a suitable vehicle for the distinctive traits ot 
Western culture, and was calculated to promote an all-round progress 
of the students’ mind and to develop his character and personality. 
It is difficult to imagine what better type of education could be de¬ 
vised in those days by the greatest well-wishers of this country, or 
what more encouraging result could be expected even by the greatest 
enthusiasts for a modem type of education. The broad and fresh 
outlook of the students of the Hindu College, their high intellectual 
eminence and original creative faculties of mind, their familiarity 
with the most advanced views in every sphere of human activity 
conceived anywhere in the worlds their fervid patriotism—a senti¬ 
ment almost unknown till then—>an|l the sturdy independence of 
character shed a lustre on the brief career of this College. It is not 
possible here to give an account or even simply mention the names 
of the very large number of brilliant students of this College who 
played a dominant role in almost all the branches of public life in 


41 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-11 

Bengal. But it will be difficult to name any institution which turn¬ 
ed out so many striking personalities within a period of less than 
two decades. 

III. BRITISH POLICY TOWARDS EDUCATION UP TO 1835. 

The antiquity of Indian civilization impressed the Western mind 
in the latter half of the 18th century. Warren Hastings established 
in 1781 Calcutta Madrasa (or Muhammadan College) at the request 
of several Muhammadans of distinction with the object of promot¬ 
ing the study of Arabic and Persian languages and of the Muslim 
Law. The Sanskrit College at Banaras was founded in 1791 by 
Jonathan Duncan, Resident in Banaras, for the preservation and 
cultivation of the laws, literature and religion of the Hindus. The 
policy of the East India Company was not to interfere in the reli¬ 
gious beliefs of its subjects. And though local authorities in India 
gave pecuniary aid and encouraged Orientalists to compile dictiona¬ 
ries, to translate Hindu and Muslim laws, and to encourage a revival 
of Oriental learning, yet the development of educational policy to¬ 
wards India and the multiplication of educational institutions can be 
traced more to Evangelical and Utilitarian movements which formed 
pressure groups in the political life of England than to anything else. 

John Shore (1751-1834) (afterwards Lord Teignmouth), for¬ 
merly Governor-General of Fort William in Bengal, Charles Grant 
(1746-1823), M. P. and for some time Chairman and Deputy Chair¬ 
man and Director of East India Company, William Wilberforce 
(1759-1833), M. P., Henry Thornton (1760-1815), a leading banker 
and M. P., who had great influence over the East India Company 20 
and directed their beneficence to earthly needs, were dedicated to 
the cause of education in India. 

At the time of the Charter Act of 1793 Charles Grant, with the 
aim of fostering Christian propaganda, influenced Wilberforce, who 
moved in the House of Commons that it was the duty of the 
British Government to send Chaplains and school masters through¬ 
out British India. But nothing came out of it, and Wilberforce re¬ 
newed his efforts at the next renewal of the Charter in 1813. By 
that time Grant’s Observations on the State of Society among the 
Asiatic Subjects of Great Britain , 21 which reflected Evangelical zeal, 
chiefly written in 1792, laid before the Court of Directors in 1793, 
and printed by orders of Parliament in 1813, became a very effective 
treatise and influenced the formation of Indian policy. It was re¬ 
garded as the best answer to the anti-missionary party headed by 
Major Scott Waring, and its thesis was that a Hindu mind was sub¬ 
merged in darkness which only the light of Christianity could dis¬ 
pel. 22 Wilberforce marvellously handled a formidable mass of 


42 


ENGLISH EDUCATION 


material and produced effect by his convictions and idealism, no less 
than by his eloquence. In Parliament he declared that the remedy 
for the ills of Hindu society was neither philosophy nor civilization, 
but the propagation of Christianity in India.Warren Hastings, 
Malcolm and Munro had given their evidence against the propaga¬ 
tion of Christianity, but the Evangelicals succeeded not only in 
securing an Episcopal establishment in India, but also the first grant 
of one lakh of rupees a year set apart, out of the Indian revenue, for 
‘the encouragement of the learned natives of India, and for the intro¬ 
duction of a knowledge of European sciences among the people*. 
Lord Min to’s timely reference to the lanientable decay of learning 
in India to the authorities in England provided a handle to the missio¬ 
naries to press their claim. 24 And though the sum of one lakh 
allotted for education was meagre, this clause can be described as a 
landmark in the history of education in India. 

Between 1813 arid 1823 the East India Company did not develop 
any educational policy in India. The money sanctioned in 1813 re¬ 
mained unspent and it was not until 17th July, 1823, that the General 
Committee of Public Instruction at Calcutta was formed and was put 
in charge of the existing government institutions and of the one lakh 
grant (with some arrears). The object of the Committee was to 
equip itself with facts about the state of education in the territories 
under Bengal Presidency and to suggest ways and means for the 
better instruction of the people. Between 1813 and 1823, besides the 
multiplication of missionary schools which offered honourable rivalry 
to native institutions and gained popularity among Indians, the foun¬ 
dation of Hindu College at Calcutta for the promotion of European 
learning and languages, as mentioned above, was symptomatic of the 
native disposition to learn English. But the general policy of the 
East India Company was to encourage traditional learning in India 
by giving pecuniary aid, and not to interfere with education or to 
suggest alternative methods, for fear that this might contravene the 
policy of religious neutrality. The foundation of the Sanskrit 
College at Calcutta by Lord Ariiherst in 1823 represents the continua¬ 
tion of the same traditional policy of the encouragement of Oriental 
learning. It is to England rather than to India that we should pri¬ 
marily look for the change-over in the educational policy of the East 
India Company. The persistent advocacy of useful knowledge by 
the Court of Directors in their Despatches from 1824 onwards was 
inspired, above all. by the influence of James Mill, Bentham’s disciple, 
who, by virtue of his position at India House, embodied in his Despat¬ 
ches the recurrent theme of Utility as the only touch-stone of educa¬ 
tion, and pressed upon the Indian Government to follow the principle 


43 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


of Utility in all matters relating to education. By the late twenties 
there was not any outstanding man among the Directors and it was 
naturally Mill to whom they looked for advice on vital matters. The 
Despatch of the Court of Directors, dated 18 February, 1824, 26 which 
embodied the general principles of the policy on education in India, 
marks a turning point in the whole educational development in India, 
because it is the first Directoral Despatch which shows contempt for 
traditional learning, stresses very clearly the superiority of Western 
education and insists on spending money on useful learning and not 
the useless fables of Hindu mythology or the tenets of the Quran. 
The Committee of Public Instruction ih India put a feeble defence 
of its policy. 26 This Directoral encouragement of the diffusion of 
useful knowledge continued right up to Bentinck’s Resolution of 
1835 and it was expected that the initiative would be taken on the 
lines recommended. In this and other subsequent Despatches there 
was no decisive suggestion on making English the medium of instruc¬ 
tion, because the Directors thought it impracticable for English to 
become the language of the people of India. It seems clear that 
they pushed forward the cause indirectly and prepared a definite 
way for subsequent policy on education, and in their Despatches they 
referred continuously to the progress of Hindu College and regarded 
it as a hope for changing the habits and dispositions of the people. 

Independently of the official attitude there was growing up in 
Calcutta and its neighbourhood a disposition to learn English through¬ 
out the entire period, as noted above. Rammohan Roy’s letter, men¬ 
tioned above, was passed on to Amherst by Bishop Heber and re¬ 
mained unanswered, but the Committee of Public Instruction regard* 
ed it as representing one individual alon4 whose opinions were well- 
known to be hostile to those entertained by all his countrymen. 27 
Even a conservative like Radhakanta Dev, who received his elemen¬ 
tary education at Mr. Cumming’s Calcutta Academy, propagated the 
cause of English and was one of the more active Governors of Hindu 
College. 28 The study of Parliamentary Papers, Court Despatches 
and the accounts of travellers, indicates that long before the official 
Resolution of 1835, Indians were themselves sensible of the great 
advantages of learning English. 29 Adam notes that those institu¬ 
tions were gaining popularity which offered English teaching, and 
F. J. Shore found the English language becoming fashionable 30 
among the rising generations. The account of the Hindu College, 
given above, shows how much the study of English classics had 
gained a hold on the minds of pupils. 

The funds placed at the disposal of the General Committee of 
Public Instruction were limited, and the question turned on how 


44 


ENGUSH EDUCATION 

the money was to be spent: should Western knowledge be diffused 
through English or the classical languages? The question of making 
English a compulsory subject in the Arabic College at Calcutta “final¬ 
ly put the match to the train of major controversy of 1834”. 31 The 
Act of 1813 was interpreted in ways favourable to the attitude of 
the members of the Committee who found themselves equally 
divided. 

For a long time it has been generally held by the historians 
that it was Macaulay’s minute which proved decisive in the intro¬ 
duction of English as the medium of instruction. But the ground had 
already been prepared long before Macaulay arrived in India. The 
historical process of the entire movement had been in operation for 
a long time and nothing caused or moved this process more than the 
Evangelical and Utilitarian ideas. Furthermore, the public employ¬ 
ment of Indians in places where the number of Europeans could be 
curtailed on grounds of economy gave stimulus to education. 32 The 
Chairman of the Court of Directors, William Astell, in his letter to 
Bentinck, reflected the anxiety of the Court to afford every reason¬ 
able facility for the education of the natives. 33 Bentinck anticipat¬ 
ed collateral advantages by introducing English as the language of 
public business in all departments, 34 and the authorities in England, 
though preferring English to Persian, hinted at the adoption of ver¬ 
nacular languages, but still left the whole question to the better 
judgment and superior local knowledge of Bentinck. 35 

When Bentinck reached India, British power was established 
more firmly than at any former time. In England he had met James 
Mill at Mrs. Grote’s house and assured him that in reality Bentham 
would be the Governor-General of India. 36 Bentham wrote to Ben¬ 
tinck on November 19; 1829: “It seems to me that I behold the golden 
age of India lying before me’\* and very much desired Bentinck 
to encourage the diffusion of education and useful knowledge. 37 
Bentinck was a simple, though confirmed, Westerner, 38 who had Both 
intellectual and moral clarity. He had a Utilitarian faith in educa¬ 
tion as a means for the elevation of human character. 39 He wrote 
of the British language as the key to all improvements. 40 In his 
letter of 1st June, 1834, to Mancy, he outlined his views on education: 
“General education is my panacea for the regeneration of India.” 41 
It seems clear that before Macaulay reached India, Bentinck had al¬ 
ready formulated his plans. Charles Trevelyan’s letters to Ben¬ 
tinck indicate that being a compound of a radical and a despot, Ben¬ 
tinck was only waiting for the ripe moment, 42 and there seems a 
clear and delightful conspiracy between him and the young, fervent 
Trevelyan, who* in his frenzied zeal, intended to secure the prefe- 


45 


THEBRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

rence of European over Oriental learning. Trevelyan dreamt of 
planting Western civilization not only in India but in the whole of 
Asia, and regarded “our language” as a proper means for doing so. 43 
Bentinck watched carefully the indications of the time—the 
thoughts and disposition of Hindus to learn English—and he utilized 
his power firmly in actually moulding the process'then at work. As 
compared with Mill, Bentinck had an extra advantage in this that 
being on the spot, he was more able to assert in practice the doctrine 
of Utility. 44 He had a hand in the game that was being played and 
he hit the ball now more clearly than before and fulfilled what 
Grant had hoped, what Mill had pUshed forward, what Trevelyan 
had almost decided upon with Bentinck, what E. Ryan had long 
entertained 46 and what Macaulay put forth in a bold and highly 
coloured fashion in his Minute reflecting much of Bentinck’s mind, 
though the latter might not have appreciated the sentimental 
parts. 46 

Macaulay was a mixture of the Benthamite theory of legisla¬ 
tion and Evangelical vehemence in sentiment. His Minute cm Edu¬ 
cation was brilliant, though he tried to disguise the thinness of his 
legal reason by taking refuge in bold and emphatic rhetoric*. His 
main thesis was that all the learning of the East was nothing beside 
the metaphysics of Locke and physics of Newton, and that it was 
only the torch of Western learning that could illumine the Indian mind, 
submerged in superstition and ignorance. His view on Indian so¬ 
ciety reflected Utilitarian contempt for Oriental civilisation and his 
Minute reads like James Mill’s compositions 47 He advocated a root 
and branch policy to sweep away everything of the past and to write 
afresh. Macaulay pointed out that English books in India were 
much in demand whereas Sanskrit and Arabic books found practi¬ 
cally no purchasers. His object was to ‘form a class of persons, 
Indian in blood and in colour, but English in tastes, in opinions, and 
in morals and in intellect*. The Orientalists, led by Prinsep, thought 
it impracticable to make English the language of the people, and 
were of the opinion that the introduction of English would upset 
the existing arrangements and kill vernaculars. They urged that 
the stuff might be in a greater degree European, but must in all 
cases be interwoven with home-spun material. Macaulay, on the 
other hand, pointed out the plight of those students from Sanskrit 
College who found no employment anywhere, and considered that 
the dialects nad no value. Macaulay passed his Minute on to Ben¬ 
tinck and made the whole problem clearer and more intelligible than 
ever before and created a peculiar situation when solution—one 
way or the other naturally influenced by his threat of resignation— 


46 



ENGLISH EDUCATION 


could no longer be postponed. Bentinck grasped the reality and the 
intensity of the situation, and gave his entire concurrence to the 
sentiments expressed in Macaulay’s Minute. Macaulay was not the 
herald of the dawn. His thesis merely confirmed Bentinck’s opi¬ 
nions, who issued his Resolution of the 7th March, 1835, which 
stated: “The great object of the British Government ought to be 
the promotion of European literature and science among the natives 
of India; and that all the funds appropriated for the purpose of edu¬ 
cation would be best employed on English education alone.” 

It is not possible here to deal at length with the various criti¬ 
cisms of the new educational policy. Reference may only be made to 
a few of them. It has been held that the effect of English education 
has been to create a group sharply separated from their fellow In¬ 
dians, and almost setting up a new caste in this caste-ridden country. 
Nobody can deny the truth of this charge, so far at least as the 
best part of the nineteenth century is concerned. The main reason 
for this is the very small number of men who were educated in Eng¬ 
lish as compared with the rest who had no such education. Besides, 
the English-educated classes at first occupied higher administrative 
posts and this created a cleavage between them and the masses. 
Far worse was, however, a dual mentality which the English-edu¬ 
cated people had to maintain. Their liberal ideas found little favour 
with the orthodox members of the family, particularly the women 
folk who clung to the old traditional ideas, customs, and practices. 
The educated few might discuss the liberal principles among them¬ 
selves, in clubs or other associations, but fell in the old groovte as 
soon as they returned home. This existence as a sort of Jekyll and 
Hyde was not conducive, either to the mental peace or to the intel¬ 
lectual development of the class as a whole. This is one of the main 
reasons why Western education did not produce all the benefits that 
could be reasonably expected. 

There is, however, one criticism, often repeated even now, 
against the new educational policy which is due to misunderstanding. 
It has been regretted by many on the ground that it gave an undue 
favour to English against vernacular as the medium of instruction. 
As a matter of fact the decision merely meant that English, and not 
Sanskrit or Arabic, should be the medium of higher education. It 
had no reference to vernacular which would remain the medium 
of a system of national education embracing every village in the 
country. This was clearly laid down in the report of the Committee 
drawn up in the same year in which the above resolution about 
English education was passed. 47 * Even the Orientalists never 
fought for making vernaculars the medium of instruction. It was 


47 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

not a practical proposition in those days where, as in Bengal, verna¬ 
culars were not sufficiently developed to be Used as the vehicle of 
instruction in higher branches of literature and sciences. It was, 
however, given a fair trial in Bombay and the North-Western Pro¬ 
vinces, as will be shown later. But the vernacular literature in 
these two Provinces did not make progress in any way comparable 
to that in Bengal. 

The Orientalists, however, did not accept the new policy, lying 
down. As a protest, two of them retired from the Committee of Public 
Instruction. A petition, signed by , 10,000 Hindu inhabitants 
of Calcutta and of Zillas, was sent to the Court of Directors protest¬ 
ing against the Resolution of 1835. The Asiatic Society sent a me¬ 
morial to the local Government whereas the Court of Directors 
and the Board of Control were pressed hard by the strong remon¬ 
strances from the Royal Asiatic Society. For long the Home authorities 
were unwilling to send their orders on the subject of the changes in 
education in Bengal, 47b and Hobhouse, who replaced Charles Grant as 
President of the Board of Control, refrained from provoking another 
controversy 47 * and appreciated Auckland’s Minute of 24th Novem¬ 
ber, 1839. 4Td To Auckland both Macaulay and Prinsep represented 
extreme positions and here operated t{ie English sense of compromise 
which brought the issues comparatively nearer, and reconciled exist¬ 
ing differences of opinion. 47 * Auckland did not reverse Bentinck’s de¬ 
cision 4 ™ but modified it and restored to a certain extent the alto¬ 
gether neglected Oriental learning which met the approbation of 
the Court of Directors in their Despatch of 20th January, 1841, 
though they did not express any decided opinion on the medium of 
instruction. 

IV. GENERAL POLICY AND PROGRESS OF ENGLISH 

EDUCATION (1835-57). 

The Resolution of Lord William Bentinck gave a great impetus 
to the progress of English Education in India. Its effects were felt 
immediately in Bengal and gradually in the other Presidencies. 
Between 1835 and 1838 the number of seminaries of Public Instruc¬ 
tion in the Bengal Presidency rose to forty, and the number of stu¬ 
dents from about three thousand and four hundred to six thou¬ 
sand. 43 “The tide had set in”, wrote Trevelyan in 1838, “in favour 
of English education and when the Committee declared itself on the 
same side, the public support they received rather went beyond than 
fell short of what was required”. 49 A Resolution of another Go¬ 
vernor-General gave additional support to the cause of English edu- 




ENGLISH EDUCATION 


cation in India by making a knowledge of it essential for prospects 
in Government services. It was Lord Hardinge’s Educational Des¬ 
patch of 10th October, 1844, which declared that “in every possible 
case a preference shall be given in the selection of candidates for 
public employment to those who have been educated in the institu¬ 
tions thus established and specially to those who have distinguished 
themselves therein by more than ordinary degree of merit and attain¬ 
ment”. It was thought that the test for public services was to be 
conducted under the superintendence of the Council of Education, 
which had replaced the Committee of Public Instruction in Bengal 
(1842-43). ' 

In Bengal, the number of schools under the control of the Coun¬ 
cil of Education rose from 28 in 1843 to 151 in 1855, and the number 
of pupils from 4,632 in 1843 to 13,163 in 1855. Annual Government 
expenditure on education had only increased from Rs. 4,12,284, in 
1843 to Rs. 5,94,428 in 1855. 60 

In 1845 the Council of Education in Calcutta, under the Presi¬ 
dentship of Charles Hay Cameron, drew up a plan for a University 
in Calcutta, but it could not be implemented, probably because it 
was discountenanced by the authorities in England. There was 
some progress in the spread of English education in Bombay and 
Madras before 1854, due mainly to State efforts, though it did not 
compare favourably with what had been achieved in this respect 
in Bengal by that time. 

The subject of education received serious consideration of the 
Company’s Government on the eve of the renewal of the Charter 
of 1853. Lord Dalhousie himself took interest in mass education. 
He desired to “establish a complete class of vernacular schools, to 
extend throughout the whole of India, with a view to convey instruc¬ 
tion to the masses of the people.” He also proposed to place the 
higher education of the people, especially in Calcutta, on “a footing 
adequate to the wants of the community, and worthy of the Govern¬ 
ment of the Hon’ble Company”. With the encouragement of the 
Governor-General, the local Governments in Bengal, Bombay and 
the Panjab extended encouragement to vernacular education. Fur¬ 
ther, a Parliamentary Committee, appointed to inquire into the state 
of education, examined a number of witnesses including experienced 
persons like Trevelyan and Duff. 

A highly significant step regarding education in India was soon 
taken by the Company’s Government. It was the famous Educa¬ 
tional Despatch* No. 49, dated 19th July, 1854, which was drafted 
by Sir Charles Wood, President of the Board of Control, and for- 

49 


r.iM.n.—4 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


warded to India through the Court of Directors, and which imposed 
upon the Government the duty of “creating a properly articulated 
system of education, from the primary school to the University”. 

The Educational Despatch of 1854, described as the “Magna 
Carta of English Education in India”, formed a landmark in the his¬ 
tory of education in modren India, because it outlined a comprehen¬ 
sive plan which supplied the basis for the subsequent development 
of educational system in this country. This Despatch, the principles 
of which were confirmed by the Secretary of State for India in the 
Despatch of the 7th April, 1859, commended to the special attention 
of the Government of India “the improvement and far wider ex¬ 
tension of education, both English and vernacular”, and recommend¬ 
ed the following measures for the attainment of these objects:—1. 
the constitution of a separate department of the administration for 
education; 2. the institution of universities at the Presidency towns; 
3. the establishment of institutions for training teachers for all 
classes of schools; 4. the maintenance of the existing Government 
Colleges and High Schools and the increase of their number when 
necessary; 5. the establishment of new Middle Schools; 6. increased 
attention to vernacular schools, indigenous or others, for elementary 
education; and 7. the introduction of a system of grants-in-aid. The 
attention of the Government was “specially directed to the impor¬ 
tance of placing the means of acquiring useful and practical know¬ 
ledge within reach of the great mass of the people. The English 
language is to be the medium of instruction in the higher branches, 
and the vernacular in the lower. English is to be taught wherever 
there is a demand for it, but it is not to be substituted for the verna¬ 
cular languages of the country. The system of grants-in-aid is to 

be based on the principle of perfect religious neutrality.A 

comprehensive system of scholarships is to be instituted so as to 
connect lower schools with higher, and higher schools with colleges. 
Female education is to receive the frank and cordial support of 
Government”. 

In accordance with the recommendation of Wood’s Despatch 
steps were soon taken “to form an Education Department in each of 
the great territorial divisions of India as then constituted, and be¬ 
fore the end of 1856, the new system was fairly at work. The for¬ 
mation of the separate Departments continued over a period of about 
12 years, from 1854-55 in the larger provinces to 1866-67 in the Hy¬ 
derabad Assigned Districts”. 61 

A Director of Public Instruction was appointed in each Pro¬ 
vince, with a staff of Inspectors and Deputy or Assistant Inspectors. 


50 



ENGLISH EDUCATION 


This organization of inspection and control continued ‘substantially 
unchanged’ in the subsequent periods with such additioirs or altera¬ 
tions as were required by the formation of new territorial divisions 
or by the amalgamation of old ones. The Education Department in 
each Province came directly under the Provincial Government. - 
Under this arrangement the Education Departments became more or 
less officialised in character. It has been rightly pointed out by 
Prof. Dodwell that the men in charge of these Departments being 
‘primarily administrators’, education “tended to become a matter of 
administration and routines”. 52 The anomaly has continued more 
or less till now. 

Within a few years after 1854 the political atmosphere in India 
was greatly ruffled by the outbreak of 1857. Yet, this year has a 
great significance in the history of Indian education, for it witnessed 
the establishment of three Indian universities on the lines of princi¬ 
ples laid down in the Despatch of 1854. It was noted in that Des¬ 
patch that “the time has now arrived for the establishment of univer¬ 
sities in India, which may encourage a regular and liberal course of 
education, by conferring academical degrees, as evidence of attain¬ 
ments in the different branches of arts and science and by adding 
marks of honour for those who may desire to compete for honorary 
distinction”. The University of London was to serve as the model 
for the Indian universities, whose function was “to be to confer de¬ 
grees upon such persons, as having been entered as candidates ac¬ 
cording to the rules which may be fixed in this respect, and having 
produced from any of the ‘affiliated institutions’ ... certificates 
of conduct, and of having pursued a regular course of study for 
a given time shall have also passed at the Universities such an exa¬ 
mination as may be required of them”. 

The University of Calcutta was incorporated by an Act, passed 
on the 24th January, 1857; the University of Bombay by an Act pas¬ 
sed on the 18th July, 1857; and the University of Madras, by an Act 
passed on the 5th September, 1857. The affairs of each University 
were to be managed by a Chancellor and a Senate consisting of 
the Vice-Chancellor and Fellows who were mainly Government ser¬ 
vants. To start with, the Calcutta University Senate had thirty- 
eight members of whom six were Indians, while in the Bombay 
University there were five Indians in a Senate of twenty-nine, and 
in the Madras University three Indians out of forty members. The 
Governor-General was the Chancellor of the Calcutta University, 
while the Governors of Bombay and Madras were the Chancellors, 
respectively, of the two Universities there. \ Regarding higher edu¬ 
cation the spheres of control of the Universities of Bombay and 

51 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUHTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—□ 

* 

Madras were the territorial jurisdictions of the respective Presiden¬ 
cies and Native States of Western and Southern India, while that 
of the Calcutta University extended over the whole of Northern In¬ 
dia, the Central Provinces and British Burma. 

Each of these Universities had at first the four Faculties, namely 
those of Arts cum Science, Law, Medicine and Engineering, to which 
was added subsequently a separate Science Faculty. These Universi¬ 
ties remained affiliating and examining bodies. The recommenda¬ 
tion of the Despatch of 1854 for the institution of Professorships 
“for the purpose of delivery of lectures in the various branches of 
learning” was rejected by Lord Dalhousie on the ground that the Uni¬ 
versities would not be qualified to supervise actual tuition. 63 The 
teaching was imparted in the colleges,—Government, missionary and 
private. Some High Schools had College classes, and several Col¬ 
leges arranged classes in school-courses. Most of the colleges in 
this period provided education in Arts. As regards technical colleges, 
there were two Colleges of Engineering, one started at Roorkee in 
the North-Western Provinces in 1847 and the other was the Calcutta 
College of Engineering, opened at the Writers’ Buildings, Calcutta, 
in November, 1856, amalgamated with the Presidency College in 
1865. and shifted to Sibpur in 1880. The Overseer’s school of Poona 
was raised to the status of the Poona College of Engineering and 
affiliated to the Bombay University in 1858. In the Madras Presi¬ 
dency the industrial school attached to the Gun Carriage Factory be¬ 
came Guindy College of Engineering and was affiliated to the Mad¬ 
ras University in 1858. Medical training was being imparted in the 
Medical Colleges in Calcutta, Bombay and Madras, and in the 
Lahore Medical School. Law Departments were attached to Arts 
Colleges and separate Law Colleges came into existence later. 

V, GENERAL POLICY AND PROGRESS OF ENGLISH 

EDUCATION (1858-1905). 

During the period between 1857 and 1882 there was an increase 
in the number of Colleges and students in the three Universities. 
At the first Entrance Examinations of the three Universities, 219 
students came out successful,—162 (out of 244 candidates) in Cal¬ 
cutta, 21 in Bombay, and 36 in Madras. In 1882, out of 7,429 candi¬ 
dates. who appeared at the Entrance Examination, 2,778 were suc¬ 
cessful. India had 27 Colleges in 1857 and the number rose to 72 in 
1882. “During, the first 14 years 2,666 ca.ididates passed the First 
Arts (Intermediate) Examination, 850, the B.A. Examination, and 
151, the M.A. During the next 11 years the corresponding numbers 
were 5,969, 2.434, and 385”. 


52 




ENGLISH EDUCATION 


The growth in the numerical strength of students and the consi¬ 
deration of the extensive areas of jurisdiction of the existing Uni¬ 
versities led to the establishment of two other Universities during 
the nineteenth century. These were the University of Lahore and 
the University of Allahabad. In Lahore the movement for a Uni¬ 
versity was started by some influential persons, backed by the Lieu¬ 
tenant Governor, Sir Donald Macleod. They demanded an Oriental 
University, which, besides promoting the study of Eastern classics 
and vernacular languages of the country, was also to encourage 
the study of English language and Western science. In August, 
1867, the British Indian Association of the North-Western Provinces 
(modem United Provinces) submitted a petition to the Governor- 
General indicating the defects of the prevailing educational system 
and recommending the establishment in the Province of a Univer¬ 
sity in which “the Eastern classics and the vernacular would be duly 
encouraged side by side with English education”. For certain rea¬ 
sons the Government of India did not agree to these demands, but 
sanctioned in December, 1869, the establishment of the Lahore Uni¬ 
versity College. The specific objects of this College were “to pro¬ 
mote the diffusion of European Science, as far as possible, through 
the medium of vernacular languages of the Punjab, and the improve¬ 
ment and extension of vernacular literature generally”, and to 
“afford encouragement to the enlightened study of Eastern classical 
languages and literature”. It was at the same time declared that 
“every encouragement would be afforded to the study of the English 
language and literature; and in all subjects which cannot be com¬ 
pletely taught in the vernacular, the English language would be re¬ 
garded as the medium of instruction and examination”. 54 A large 
number of institutions were affiliated to the Lahore University Col¬ 
lege and its activities expanded for a decade before another demand 
for a University in the Punjab was put forth. The Government of 
Lord Ripon acceded to this demand and a notification of the Punjab 
Government, dated the 14th October, 1882, formally constituted the 
Punjab University with the Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab 
as its Chancellor and with a constitution more or less similar to 
those of the other Indian Universities. The total number of Arts 
Colleges in India (excluding Burma and Ajmer) in 1881-82 were 
59 with 5399 students. 55 

The Allahabad University was incorporated by an Act, dated 
the 23rd September, 1887, with a constitution closely resembling 
that of the University of Calcutta. 

On the 3rd February, 1882, the Government of India appointed 
a Commission with Sir W. W. Hunter as its President, “to enquire 

53 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


particularly into ^he manner in which effect had been given to the 
principles of the Despatch of 1854, and to suggest such measures 
as might seem desirable in order to further carrying out of the policy 
therein laid down”. Though the chief object of inquiry of this Com¬ 
mission was to be the “present state of elementary education and the 
means by which this can everywhere be extended and improved”, 
it collected plenty of useful information about collegiate education, 
especially regarding attendance, fees, discipline and later career of 
the students. Some of its important recommendations were:—1. 
withdrawal of State from direct management and support of institu¬ 
tions for higher education should be by slow and cautious steps; 
2. provision to be made for ordinary financial aid and special grants 
to Colleges; 3. “in order to encourage diversity of culture, both 
on the literary and on the physical side”, there should be provision 
in all the larger colleges, Government and aided, “for more than 
one of the alternative courses laid down by the Universities”; 4. “an 
attempt to be made to prepare a moral text-book, based upon the 
fundamental principles of natural religion, such as may be taught 
in all Government and non-Government colleges”; 5. “the Princi¬ 
pal or one of the Professors in each Government and aided college 
to deliver to each of the college classes in every session in all Go¬ 
vernment and non-Government colleges a series of lectures on the 
duties of a man and a citizen”. 6. observance of certain general 
principles for college fees and exemption from these and attendance; 
7. framing new regulations for grant of scholarships. 

With its conviction that “it is no less essential to the welfare 
of the community that provision should be made for the maintenance 
and development of colleges and schools of the higher class” 66 than 
the development of elementary education, the Hunter Commission 
made twenty-three recommendations on the subject of secondary 
education, the more important of which were as follows:—1. “In the 
upper classes of high schools there should be two divisions,—one 
leading to the entrance examination of the universities, the other 
of a more practical character intended to fit youths for commercial, 
or other non-literary pursuits; 2. provision should be made in res¬ 
pect of grant for the formation and maintenance of libraries in all 
high schools and for furniture and apparatus of instruction; 3. new 
rules should be framed for charging fees from students and for grants 
of scholarships to them; 4. “it be distinctly laid down that the rela¬ 
tion of the state to secondary is different from its relation to primary 
education, in that the means of primary education may be provided 
without regard to the existence of local co-operation, while it is ordi¬ 
narily expedient to provide the means of secondary education only 


54 


ENGLISH EDUCATION 


where adequate local co-operation is forthcoming, and that there¬ 
fore, in all ordinary cases, secondary schools for instruction in Eng¬ 
lish be hereafter established by the State preferably on the footing 
of the system of grants-in-aids” 

The Government of India approved of nearly all the recommen¬ 
dations of the Hunter Commission. In a Resolution, dated the 
23rd October, 1884, recorded in the Home Department, the Governor- 
General in Council reviewed the Report of the” Hunter Commission, 
and laid down for the future guidance of Local Governments and 
Administrators the main lines of the educational policy which the 
Government of India intended to pursue. In expressing his approval 
of this Resolution, the Secretary of State for India communicated 
the following instructions to the Government of India: “In order 
to stimuate the efforts of the various authorities in the promotion 
of education on the lines now laid down, it would, I think, be well 
if your Excellency in Council would direct the preparation of Ge¬ 
neral Annual Report, embracing the important features of the several 
provincial reports (including Madras and Bombay), transmit copies 
of the same to the Secretary of State, with a Resolution by the Go¬ 
vernment of India reviewing such General Report”. According to 
these instructions the work of preparing the General Report was 
first entrusted to Sir Alfred Croft, Director of Public Instruction in 
Bengal, whose ‘Review of Education in India in 1886’ is a valuable 
record containing detailed information on the subject. 

With occasional fluctuations due to natural calamities like pla¬ 
gue or famine, there was, by the close of the nineteenth century, in¬ 
crease in the number of institutions as well as students. At the end 
of the year 1901-2, about 4,000,000 students were receiving instruc¬ 
tion in nearly 105,000 public institutions of various grades, and 
more than 600,000 pupils were under instruction in about 43,000 
private institutions outside the scope of the Department of Public 
Instruction. More than 17,500 undergraduates were by that year 
getting education in 145 Arts Colleges, while there was a total en¬ 
rolment of 5,400 students in 46 colleges meant for teaching of law, 
medicine, and other professional studies.* From 1881-82 the number 
of pupils in secondary schools had increased by 180 per cent, and that 
in primary schools by 49 per cent. On the whole there was quanti¬ 
tative expansion of education. But even then there was staggering 
illiteracy of the vast masses of the people of India. According 
to the census of 1901 “the proportion of persons able to read and 
write to the total population was 98 per 1,000 in the case of males, 
and 7 per 1,000 in the case of females.” As regards Primary Edu¬ 
cation of the masses, the declarations of the despatch of 1854 and 


55 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


of the Education Commission of 1882, though reaffirmed by the Go¬ 
vernment several times, remained more or less barren of good re¬ 
sults, both from qualitative and quantitative points of view. By the 
end of 1901-2 “only about one-sixth of the boys of school-going age 
(calculated at 15 per cent, of the total male population) were fol¬ 
lowing the primary course in public institutions”. 

The period of Lord Curzon’s administration was marked by 
some striking changes in the sphere of education as in the other 
branches. Insistently there beats through Curzon’s utterances the 
urge to frame a sound educational policy. He realized that there 
was something rotten in the State of Denmark. For years educa¬ 
tion had been muddling along. In primary education four out of 
every five Indian villages were found to be without a school; three 
out of every four Indian boys grew up without education, and only 
one Indian girl in every 40 attended any kind of school. 57 Curzon 
thought that primary education was languishing nearly everywhere 
for want of funds. 68 Secondary schools really sapped the brain 
power as well as the physical strength of the rising generation. 59 
In higher education, the position seemed to him still worse. The 
standards of teaching and learning were equally low. 60 Curzon 
saw in his mind’s eye the students driven like sheep from lecture 
room to lecture room and from examination to examination. Though 
the members of the Indian Universities Commission (1902) saw no 
reason to regret the decision of the Government in 1854, 61 Curzon 
drew a very depressing picture of the state of education in his time: 
the text-books prescribed were badly chosen; degrees were pursued 
for their commercial value; the Senates were over-swollen with 
members, whose aims were not academic; and the Syndicates were 
devoid of statutory powers. 62 Only 2$% of the female population 
of school-going age attended schools. 63 Everywhere words rather 
than ideas were studied. 64 There was too slavish an imitation of 
the European model, 65 and the members of the Indian Universities 
Commission admitted that teaching had been made subsidiary to 
examination. 66 Instead of thinking only of the mental and moral 
development, teachers were preoccupied with percentages, passes 
and tabulated results. 67 An Indian University was not even a collec¬ 
tion of buildings. No wonder Curzon felt despondent as to the effi¬ 
cacy and standards of a system which showed by statistics that out 
of the thousands of young men, who sat for the matriculation exami¬ 
nation of the various universities, only 1 in 17 ultimately took a 
degree 68 and Curzon wondered whether the preceding stages Vrere 
not too easy. To Curzon the whole system was at fault and remind¬ 
ed him of the days of Hebrew judges when there was no king in 
Israel. 69 


56 


ENGtdSH EDUCATION 


The above facts about education fired him with a burning zeal 
to take up the subject of educational reform. In pursuance of his 
policy of thoroughness and efficiency, Lord Curzon sought to reorga¬ 
nize the educational system and to effectively control the educational 
institutions of the country. After a preliminary survey, the Viceroy 
summoned in September, 1901, a conference of chief education 
officers at Simla “to consider the system of education in India”. On 
the 27th January, 1902, his Government appointed a Universities 
Commission “to inquire into the conditions and prospects of the Indian 
Universities, to report upon proposals which might improve their 
constitution and working, and to recommend such measures as might 
tend to elevate the standard of University teaching and to promote 
the advancement of learning”. 70 The Commission was presided 
over by Mr. (afterwards, Sir) Thomas Raleigh, Legal Member of the 
Viceroy’s Executive Council. The members included Mr. Syed Hus.- 
ain Bilgrami, Director of Public Instruction in the Nizam’s Domi¬ 
nions, and when the Hindu community complained that it was un¬ 
represented, Mr. Justice Gurudas Banerjee, a Judge of the Calcutta 
High Court, was added to the Commission. 71 

The Commission visited all the universities and a number of 
affiliated colleges during its three months tour and submitted its 
Report in June, 1902. Its principal recommendations were as 
follows:— 

“1. The legal powers of the older universities should be en¬ 
larged so that all the universities may be recognised as Teaching 
Bodies, but the local limits of each university should be more accu¬ 
rately defined and steps taken to remove from the Calcutta Univer¬ 
sity the affiliated colleges in the Central Provinces, United Provinces, 
etc.” 

• 

2. The Senate, the Syndicate and the Faculties have to be re¬ 
organised and made more representative than before. 

3. More stringent conditions were to be imposed for the recog¬ 
nition of affiliated institutions, and there should be insistence on the 
better equipment of affiliated colleges, and supervision of the disci¬ 
pline of students and their places of residence. 

4. There should be a properly constituted Governing Body for 
each College. 

5. Suggestions were made for important changes in the cour¬ 
ses of study and methods of examination. 

6. That a minimum rate of college fees should be fixOd. 

57 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-II 


7. That Second-grade colleges (teaching only up to the I.A. 
standard) should be gradually abolished. 

8. That the system of teaching law by law classes attached to 
Arts colleges should be modified. 

The Government expressed general approval of the Commis¬ 
sion’s recommendations except the last three, on which further in¬ 
quiries were to be made before coming to a final decision. The Re¬ 
port of the Commission and the Government comments were publish¬ 
ed in October, 1902, and they were at once subjected to severe oppo¬ 
sition by the Indians of all classes. The main point of attack was 
that if the recommendations were given effect to, Senates and Syndi¬ 
cates would be officialised and the Universities would be practically 
converted into Government Departments. A big public meeting 
was held in the Calcutta Town Hall to protest against the recom¬ 
mendations, and “old men, bent down with the weight of years”, as 
Surendra-nath Banerji put it, “came tottering to place on record their 
protest against the recommendations of the Commission.” 72 Phe- 
rozeshah Mehta took a leading part in opposing the recommenda¬ 
tions, and the Indian National Congress, in its session at Ahmadabad 
in 1902, passed a comprehensive resolution on the subject, which is 
partly quoted below:— 

“That this Congress views with the greatest alarm many of the 
Commission’s recommendations, the acceptance of which will, in its 
opinion, reverse the policy steadily pursued during the last half-a- 
century by the British Government in the matter of higher educa¬ 
tion, by checking its spread and restricting its scope, and by virtually 
destroying su6{i limited independence as the Universities at present 
enjoy.” 

In addition to the last three recommendations, specified above, 
the Congress strongly objected, in particular, to (a) the introduction 
of a rigidly uniform course of studies throughout the country; (b) the 
virtual licensing of all secondary education; and (c) the officialisa- 
tion of the Senate and the Syndicate and the practical conversion of 
the University into a Department of Government. 

On 21 March, 1904, was passed the Indian Universities Act, bas¬ 
ed mainly on the recommendations of the Education Commission of 
1902. The Act fixed the number of Ordinary Fellows at a minimum 
of fifty and a maximum of one hundred for the three older universi¬ 
ties, and at a minimum of forty and maximum of seventy-five for the 
other two. These numbers were exclusive of the Chancellor, the Vice- 
Chancellor, the Rector of the Calcutta University, and the ex-officio 


58 


ENGLISH EDUCATION 


Fellows, who were also members of the Senate and whose maximum 
number was fixed at ten for each University. The tenure of office of 
the ordinary members was limited to a period of five years. The Act 
fixed the number of elected Fellows at twenty for the three older uni¬ 
versities and fifteen for the other two. The Syndicate of a University 
was to consist of the Vice-Chancellor, the Director of Public Instruc¬ 
tion and not less than seven or more than fifteen Fellows, “elected by 
the Senate or by the Faculties in such manner as may be provided by 
the regulations”. Adequate representation of university teachers 
on the Syndicates was to be provided. The university was to have 
enhanced powers of supervision over the affiliated colleges and con¬ 
ditions for the affiliation of new ones were made more stringent (one 
of the immediate effects was reduction in the number of affiliated 
colleges). All affiliations and disaffiliations of colleges were to be 
finally settled by the Government; appointments of Professors, Rea¬ 
ders and Lecturers were subject to the approval of the Government; 
and many details of university policy were subject to Government 
supervision. “Practically nothing was to be done without the ap¬ 
proval of the Government”. 73 

An important feature of the Act was provision by the universi¬ 
ties for the “instruction of students, with power to appoint univer¬ 
sity Professors and Lecturers, to hold and manage educational en¬ 
dowments, to erect, equip and maintain university laboratories and 
museums, to make regulations relating to the residence and conduct 
of students, and to do all acts which tend to the promotion of study 
and research”. It was not, however, applied for many years in most 
of the Universities, though the Calcutta University under the guid¬ 
ance of its most distinguished Vice-Chancellor, Sir Ashutosh Mooker- 
jee, started post-graduate teaching in the University within a few 
years. 

The Bill, which was ultimately passed into the Indian Univer¬ 
sities Act of 1904, was strongly opposed by the Indian public. The 
Indian National Congress, in its Madras Session, 1903, entered its 
protest against the general principles of the Bill which, if passed into 
law, “will have the effect of restricting the area of education and 
completely destroying the independence of the Universities upon 
which largely depend their efficiency and usefulness...” The Con¬ 
gress also made a number of constructive suggestions for modifying 
the Bill. There was a protracted debate upon the Bill in the Coun¬ 
cil where a bitter attack was made upon it by G. K. Gokhale. 

As could be expected, Lord Curzon did not pay much heed to 
the public criticism, and vigorously defended the Bill. He said he 


59 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-11 

did not regret the battle or the storm waged over the University 
legislation, for he was “firmly convinced that out of them had been 
born a new life for Higher Education in India”. 74 He defended the 
sincere aims of the Simla Conference which had been denounced as 
“some dark and sinister conspiracy”. 76 He regarded the Univer¬ 
sity legislation and the form that sprang from it as a decree of eman¬ 
cipation, 76 and believed that it had put education on a sounder foot¬ 
ing. One of his biographers, Lovat Fraser, has nothing but 
enthusiastic praise for the Act, and even went so far as to say, in 

1911, that “many who were at first alarmed are ready to admit with 

% 

alacrity that it has had admirable results”. 77 On the other hand, 
another biographer, Earl of Ronaldshay, mournfully admits that the 
high hopes entertained by Lord Curzon were far from being realized. 
He is perhaps nearer the truth. But it is only fair to point out that 
the public criticism of the measure was not duly tempered by a con¬ 
sideration of the actual state of things prevailing at the time. 
There is no doubt that the Senate, the supreme governing body, was 
unwieldy, and its composition was not dictated by academic inte¬ 
rest. The Senate of the Calcutta, Madras and Bombay University had, 
respectively, 180, 197 and 310 members, called Fellows, some of 
whom could hardly sign their names. 78 The Fellowship in those 
days, like Justice of the Peace, was regarded as an honour, and 
academic distinctions were hardly considered as a requisite quali¬ 
fication for its selection. 79 It would be idle to deny also that some, 
if not many, of the educational institutions, in those days, were run 
more as profitable business concerns than as academic institutions 
for imparting education and developing character. It is undoubt¬ 
edly true that the legislation of 1904 tightened the control of Gov¬ 
ernment over higher education, but it may be pertinently asked, 
whether any other agency could remove the aforesaid abuses, and 
make the University, which was merely an examining body, an 
institution for higher study and research also. It is true that all 
the Universities had not been transformed as much as Lord Curzon 
hoped they would. But the example of the Calcutta University during 
the next twenty years showed what great improvements were 
possible within the framework of the Act of 1904, in spite of the 
handicaps imposed by it. There is some truth in the observations 
of Mr. Chailley, a Frenchman and an umprejudiced commentator, 
that the Universities Act of 1904 “constitutes the real charter of 
present day education in India”. 80 

VI. VERNACULAR AND PRIMARY EDUCATION. 81 

* 

The state of indigenous education in Bengal about the begin¬ 
ning of the period under review has been described briefly in the 


60 


ENGLISH EDUCATION 


preceding chapter on the basis of Adam’s Report. 81 * More or less 
the same' state of things prevailed in other parts of India, though 
the extent to which the elementary education spread among the 
masses, and the subjects or detailed syllabus of higher education 
must have varied in different parts of the country. 

When Adam presented his first report on the intellectual con¬ 
dition of the people, he was greatly impressed by the large number 
of village schools scattered over Bengal and Bihar which convinced 
him of a deep-seated desire in the minds of parents, even of the 
humblest classes, to give education to their children. But his second 
and third reports on education brought out the defects in the sys¬ 
tem that had at first seemed so satisfactory, and he modified his 
earlier opinions and presented a melancholy picture of the depres¬ 
sed state of instruction as it existed amongst the masses of the 
Indian population. 

Adam wrote that, considering only the population of teachable 
age, in Natore (Rajshahi district) the proportion of instructed to 
uninstructed was 132 to 1000, but that in the whole adult male popu¬ 
lation, the proportion of instructed to uninstructed was 114.6 to 
1000. Adam’s reports indicate that of children of school-going age 
in Bengal, there were only 7.75 per cent, who received instruction 
of any kind, even the most elementary. William Ward supposed 
that of the persons grown up to maturity among the male popula¬ 
tion in Bengal, not more than 200 in 1000 could read, and women 
were almost in every instance unable to do so. The Board of Re¬ 
venue observed that only 1 in 67 was receiving education in the 
territories under the Madras Presidency, but Sir Thomas Munro 
estimated the portion of male population who received school educa¬ 
tion to be nearer to one-third rather than one-fourth of the whole. 
In his valuable report, A. D. Campbell points out that in Bellary 
district not more than 7 individuals in a 1000 of the entire popula¬ 
tion attended schools. In Delhi territory, Metcalfe’s report shows 
a percentage of about 10. Inquiries conducted by the Government 
of North-Western Provinces indicated that the greatest ignorance 
prevailed amongst the people throughout those provinces, and that 
there were no adequate means for affording them instruction. 
W. D. Arnold was confronted with a population in the Panjab which 
was ignorant of the history and geography of its own province and 
knew little beyond elementary arithmetic. In Lande schools 82 in the 
Panjab, children wrote in a character which neither they them¬ 
selves nor anybody else could decipher an hour after it had been 
written. Richard Jenkins, Resident at Nagpur, found that with 
the exception of the children of Brahmans and merchants, all the 


f>t 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AnD INDIAN RENAISSANCB-II 

other classes were extremely illiterate. Dubois, who knew. Southern 
India very well, records that there was no public institution which 
was, properly speaking, devoted to the diffusion of knowledge. 
Lord Moira notes that the want of instruction in the territory' of 
Rajputana might be judged by the fact that “the first Minister of Jey- 
pore, otherwise a man of ability, could not write and could scarcely 
read’. 83 With, individual exceptions, the female population of the 
teachable age was growing up without any knowledge of reading 
and writing, though W. D. Arnold mentions that female education 
was to be found in many parts in the Panjab. 

Those who attacked traditional learning did so on the ground 
that teachers were not qualified and followed other professions to 
eke out their income. Many Pandits had never seen a printed book 
and even manuscripts were unknown to them. The majority of 
them were superficial even according to the standard of their coun¬ 
trymen. Agricultural and commercial accounts became the sum- 
mum bonum which circumscribed rather than enlarged the minds 
of pupils, and there was no attempt whatsoever to acquire the ortho¬ 
graphy of the language of the country, or a knowledge of its geogra¬ 
phy ox history. In Muhammadan schools, the loose system of pri¬ 
vate tuition largely prevailed and though Muslim priests committed 
to memory substantial portions of the Quran, very few really under¬ 
stood its meaning or could explain Muslim law. Missionaries con¬ 
demned the Indian teacher for imparting instruction from books 
which contained no ‘moral truths’. Works of Saadi were re* for 
enjoyment and Sir Thomas Munro 84 ridiculed the story of Maj nun. 
Persian was studied both by the Hindus and Muslims, and was con¬ 
sidered an accomplishment in a gentleman and a passport for em¬ 
ployment in revenue and judicial administration. 

On the content of instruction imparted, the Evangelical Charles 
Grant, the sympathetic Thomas Munro, the candid Heber, the Bap¬ 
tist Ward, the fervent Lord Moira, the Orientalist Wilson, the calcu¬ 
lating Rammohan Roy, the zealous C. E. Trevelyan, and the pains¬ 
taking missionary Adam said trenchant things and their portrait of 
indigenous learning is by no means favourable. The learned Brah¬ 
mans had told ‘Mr. Prinsep that the British system was most rational 
but that their own answered all their purposes’. 86 The worst 
feature of the indigenous system was that learning tended towards 
pedantry, mere automatism and an exercise of memory only. It 
turned out accomplished Pandits and Maulvis who possessed the 
logical finesse of the Medieval schoolmen. There were child pro¬ 
digies who performed amazing feats in multiplication tables. But 
advanced learning was confined to a group, exclusive, scholastic and 


62 


ENGLISH EDUCATION 


unworldly at times, but somewhat rigid, which could not share its 
rewards with the ignorant mass of the people. And being steeped 
in the austerities of scholastic learning, these well-meaning men 
wrote commentaries on the accumulated wisdom of the past, knew 
but a small portion of the world, and lacked breadth and sweep of 
vision. Their scheme of knowledge ignored man and his role in 
society and nature; they sought things in words and quoted texts 
with unquestioning trust; their minds were used to receiving opi¬ 
nions from authority and they imitated models which set manners 
over matter. 

The entire system of indigenous learning depended mainly on 
the support and voluntary contribution of opulent Hindu and Mus¬ 
lim families ( Zamindars , Talukdars and shopkeepers), charity lands, 
or inducements given to scholars by gifts of money, or in the form 
of shelter, clothing and often food. The teacher depended on en¬ 
dowments and patronage, and students were given stipends for pro¬ 
secuting their studies. Students seldom paid their teachers. Adam’s 
idea of basing all schemes of Indian education on the existing indi¬ 
genous system, though considered impracticable by Lord Auckland 
and by the Committee of Public Instruction, was taken up by Tho¬ 
mason, Lieutenant-Governor of. North-Western Provinces, whose 
plan was recommended as a model for general adoption by the Gov¬ 
ernment. 

The question of primary and indigenous system of educa¬ 
tion was taken up in the Despatch of 1854. Besides emphasiz¬ 
ing on higher collegiate education, the Court of Directors ex¬ 
pressed in this Despatch the view that “attention should 

now be directed to a consideration-how useful and practical 

knowledge, suited to every station in life, may be best conveyed to 
the great mass of the people”. They wanted for this that “schools 
—whose object should be not to train highly a few youths, but to 
provide more opportunities than now exist for the acquisition of 
such an improved education as will make those who possess it more 
useful members of society in every condition of life—should exist 
in every district in India”. The attention of the Government 
during the period from 1854 to 1871 was directed not only to the 
Drovision of education through the vernacular languages of the 
country but also “to the increase of schools of secondary education”. 
There were three classes of secondary schools,—the High English 
Schools, the Middle English Schools and the Vernacular Schools. 
The Reports of the successive reviews of the progress of education 
in India undertaken by the Home authorities (the British Govern¬ 
ment) in 1859, 1863 and 1864 laid emphasis on the need of extending 


63 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE)—II 

elementary education among the masses in particular. So in the 
period from 1871 to 1882 in which the control of education was 
transferred to the local Governments, the extension of secondary 
education was ‘‘much less markisd than that of primary education, 
for the support and development of which local cesses had been 
raised in most Provinces”. 86 In Bengal, the Lieutenant-Governor, 
Sir George Campbell, declared in a Resolution, dated 30th Septem¬ 
ber, 1872, that he desired extension of education among the masses 
and granted for this four lakhs of rupees to make a beginning. 

Between 1870-71 and 1881-82 the total number of primary 
schools in India (excluding Burma and Ajmer) increased from 
16,473, to 82,916 or more than five-fold; while the total number of 
pupils increased from 607,320 to 2,061, 541 or more than threefold. 
Increase in schools, more than in pupils, was due chiefly to the fact 
that a latge number of indigenous schools in Bengal were brought 
under the grant-in-aid system. 87 The total number of secondary 
schools in India increased from 3,070 in 1871 to 3,916 in 1881-82, 
while in the number of pupils there was a much smaller propor¬ 
tionate increase, that is, from 202,294 to 214,077. 88 

The extension of elementary education in England had for 
many years interested Ripon who took the Despatch of 1854 as his 
model for the expansion of education in India. The dispropor¬ 
tionate expenditure of over 80% of the money on less than a sixth 
of the total number of students was obviously at variance with the 
policy of wide diffusion of education among all classes. 89 The Hun¬ 
ter Commission of 1882, referred to above, was appointed chiefly 
to review the working of the system and to propose ways of ex¬ 
tending elementary education. The Commission submitted its re¬ 
port in October, 1883, and its thirty-six recommendations about pri¬ 
mary education opened a new chapter in its history. “We there¬ 
fore express our conviction” wrote this Commission, “that while 
every branch of education can justly claim the fostering care of the 
State, it is desirable in the present circumstances of the country, to 
declare the elementary education of the masses, its provision, ex¬ 
tension, and improvement, to be the part of the educational system 
to which the strenuous efforts of the State should now be directed 
in a still larger measure than herebefore”. 90 The more important 
of these recommendations laid down that (i) “primary education 
be regarded as the instruction of the masses through the vernacular 
in such subjects as will best fit them for their position in life, and 
be not necessarily regarded as a portion of instruction leading up 
to the University”; (2) “an attempt be made to secure the fullest 
possible provision for an extension of primary education by legis- 


64 



ENGLISH EDUCATION 


lation suited to the circumstances of each Province”; (3) “Where 
indigenous schools exist, the principle of aiding and improving them 
be recognised as an important means' of extending elementary edu¬ 
cation”; (4) “primary education be declared to be that part of the 
whole system of public instruction which possesses an almost ex¬ 
clusive claim on local funds set apart for education, and a large 
claim on provincial revenues”; (5) “both Municipal and Local Self- 
Government Boards keep a separate school-fund”. There were also 
recommendations for inspection and supervision, encouragement of 

night schools wherever possible, elasticity as regards the hours of 

% 

the days and the seasons of the year during which attendance of 
scholars is required, religious teaching, Normal schools etc. 91 With 
the growth of Local Self-Government after 1882, the Local Boards 
and Municipalities were entrusted with powers for management of 
schools. 

VII. FEMALE EDUCATION. 

The uplift of women has been one of the most significant trends 
of New India, and it has been furthered by progress of education 
among them. During the first half of the nineteenth century, some 
members of the aristocratic Indian families, guided chiefly by con¬ 
siderations of management of estates, and the Christian missionaries, 
prompted by religious zeal for the propagation of their faith, took 
interest in female education. An enlightened public opinion in 
favour of it was also gathering momentum, though most of the 
members of the orthodox sections of the community were opposed 
to it. 92 In fact, very little was achieved in respect of female educa¬ 
tion till the mid-nineteenth century and the Government of the East 
India Company remained indifferent to it though it was respon¬ 
sible for some other important social reforms. 

Since then female education received support from diffe¬ 
rent quarters, though its progress was rather slow. It receiv¬ 
ed considerable impetus from the modern movements for social re¬ 
forms. The women had a great defender of their rights in Raja Ram- 
mohan Roy, and the Brahma Samaj has a record of conspicuous ser¬ 
vices for their advancement. Some prominent members of this 
Samaj started, from time to time, journals for promotion of educa¬ 
tion and culture among women, viz. (a) the Bdmabodhint# started in 
1863 and edited by Umesh-chandra Datta; (b), the Abaldbandhava, 
started about 1869 by Dwaraka-nath Ganguli; (c) the Mahila, edited 
by Girish-chandra Sen; (d) the Antahpura, started by Sasipada 
Banerji; (e) the Bharatt started by Dwijendra-nath Tagore and 
long edited by his accomplished sister Swarna-kuiriari Ghosal and her 
talented daughters; (f) the Bh&ratamahiM, and (g) Suprabhdt, start- 

65 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCB-II 

ed by two graduate sisters, Kumudini and Basanti Mitra. The Arya 
Samaj made arrangements for women's education through institu¬ 
tions like Mahakanya Vidyalaya at Jullundur in the Panjab, and 
some others started here and there. Gradually secondary and pri¬ 
mary schools sprang up under the supervision of its. branches in 
different parts of India. The Prarthana Samaj arid the Deccan 
Education Society also made important contributions to the cause 
of female education. The Indian Social Conference, meeting every 
year with the annual session of the Indian National Congress, passed 
resolutions advocating extension of female education. 

It took several years before the Government's apathy towards 
female education was removed. The formation of the Hindu Balika 
Vidyalaya in Calcutta in 1849, with eleven students, due to the efforts 
of Hon’ble J. E. Drinkwater Bethune, Legal Member of the Gover¬ 
nor-General’s Council and President of the Council of Education, 
and of Pandit Isvar-chandra Vidyasagar, one of the greatest edu¬ 
cationists and social reformers of modern India, marked a turn¬ 
ing-point in the history of female education in our country. Though 
many in Calcutta vehemently opposed it, Mr. Bethune received con¬ 
siderable • support from some influential persons. The Governor- 
General, Lord Dalhousie, recorded in his Minute, dated the 1st April, 
1850, that Mr. Bethune “has done a great work in the successful in¬ 
troduction of Native Female Education in India, on a sound and solid 
foundation; and has earned a right not only to the gratitude of the 
Government but to its frank and cordial support”. 

Sir Charles Wood’s Despatch of 1854 thus remarked about 
female education in India in Para 83 of its Report:—“The importance 
of female education in India cannot be over-rated; and we have 
observed with pleasure the evidence which is now afforded of an 
increased desire on the part of many of the natives of India to give 
a good education to their daughters. By this means a far greater 
proportional impulse is imparted to the educational and moral tone 
of the people than by the education of men. We have already ob¬ 
served that schools for females are included among those to which 
grants-in-aid may be given, and we cannot refrain from expressing 
our cordial sympathy with the efforts which are being made in this 
direction”. But the policy of the British Government in relation 
to female education in India was still one of caution. Lord Can¬ 
ning’s Government declared that Government could not take such 
initiative in the matter of girls* education as it has done in the case 
of education for boys, but that such girls* schools should be supported 
mainly by voluntary aid, and Government might encourage the exis¬ 
ting schools by grants-in-aids. Nevertheless, some grants were made, 

66 


ENGLISH EDUCATION 


and in 1873 there were only one thousand six hundred and forty 
girls’ schools of all kinds in British India. 93 

Between 1871 and 1882 there was an aggregate increase in fe¬ 
male education in India. Large proportion of efforts was devoted 
to the primary education of girls as compared with their secondary 
or higher education. Except in Bengal, and to some degree in Mad* 
ras, secondary education for girls was in the hands of Cnristian mis¬ 
sionaries and 'native managers’. 

After reviewing the situation about female education in India, 
the Education Commission of 1882 remarked that it was still in “an 
extremely backward condition, and that it needs to be fostered in 
every iegitmate way”. In its first out of twenty-seven recom¬ 
mendations touching various aspects of the problem, the Commis* 
sion observed that "female education be treated as a legitimate' 
charge alike on loc&L on Municipal, and on Provincial Funds and re^ 
ceive special encouragement”. Henceforth Government grants for 
girls’ schools began to be more liberally given and. Government ma¬ 
nagement more freely used than before. This helped the growth 
in the number of such schools and their pupils. Women were re¬ 
ceiving University education both in men’s colleges and in special 
female colleges. In 1901-02 there were 12 female colleges—three 
in Madras, three in Bengal and six in the United Provinces. The 
number of the female college students was by the end of that year 
177 (Bengal 55, Madras 35, Bombay 30, United Provinces 49, and 
Burma 8). The number of secondary schools for girls was 461 and 
the total number of girl students both in schools for boys and girls was 
found to be 44,695. The great majority of them were in the primary 
^tage, and the number in the secondary stage was about 9,800. The 
number of primary schools for girls was 5,628. The average num¬ 
ber of students per school was 35 in 1901-02. "At the end of 1901- 
02 there were 390,000 girls in primary and secondary schools and 
of these all but 9,800 were in the primary stage of education.” 94 
Still the percentage of girls in public institutions to girls of school¬ 
going age.was 2.2 in 1901-02. 

VHI. PROGRESS OF EDUCATION IN DIFFERENT PROVINCES 

Having reviewed the evolution of the general policy and actual 
schemes of education through different stages we may now proceed 
to describe briefly the progress of education in different provinces. 

1. BENGAL. 

The beginnings of English education in Bengal have been dis-' 
cussed above in Section 1. Medical and English classes were added 


€7 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 

both to the Calcutta Madrasa (founded in 1781) and the Sanskrit Col¬ 
lege of Calcutta (founded in 1824) between 1826 and 1828. The 
Hindu College, to which reference has been made above, gained 
decided superiority^ over all other institutions in affording tuition 
in the English language and literature* and ancient and modern 
history. The sons of the most respectable classes of the native com¬ 
munity of Calcutta attended this institution and paid for their edu¬ 
cation. In the report of 1827-28 the studies described were Natural 
and Experimental philosophy, Chemistry, Mathematics, Algebra, 
Tytler’s Elements of General History, Russell's Modern Europe, Mil- 
ton and Shakespeare. Other early colleges were Serampore College 
(1818), the General Assembly’s Institution of the Church of Scot¬ 
land founded by Dr. Duff in 1830, the Hooghli College established 
from the funds of the Mohsin endowment in 1838, the Institution of 
the Free Church of Scotland in *1843, and the Patna College in 
1863. 94a In addition to the Government colleges at Dacca, Behram- 
pore and Krishnagar, there were also the Doveton, La Martiniere, 
St. Paul’s private foundation, and the Bhowanipore College of the 
London Missionary Society. f 

There was a continuous feeling among the authorities after 1841 
(and also indicated in the Despatch of 1854) that very little in Ben¬ 
gal had been done for the education of the mass of the people through 
the medium of their vernaculars. A few vernacular schools had been 
founded in Bengal in 1844, of which 33 only remained with 1400 
students, whereas the comparable figures in Bombay were 216 ver¬ 
nacular schools with 12,t)00 pupils. The Council of Education, in their 
letter of 29 June, 1848, stressed the necessity of combining verna¬ 
cular with English education, and cited North-Western Provinces 
as an example to be followed. 96 Men belonging mostly to the rising 
middle class asked why the government taught what people were not 
willing to learn. The Court of Directors did not feel discouraged as 
they had been encouraged by the success of vernacular schools in 
^the North-Western Provinces, and the local Government in Bengal 
continued extending vernacular education by confining its direct 
action .to the maintenance of model schools and by introducing the 
system of grant-in-aid to indigenous institutions. 

The Court of Directors in their Despatch of May 12, 1847, de¬ 
clared that they did not regard a higher degree of scholastic know¬ 
ledge as an essential qualification for the public service and valued 
a moderate and practical knowledge of English. 99 This Despatch 
shows that the process was not reversed but modified, and a critical 
knowledge of Bacon, Shakespeare or Milton was not necessary. 

68 


ENGLISH EDUCATION 

Henry Woodrow, the Inspector of the Eastern Education Divi¬ 
sion, tried to make use of the existing indigenous schools and pro¬ 
ceeded by forming these schools into circles each comprising 3, 4 
or 5 schools, and after that progress in vernacular education was 
sustained. 97 This method was followed and improved upon by 
other administrators, especially by Sir George Campbell in Bengal. 

Thte medical classes of the Madrasa and Sanskrit College, Cal¬ 
cutta, were abolished from 1st February, 1835, and the Medical Col¬ 
lege was opened in June 1835. Dr. M. T. Bramley was appointed 
its first principal and Madhusudan Gupta made the first attempt to 
dissect a dead body. A secondary school in connection with the 
college for the instruction of native doctors for the military and civil 
branches of the service was established in 1839. The first hospital 
was opened in 1838 and a female hospital began to function in 1841. 
In March, 1844, four students went to England for braining in medical 
science., The sanction for the opening of art engineering college was 
received from the Court of Directors on 19th September, 1855. The 
college was opened in November, 1856, at the Writers’ Building, Cal¬ 
cutta and lin 1880 it was replaced by Government Engineering College 
at Sibpur. In 1842 the appointment of a Professor of Law in Hindu 
College was sanctioned, and a course of lectures was delivered by 
the Advocate-General, J. E. Lyall. The law class was organized 
from the beginning of the session of 1855. On the establishment of 
the Calcutta University in 1857, University examinations for the 
Licentiate and the Degree of Bachelor of Law were instituted and the 
number of colleges teaching law was 16 in 1903-4. 

In 1857, 10 Arts Colleges were affiliated to the Calcutta Univer¬ 
sity. By 1902, the Calcutta University had 46 first-grade and 32 
second-grade collegiate institutions affiliated to it. 98 The Degree of 
M. A. was conferred for the first time in 1862 and that of Bachelor of 
Science in 1901-2. In 1903-4 the number attending secondary 
schools was 4.4 per cent, of the boys of school-going age and 122 
primary schools were maintained wholly by the Education Depart¬ 
ment. The number of children attending schools represented 16.5 
per cent, of the total population of school-going age in 1903-4. 99 * 

The promotion of female education was the work of individual 
and private Societies and was not recognised as a branch of the 
States’ system of education until 1854. The Calcutta School So¬ 
ciety had female education as one of its objects. But the first real 
attempt to instruct Bengali girls was made by the Calcutta Female 
Juvenile Society which came to be known subsequently as the Ladies 
Society for Native Female Education. Mrs. Wilson, whose services 


69 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUttTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

were engaged by the Corresponding Committee of the Church Mis¬ 
sionary Society, had 30 sctools in 1826 which were formed into a 
Central school in 1829. Otier schools sprang up- due to the efforts 
of the London Church Misdonary Society. In May, 1849, Bethune 
opened a female school at Calcutta to which he donated a sum of 
£10,000 and this institution was recognised by the government. 
At first only 11 pupils joined this school but by April 11, 1850, the 
number had risen to 35. The example set by Bethune was Allowed 
by others in Bengal, and Talhousie regarded female education as the 
beginning of a great revolution in Indian habits. The number of Arts 
colleges and schools for grls rose from 831 in 1881 to 5005 in 1904. 
The percentage of girls under instruction to the number of school¬ 
going age was 0.87 in 1880-81 and 2.8 in 1903-4. The Bethune 
College, La Martiniere, md Loretto House were prominent institu¬ 
tions. 

2. BOMBAY 

In Bombay the number of Europeans was small and their connec¬ 
tions with local people were recent and less intimate thsn they 
were in Bengal. In 815 the Bombay Native Education Society 
was formed and openet three schools in Bombay, Thana and Broach. 
Mountstuart Elphinstcie extended the Society’s operations to sup¬ 
plying vernacular anc school book literature. The Society recom¬ 
mended the adoption >f the Lancasterian method 100 of teaching and 
continued its work til 1840, when it became the Board of Educa¬ 
tion, which devoted xself to the improvement of teaching. In 1820 
was formed a special ommittee for native education called the ‘Native 
School and School Bok Committee’, the object of which was to raise 
funds for the purpos< of education. The Poona Sanskrit College was 
opened by Mr. Wiliam Chaplin on 6th October, 1821, for the en¬ 
couragement of the study of Sanskrit and of ancient Hindu litera¬ 
ture and sciences. 10 The scope of this college was widened and it 
was later known a? the Deccan College. In 1823 the Court of Di¬ 
rectors rebuked theBombay Government for having set lip the Poona 
College and thougl they allowed the Poona College to continue, 
they firmly rejectd the Bombay College plan. Hie Society’s cen¬ 
tral school in Bonbay proved more successful and remained the 
principal Government high school. When Mr. Elphinstone left in 
1827, the native gmtlemen subscribed, as a memorial to him, 
£21,600, from the Merest on which professorships were to be esta¬ 
blished, the incumbents to be recruited from Great Britain until 
“natives shall be competent to hold them”. No such profesiors ar¬ 
rived till 1835. 101 Tke classes were held in the Town Hall and pro¬ 
vided the nucleus for Elphinstone College. 103 The Wilson College, 


70 


ENGLISH EDUCATION 


originally called the General Assembly’s Institution, was founded 
as a high school in 1834. By 1850 there were only eight schools 
subordinate to the Board of Education throughout the Bombay 
Presidency. The monthly fee of Elphinstone Institution was Re. 1/- 
whereas in Hindu College, Calcutta, students paid as much as Rs. 
8 /-.'°* 

In Bombay the emphasis from the very beginning was on the 
diffusion of Western knowledge through the vernaculars. Mount- 
stuart Elphinstone, a liberal, if not a radical, was deeply interested 
in the education of the masses in Benthamite terms 106 , and although 
there were conflicting claims between English and the vernaculars, 
Elphinstone’s view in favour of the latter received the approbation 
of the Court of Directors. Malcolm followed Elphinstone and dif¬ 
fered from Warden as to the mode of diffusing education. And 
though later, men like Edward Perry and Col. Jervis debated the 
same problem—‘English vs. Vernaculars’—the Government of Bom¬ 
bay in their letter of 5th April, 1848, gave preference to ‘native lan¬ 
guages’ in so far as general education of the people was concern¬ 
ed. 106 The immediate occasion for the controversy between Col. 
Jervis and Perry was a proposal to give instruction in civil engineer¬ 
ing through the medium of vernaculars. 107 Jervis suggested that 
the instruction should be through the language of the people whereas 
E. Perry’s view was that superior branches of education could be 
imparted only through the medium of English. 106 The Government 
of Bombay in their letter to the Board of Education, dated 5th April, 
1848, gave a decided preference to the views of those who advocated 
the use of vernaculars for the diffusion of knowledge. That did 
not mean that there was no desire to acquire a knowledge of En¬ 
glish language and literature, and while the vernacular education 
was languishing in Bengal, in Bombay it was making rapid progress. 
In contrast to Calcutta, there were 216 vernacular schools under 
the Board of Education with 12,000 students. 

In October 1845, the Grant Medical College was formally open¬ 
ed, and the first regular session began on 16th June, 1846. The Sir 
Jamsetjee Jeejeebhoy Hospital began as ‘the school of practice* of 
the Grant Medical College, which received recognition from the Ro¬ 
yal College of Surgeons in England in 1854. An Engineering Insti¬ 
tution was in existence in Bombay in 1824. To no branch of educa¬ 
tion did Malcolm look forward to with more sanguine expectations 
than the Engineers’ Institution in Bombay Presidency. 109 A class for 
training engineers was opened in the Elphinstone Institution in 1844, 
but for want of suitable candidates for admission the class was broken 
up in 1847. The nucleus of a college of civil engineering existed in 

71 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 

the Poona-Engineering Class and Mechanical Class. The Poona Col¬ 
lege of Science grew out of an engineering school founded in 1854. 

In 1847 Sir Edward Perry, President of the Board of Education, 
advocated the institution of a law class at the Elphinstone Institu¬ 
tion. In 1855 a professorship was founded on endowment subscrib¬ 
ed in honour of Sir Edward Perry. Two other professorships were 
sanctioned later. The Government maintained model schools at the 
headquarters of each district. The Grant Medical College, the El¬ 
phinstone, Wilson, Deccan, St. Xaviers* and Fergusson were the prin¬ 
cipal colleges. By 1902 Bombay had 10 first-grade colleges and only 
one second-grade college. 1 ^ 0 Of the male population of school-going 
age, 19.8% attended public primary schools in 1903-4. 

The Americaii Missionary Society, which did the pioneering 
work in female education, established the first native girls* school 
in Bombay Presidency in 1824, and two years later they reported an 
increase^ of 9 girls* schools. One of these institutions was a Boarding 
School, maintained at Byculla in the island of Bombay. In 1831, 
two native schools in Ahmadnagar were established by the same 
mission. The first of many female schools of Mrs. Wilson was open¬ 
ed in December, 1829. During 1829-30 Dr. and Mrs. Wilson esta¬ 
blished six schools. The Church Missionary Society established its 
first school in 1826. Other female schools were established at Thana, 
Bassein and Nasik. And there was a substantial increase of Normal 
schools and Elementary schools by the seventies of the last cen¬ 
tury. 111 In 1903-4, 4.74% of the, female population of school-going 
age attended schools. In both male and female populations, the 
Parsis took the lead. 

3. MADRAS. 

\ The missionaries were the first to open schools in the Madras 
Presidency. Protestant Mission Schools were established at Madras, 
Cuddalore, Tanjore and Trichinopoly. In 1787, the Court of Direc¬ 
tors authorised a permanent annual grant for the support of three 
schools. Mr. Hugh’s Chaplin, a missionary in Palamkotta, opened 
two schools in 1817 with the support of the Madras Corresponding 
Committee of the Church Missionary Society. Sir Thomas Munro was 
a strong believer in the good effect of education. He restored funds 
which had been diverted due to political instability. It was Munro’s 
Minute of 25th June, 1822, which first suggested the idea of conduct¬ 
ing a statistical inquiry into the state of education. According to 
Munro the means of dispelling ignorance in India was the endow¬ 
ment of schools throughout the country by Government with a mo¬ 
derate allowance secured to teachers which would place them above 
want. Munro wanted to give inducements both to teachers and to 


72 


ENGLISH EDUCATION 


students for furthering education, and he wished to establish in 

each Collectorate two principal schools. 

• . \ 

The Madras Book Society played an important part and the Court 

of Directors desired that measures for giving instruction in English 
language and literature should be adopted. 112 The Board of 
Public Instruction was reconstituted in 1836 as the Committee of 
Native Education which in turn gave place in 1841 to a University 
Board. This was superseded by a Council of Education in 1845, 
which was finally dissolved at the instance of the Court of Directors 
in 1847. The Department of Public Instruction was formed in 1854. 
By 1852 there was only a single institution in the Presidency, found¬ 
ed by or under the immediate control of the Government. But Mis¬ 
sionary enterprise had been particularly active. The Collectorate 
and Tehsildari schools, with elementary instruction through the ver¬ 
nacular along with a little English in a few of them, had continued, 
but as a result of Bentinck's Resolution, they were abolished in 1836. 

There were differences of opinion between the Board and the 
members of the Governor’s Council on educational policy, and in 
more cases than one, the Court of Directors also negatived the 
schemes put forward by authorities in India. A balance of over 
Rs. 3 lakhs had been accumulated, 113 and it was not until June, 1853, 
that the first Government school outside Madras city was founded at 
Cuddalore and another at Rajahmundry. Lord Elphinstone in his 
Minute of 12th December, 1839, recommended the establishment of 
a collegiate institution at Madras. In February, 1853, the Govern¬ 
ment formally sanctioned the immediate establishment of a Colle¬ 
giate Department, designated as the Madras University. 114 The 
first report of the Director of Public Instruction (1854-55) shows 
that with the exception of the sum spent on elementary schools in 
a few places, the operations of the Government were confined to 
the collegiate institution under the designation of the University of 
Madras, and to the two Provincial schools at Rajahmundry and Cud¬ 
dalore. A few more Provincial schools at Bellary, Calicut etc. were 
later established. The Court of Directors in their Despatch of 1854 
lamented that very little had been done by the Government of Mad¬ 
ras for the masses, and it was only the activities of the Christian mis¬ 
sionaries that had been successful among the Tamil population. The 
example of North-Western Provinces was cited for giving impetus 
to vernacular education. The Court, in their Despatch of 30th De¬ 
cember, 1842, recorded that the University students at Madras were 
inferior both in number and proficiency to those pf Bombay and 
Bengal, and recommended the formation of a Normal School. In 


73 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

their Despatch of 1859 they suggested that the High School of Mad¬ 
ras should be remodelled and formed into an institution somewhat 
resembling the Presidency College, Calcutta. Furthermore, they 
lamented the less advanced state of education throughout the Mad¬ 
ras Presidency, and recommended that Woodrow’s plan should be 
followed for the improvement of the existing village schools. 

In Madras the foundation of colleges began much later. The 
General Assembly’s institution, known as the Christian College, was 
founded in 1837. In 1841 the Central school was converted into a 
high school; in 1853 a college department was added to it, and later 
it developed into the Presidency College. St. Joseph’s College was 
established at Negapatam in 1846 by the Jesuits in charge of the 
Madura Mission. , Medical classes were started at the Madras Me¬ 
dical School, and in 1851 the institution was raised to the status 
of a college. The Presidency College, the Madras Christian College, 
Pachayyappa’s College, the Jesuit and S.P.G. Colleges at Trichino- 
poly, and St. Peter’s College at Tanjore were the principal colleges. 
In 1904 one boy in every five of school-going age attended primary 
classes, and one boy in every forty-five of school-going age, secondary 
classes. By 1902 Madras had 15 first-grade and 39 second-grade 
colleges. 116 The education of girls was begun by the missionaries. On 
17th October, 1821, it was resolved to form native girls* schools in 
Madras, 116 but it was not until 1866 that Government started its own 
schools for them. In 1904 the percentage of girls under instruction 

to the population of school-going age was 4.8. 

\ 

The first attempt *to train teachers in India was made by Dr. 
Andrew Bell at the end of the eighteenth century and his system 
(sometimes called the Madras System) was adopted in Europe and 
America. 


4. UTTAR PRADESH (UNITED PROVINCES) 

The oldest college in U.P., the Sanskrit College at Banaras, was 
founded in 1791 <( to cultivate the laws, literature and religion of the 
Hindus”, and “especially to supply qualified Hindu assistants to Euro¬ 
pean judges”. The college at Agra was established in 1823, and at 
Delhi an Oriental college was founded in 1825. English was introduc¬ 
ed in Delhi college in 1828. The Allahabad School was opened in 1834. 
The college at Bareilly arose in 1850 out of a high school founded in 
1836. Canning College was founded at I akhnau in 1864 by the 
talukdars of Avadh in grateful memory of the generous treatment 
they received from Lord Canning after the Mutiny. 


74 




BfQUBH EDUCATION 


The control of the educational institutions in North-Western Pro¬ 
vinces was transferred from the Government of Bengal to the Local 
Government together with the funds belonging to the colleges at 
Banaras, Agra and Delhi, by a Resolution of the Supreme Govern¬ 
ment, dated 29th April, 1840. At that time there were three colleges 
and nine Anglo-Vernacular schools maintained by Government. In 
this Province a completely new development took place. Mr. James 
Thomason, Lieutenant-Governor of the North-Western Provinces, 
took up the idea of Adam’s vernacular education in 1843, brought it 
closer to the reality of agricultural life, and made it the whole basis of 
general education in this Province. He displayed accurate know¬ 
ledge of the conditions and the requirements of the people under 
his charge, and provided honourable inducements to his subjects for 
gaining elementary knowledge so that their own rights might be 
preserved. The necessity for registering land ofTered him an oppor¬ 
tunity which he turned to good account. A peasant naturally had 
suffered much due to his ignorance and Mr. Thomason made people 
realize that elementary knowledge of reading, writing, arithmetic 
and agricultural accounts was indispensable for the preservation of 
their legitimate rights. His conception of education was not con¬ 
fined .to the narrow wants of higher classes, but embraced the whole 
population, especially the peasantry. He had in him the sympathe¬ 
tic outlook and comprehensive vision Of Thomas Munro, and as 
compared with Bengal, there was less encouragement for the study 
of English. 117 The Local Government decided to introduce educa¬ 
tion through the medium of vernaculars and thus there began the 
multiplication and improvement of Village schools by supervision, 
advice and distribution of elementary books,—the kind of policy which 
Munro, and later on Adam, had suggested. But though the Court of 
Directors objected to incidental points like that of the grant of Jdpfr, 
both the Court and the Local Government sanctioned as an expe¬ 
rimental measure the establishment of Tehsildari schools in eight 
districts. 

A Model School was established by Mr. Thomason at the head¬ 
quarter of each Tehsildar , and for meeting the requirements of the 
agricultural people the system of Halkabandi UQ was introduced. The 
system worked on the basis that the peasantry was the real back¬ 
bone of the country, that their rights should be preserved, and that 
they should be encouraged to improve themselves. Adam’s Reports 
had contemplated the endowment of a school in every village, and 
Thomason, in his revised scheme of 19th April, 1848, asked for au¬ 
thority to introduce his scheme of vernacular education in eight 
districts which might involve an expense not exceeding Rs. 13,000 


75 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 

per annum, while one Government school in each Tehsil was to serve 
as a model to the village schobl master. Eight districts were selected, 
and the experiment was an eminent success. Daihousie, in 
his Minute of 25th October, 1853, paid a great compliment to the 
scheme of vernacular schools 119 and was prepared to extend the 
system. Though Mr. Thomason died on the 29th September, 1853, 
Daihousie recommended to the Court of Directors that fullest sanc¬ 
tion should be given to the extension of the scheme of vernacular 
education in all districts within the jurisdiction of North-Western 
Provinces. 120 The successful scheme was held up as an example 
to other Governments. 

F. J. Mouat, in his report of June 4, 1853, 121 paid a great compli¬ 
ment to vernacular education in North-Western Provinces, which 
he thought was decidedly better than the instruction in any verna¬ 
cular school that he had seen in Bengal. Students answered ques¬ 
tions on geography, statistics and topographical features, and 
Dr. Mouat spoke highly of the extent of scientific instruction com¬ 
municated at the Delhi College through treatises in Urdu. 122 Mr. 
H. R. Reid became in 1855 the first Director of Public Instruction. 
His first and second reports refer to his experiment of Halkabandi 
schools which flourished in the North-Western Provinces in thou¬ 
sands. This idea originated about 1851 in an experiment made by 
Mr. Alexander, Collector of Mathura, and taken up by other Col¬ 
lectors, so that by the close of 1854 there were about 17,000 pupils 
receiving education in them. 

The early instruction in engineering is connected with the Thoma¬ 
son Engineering College at Roorkee. In 1845, a jrnall engineering 
class was held at Saharanpur. In 1847 the vigorous prosecution of the 
scheme of the Ganges Canal was determined upon, and the Thomason 
Engineering College at Roorkee was a product of this engineering 
scheme. In 1849 the institution was placed on a permanent footing, 
and in 1854 the name of Thomason was associated with it. The in¬ 
stitution had 371 students in 1903 4, when certificates of proficiency 
were given by the college. University education commenced in 
1860 with the affiliations of colleges to the Calcutta University, and 
in 1872 the Muir Central College was founded. Sir Syed Ahmad 
Khan founded a school at Aligarh in 1875 which was raised to the 
status of a college in 1878. The Allahabad University was consti¬ 
tuted in 1887. The number of Arts Colleges was 16 in 1891 and 28 
in 1901-4. In 1904 the number of secondary schools for boys was 
508 and the number of scholars 17,827. The number of primary 
schools in 1904 was 8,070 and of pupils, 330,387. The proportion of 
the population of school-going age under instruction increased from 


76 


ENGLISH EDUCATION 

3.4% in 1881 to 7% in 1904. Between 1891 and 1901 the proportion 
in secondary schools increased from 1.4 to 1.8%, while in primary 
schools there was an increase from 4.1% to. 7.1%. By 1902 the 
Allahabad University had 17 first and 13 second grade colleges. 123 

At Agra, Gopal Singh, the Deputy Inspector of Schools, encour¬ 
aged the cause of female education in 1855. In 1857 the number of 
schools rose to 288, and then the system was extended to Mathura 
and other places. In 1901 the number of female institutions was 
637 and of pupils, 21,314. 

5. THE PAN JAB 

Before the Panjab was made a British Province in 1849, Go¬ 
vernment schools existed in Delhi territory, which then formed a 
part of the North-Western Provinces. After the annexation, the 
Christian Missions, especially the American Presbyterian missiona¬ 
ries and the Church of England Communion, established schools. 
The Administration Report of 1849-50 indicates that the Sikh preju¬ 
dices were dying out and that the Panjab was ripe for the introduc¬ 
tion of so*ne educational scheme. 124 Many noblemen and gentle¬ 
men were anxious to acquire the knowledge of English. The Go¬ 
vernment followed the example of the missionaries, and district 
officers, like Col. Abbot, Captain Blair Reid, Edward Paske, Major 
Brown, and Richard Temple founded schools in their districts. In 
January, 1856, W. D. Arnold was appointed Director of Public In¬ 
struction, and drew up a scheme on the basis of North-Western Pro¬ 
vinces, cost being met out of 1% cess on the land reveiiue which was 
being levied at the time in most of the districts. The Halkabaiuii 
system of North-Western Provinces was adopted, though English 
was to be taught to those who were willing to pay for it. Due to in¬ 
sufficiency of income to meet the entire cost of the maintenance of 
the schools, the scheme met with only partial success in the begin¬ 
ning. It was accordingly resolved to reduce the number of schools 
to raise the efficiency of the remainder. The policy of Sir Charles 
Aitchison was followed. The aim was the improvement of indi¬ 
genous schools without destroying their distinctive character by the 
offer of liberal grants-in-aid. Normal schools, Tehsildari schools 
and Zilla schools were established, mid the curriculum was improv¬ 
ed. The first* female school was opened in Rawalpindi in December 
1856, and by the close of the year 17 schools were established. In 
1862, Sir Robert Montgomery enlisted public support for female edu¬ 
cation, but it was only in 1885-6 that a sound system of female edu¬ 
cation was laid, and there began the steady increase of private en¬ 
terprise on behalf of female education. In 1864 Government col- 

77 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—XI 

leges were established at Lahore and Delhi. In 1870 Sir Donald 
Mecleod inaugurated the new Punjab University College, which was 
established in part fulfilment of the demands by a large number of 
the chiefs, nobles and influential classes of the Panjab. By Act 
XIX of 1882, the Punjab (formerly Lahore) University College was 
incorporated as the University of the Punjab, the primary object of 
which was the revival of Eastern learning and the creation of good 
vernacular literature, though English was still to be considered as 
the natural complement of education. Prior to the foundation of the 
University, colleges were affiliated to the Calcutta University. La¬ 
hore Medical College, established in October 1860, was raised to 
collegiate status in 1870. The law school at Lahore was founded in 
1870. The Lahore Central Training College, which provided trained 
teachers, was opened in 1881. In 1883-4 there were only three col¬ 
leges; Government and Oriental colleges' at Lahore and St. Stephens’ 
College at Delhi. The engineering class of the Punjab University 
was started before 1886. In 1888 the Dayanand Anglo-Vedic School, 
established by the Ary a Samaj, was raised to the status of a college. 
The Islamia College at Lahore was opened in 1892, and the Khalsa 
College was founded at Amritsar in 1897. By 1889-90 the number 
of Arts colleges had risen to 7 and that of matriculation candidates 
to 1,016. In 1900-1 the number of Arts colleges was 12 with 2,948 
Matriculation candidates and 1,214 passes. By 1902, the Punjab 
University had 8 colleges of the first and 7 of the second grade. 12 ® 
The percentage of males in British districts, able to read and write, 
was 6.8 according to the Census of 1901, and that of females, 0.37. 

6. CHIEFS’ COLLEGES 

Chiefs’ Colleges in India were the growth entirely of the second 
half of the 19th century. They were founded on English lines and 
were designed to provide education for the princely and aristocratic 
families of India. 126 The first of these colleges to be started was 
the Rajkumar College at Rajkot in 1870. In 1872 Mayo College was 
founded in Ajmere in memory of Lord Mayo. In 1872 Rajkumar 
College was opened at Nowgong, which was amalgamated With Daly 
College at Indore in 1898. In 1876 a special class was opened in the 
Indore Residency School for the sons of the native chiefs on the 
western side of Central India, and it received later the designa¬ 
tion of Daly College in memory of the political officer, Sir Henry 
Daly. The Aitchison College at Lahore was founded in 1886. The 
Arts College at Jaipur dates from 1873, and the Arts College at Jodh- * 
pur was established in 1893. For the education of the sons of the 
gentry, the principal schools were Colvin School at Lakhnau (for the 
sons of the Avadh Talukdars), the Raipur College (for the sons of 


78 



ENGLISH EDUCATION 


the Chattisgarh chiefs), and the Girasia colleges at Gondal and Wadh- 
wan in Kathiawar. 

IX. MUSLIM EDUCATION. 

As mentioned above, the attitude of the members of the Muham¬ 
madan community in India towards Western education was at first 
one of aversion and opposition. There was among them a general 
aptitude and inclination towards classical studies in Arabic and Per¬ 
sian, and many among them did not like an exotic system introduced 
by an alien ruling authority which had displaced the lingering ves¬ 
tige of Mughul supremacy. Soon after the introduction of English 
education in India, the Council of Education stated that the “en¬ 
deavour to impart a high order of English education** to the Muham¬ 
madan community had failed completely. There was no improve¬ 
ment in the situation for many years in respect of higher educa¬ 
tion, though the numerical strength of ihe Muhammadan students 
in schools had gradually increased. 

The backwardness of the Muhammadan population in respect 
of higher education, as compared with the members of the other 
community, attracted the attention of the Government of Lord 
Mayo, and by its Resolution of 7th August, 1871, it drew the atten¬ 
tion of the different Local Governments and Administrations to the 
subject. The Reports 127 from the Local Governments and Ad¬ 
ministrations, in reply to this Resolution, were considered by the 
Government of Lord Northbrook in a Resolution, dated 13th June, 
1873. 128 After reviewing the measures adopted by the respective 
Local Governments for encouragement of education among Muham¬ 
madans Lord Northbrook*s Resolution recorded the view that “the 
Earl of Mayo’s Resolution had succeeded in its main purpose of draw¬ 
ing attention of all Administrations to needs and obligations which 
before had, perhaps, not everywhere been adequately realized,** and 
suggested certain measures for the spread of education among the 
Muhamrfiadans. 

The Education Commission of 1882 also reviewed the subject 
of Muhammadan education in India, and made important recom¬ 
mendations in this respect, some of which were as follows:—-(1). 
“That the special encouragement of Muhammadan education be re¬ 
garded as a legitimate charge on Local, on Municipal and on 
Provincial Funds; (2). “That Higher English Education for Mu¬ 
hammadans, being the kind of education in which that community 
needs special help, be liberally encouraged**; (3). “That where 
necessary, a graduated system of special scholarships for Muham¬ 
madans be established’’ for award in schools and colleges; (4). 


79 




THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

‘‘That in all classes of schools maintained from public funds, a cer¬ 
tain proportion of free studentships be expressly reserved for Mu¬ 
hammadan students’'; and (5) “That Associations for the promotion 
of Muhammadan education be recognised and encouraged”. 

With regard to the recommendations of the. Commission relat¬ 
ing to this matter, the Government of India observed in a Resolu¬ 
tion, dated the. 23rd October, 1884: “The Governor-General in Coun¬ 
cil has the subject of Muhammadan education at present under 
separate consideration, and will merely say here that, in view of the 
backward condition into which in sonde Provinces members of that 
community have fallen, he thinks it desirable to give them in some 
respects exceptional assistance”. Another declaration of policy on 
this subject was previously made by the Government of India in a 
Resolution, dated the 15th July, 1883, after consideration of the view¬ 
points placed in a Memorial addressed to Lord Ripon in February, 
1882, by the National Muhammadan Association of Calcutta together 
with other relevant papers. The main points in July 1883 Resolu¬ 
tion were as foUows:—(1). “The Muhammadans cannot hope fairly 
to hold their own in respect of the better description of State ap¬ 
pointments but by frankly placing themselves in line with the 
Hindus, and taking full advantage of the Government system of 
high and specially of English education”; (2). A special section 
should be devoted to Muhammadan education in the Annual Reports 
of Public Instructions; (3). “For the attraction of Muhammadans 
to higher education, a liberal provision of scholarships is essential 
and their wants must not be overlooked in the framing of any general 
scheme of scholarship for any Province”; (4). “Special Muham¬ 
madan Inspecting Officers to inspect and enquire into Muhammadan 
education generally, may be appointed in places where the Muham¬ 
madans are very backward”. 129 

In the meanwhile a momentous step had been taken by an 
eminent Muhammadan of liberal and progressive outlook. He was 
Sir Syed Ahmad, to whom the Muhammadan community of India 
owes a heavy debt for their advancement. He, with his foresighted 
vision, realized the need of modem education for the progress of 
his co-religionists: With the zeal of a reformer, and by defying all 
opposition, he established the Anglo-Oriental College at Aligarh, 
which later developed into a University as an important centre of 
higher education, particularly for the Muslims in India. 130 

In 1881-8 the percentage of Muhammadan students of India re¬ 
ceiving English education in colleges was 3.6 in proportion to the 
total number of students in such institutions, and that of Muham¬ 
madan students in High and English Schools was 9.2, 131 though the 


80 


ENGLISH EDUCATION 

percentage of Muhammadans to the population of the different Pro¬ 
vinces was 22.8. There was no appreciable progress of Muham¬ 
madan education during the next fifteen years. During the period 
from 1858 to 1893 “only 546 Muhammadans succeeded in obtaining 
University Degrees in the various branches of learning, as against no 
less than 15,081 Hindus, yielding a proportion of only tKree-and-a-half 
per cent, in the total number of Hindu and Muhammadan graduates, 
and an yearly average of 15.1, as against 418.9 Hindus or a propor¬ 
tion of 1 to 28 of the average number of Hindu graduates per year” 132 
The percentage of Muhammadans among pupils of all creeds under 
public instruction was 19.2 in 1891-92 and 19.3 in 1896-97, but 
went down to 18.8 in 1901-02. This loss was in the primary Schools, 
and there was a slight increase in the number of Muhammadan stu¬ 
dents in Arts Colleges and Secondary Schools. 133 

APPENDIX 134 

CONTROVERSY BETWEEN THE “ORIENTALISTS” AND “ANG¬ 
LICISTS” AND MACAULAY’S MINUTE ON THE SAME. 

The difference between the two opposing parties has been sum¬ 
med up thus:— 

‘Half of the Committee, called the “Orientalists”, were for the 
continuation of the old system of stipends, tenable for twelve or fif¬ 
teen years, to students of Arabic and Sanskrit, and for liberal expen¬ 
diture on the publication of works in these languages. The other 
half, called the “Anglicists,” desired to reduce the expenditure on 
stipends held by “lazy and stupid schoolboys of 30 and 35 years of 
age” and to cut down the sums lavished on Sanskrit and Arabic 
printing. At this juncture, Government requested the Committee to 
prepare a scheme of instruction for a college at Agra. The Com¬ 
mittee were utterly unable to agree on any plan. Five members 
were in favour of Arabic, Persian, and Sanskrit learning, and five 
in favour of English and the vernacular, with just so much of the 
Oriental learned languages as would be necessary to satisfy local 
prejudices’. 

Macaulay, on arriving in India, was appointed President of this 
Committee, but he refused to act as such until the Governor-General 
had decided upon the language of instruction. In his capacity of 
Legislative member of the Governor-General’s Council, however, he 
was neither diffident nor inactive, and when the question was brought 
before the Council by the rival parties, who addressed their argu¬ 
ments in the form of letters, dated 21st and 22nd January, 1835, re¬ 
spectively, he expressed his views on the matter in dispute in a 
masterly Minute, dated 2nd February of that year, and from which 

81 

BJ»XR.—« 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

we quote the following paragraphs, as it is impossible to describe the 
points in dispute in clearer or more expressive language:— 

“It does not appear to me that the Act of Parliament can by any 
art of construction be made to bear the meaning which has been assign¬ 
ed to it. It contains nothing about the particular languages or 
sciences which are to be studied... 

“The admirers of the Oriental system of education have used 
another argument which, if we admit it to be valid, is decisive against 
all change. They conceive that the public faith is pledged to the 
present system, and that to alter the appropriation of any of the 
funds which have hitherto been spent in encouraging the study of 
Arabic and Sanskrit would be downright spoliation. It is not easy 
to understand by what process of reasoning they can have arrived 
at this conclusion. The grants which are made from the public 
purse for the encouragement of literature differ in no respect from 
the grants which are made from the same purse for other objects of 
real or supposed utility. We found a sanatorium on a spot which 
we suppose to be healthy. Do we thereby pledge ourselves to keep 
a sanatorium there if the result should not answer our expectations? 
We commence the erection of a pier. Is it a violation of the public 
faith to stop the works if we afterwards see reason to believe that 
the building will be useless? The rights of property are undoubted¬ 
ly sacred. But nothing endangers those rights so much as the prac¬ 
tice now unhappily too common of attributing them to things to 
which they do not belong. 

“All the parties seem to be agreed on one point, that the dialects 
commonly spoken among the natives of this part of India contain 
neither literary nor scientific information, and are moreover so poor 
and rude that until they are enriched from some other quarter it will 
not be easy to translate any valuable work into them. It seems to 
be admitted on all sides that the intellectual improvement of those 
classes of the people who have the means of pursuing higher studies 
can at present be effected only by means of some language not ver¬ 
nacular amongst them. What then shall that language be? One 
half of the Committee maintain that it should be English. The 
other half strongly recommend Arabic and Sanskrit. The whole 
question seems to me to be which language is the best worth know¬ 
ing? I have no knowledge of either Sanskrit or Arabic. But I have 
done what I could to form a correct estimate of their value. I have 
read translations of the most celebrated Arabic and Sanskrit works. 

I have conversed both here and at home with men distinguished by 
their proficiency in the eastern tongues. I am quite ready to take 
the Oriental learning at the valuation of the Orientalists themselves. 


82 


ENGLISH EDUCATION 


I have never found one among them who could deny that a single 
shelf of a good European library was worth the whole native litera¬ 
ture of India and Arabia. The intrinsic superiority of the Western 
literature is indeed fully admitted by those members of the Com¬ 
mittee who support the Oriental plan of education. It will hardly be 
disputed, I suppose, that the department of literature hi which the 
Eastern writers stand highest is poetry. And I certainly never met 
with any Orientalists who ventured to maintain that the Arabic and 
Sanskrit poetry could be compared to that of the great European 
nations. But when we pass from works of imagination to works in 
which facts are recorded and general principles investigated the 
superiority of the Europeans becomes absolutely immeasurable. It 
is, I believe, no exaggeration to say that all the historical informa¬ 
tion which has been collected from all the books written in the Sans- 

* 

krit language is less valuable than what may be found in the most 
paltry abridgments used at preparatory schools in England. In 
every branch of physical or moral philosophy the relative position 
of the two nations is nearly the same. 

“How then stands the case? We have to educate a people who 
cannot at present be educated by means of their mother tongue. We 
must teach them some foreign language. The claims of our own 
language it is hardly necessary to recapitulate. It stands pre-eminent 
even among the languages of the West. It abounds with works of 
imagination not inferior to the noblest which Greece has bequeathed 
to us; with models of every species of eloquence; with historical com¬ 
positions which considered merely as narratives have seldom been 
surpassed, and which considered as vehicles of ethical and political 
instruction have never been equalled; with just and lively represen¬ 
tations of human life and human nature; with the most profound 
speculation on metaphysics, morals, government, jurisprudence, and 
trade; with full and correct information respecting every experimen¬ 
tal science which tends to preserve the health, to increase the com¬ 
fort, or to expand the intellect of man. Whoever knows that 
language has ready access to all the vast intellectual wealth which 
all the wisest nations of the earth have created and hoarded in the 
course of ninety generations. It may safely be said that the lite¬ 
rature now extant in that language is of far greater value than all 
the literature which 30(1 years ago was extant in all the languages 
of the world together. Nor is this all. In India English is the 
language spoken by the ruling class. It is spoken by the higher 
class of natives at the seats of Government. It is likely to become 
the language of commerce throughout the seas of East. It is the 
language of two great European communities which are rising, the 
one in the south of Africa, the other in Australasia; communities 

83 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

which are every year becoming more important and more closely 
connected with our Indian Empire. Whether we look at the intrim 
sic value of our literature or at the particular situation of this 
country we shall see the strongest reason to think that of all foreign 
tongues the English tongue is that which would be the most useful 

to our native subjects. 

• 

“The question now before us is simply whether, when it is in 
our power to teach this language, we shall teach languages in which 
by universal confession there are no books on any subject which 
deserve to be compared to our own; whether, when we can teach 
European science, we shall teach systems which by universal con* 
fession whenever they differ from those of Europe differ for the 
worse; and whether, when we can patronise sound philosophy and 
true history, we shall countenance at the public expense medical 
doctrines which would disgrace an English farrier, astronomy 
which would move laughter in girls at an English Boarding-School, 
history abounding with kings thirty feet high and reigns 30,000 years 
long, and geography made up of seas of treacle and seas of butter... 
The languages of Western Europe civilised Russia. I cannot doubt 
that they will do for the Hindu what they have done for the Tartar.... 

“It is said that Sanskrit and Arabic are the languages in which the 
sacred books of a hundred millions of people are written, and that they 
are on that account entitled to peculiar encouragement. Assuredly it 
is the duty of the British Government in India to be not only tolerant 
but neutral on all religious questions. But to encourage the study of 
a literature admitted to be of small intrinsic value, only because that 
literature inculcates the most serious errors on the most important 
subjects, is a course hardly reconcilable with reason, with morality, 
or even with that very neuturality which ought, as we all agree, to be 
sacredly pursued. It is confessed that a language is barren of useful 
knowledge. We are to teach it because it is fruitful of monstrous 
superstitions. We are to teach false history, false astronomy, false 
medicine, because we find them in company with a false religion. 
We abstain, and I trust shall always abstain, from giving any public 
encouragement to those who are engaged in the work of converting 
natives to Christianity. And while we act thus can we reasonably 
and decently bribe men out of the revenues of the state to waste 
their youth in learning how they are to purify themselves after 
touching an ass, or what text of the Vedas they are to repeat to ex¬ 
piate the crime of killing a goat? .... 

» 

“To sum up what I have said. I think it is clear that we are not 
fettered by any pledge expressed or implied; that we are free to 
employ our funds as we choose; that we ought to employ them in 


84 


ENGLISH EDUCATION 

teaching what is best worth knowing; that English is better worth 
knowing than Sanskrit or Arabic; that the natives are desirous to 
be taught English, and are not desirous to be taught Sanskrit or 
Arabic; that neither as the languages of law nor as the languages 
of religion have Sanskrit and Arabic any peculiar claim to our en¬ 
couragement; that it is possible to make natives of this country 
thoroughly good English scholars, and that to this end our efforts 
ought to be directed.” 


1. Heber, I. 188-9; II. 78. 

2. For a detailed account of this Society, cf. BPP, LXXVTH, Part I (Jan.-June, 

1959), pp. 30 ff. ' , _ 

3. For a full account, with references, cf. JAS, Letters, XXXL 39 ff. 

4. Sketches, EH. 91. 

5. Andrews and Mookerjee, 70-1. 

6. Heber, m. 360. 

7. Works, 472. 

8. Ibid, 474. 

9. B.N. Banerji, HI. 236-7. 

10. Ibid, H. 44-5, 

11. Griffiths, 245. 

12. B.N. Banei^i, HI. 9-10. 

13. Ibid, I. 42. 

14. B. Majumdar, 81-2. 

15. Ibid, 82. 

16. Ibid, 79-80. 

17. Ibid, 83. 

18. Ibid, 86. 

19. Ibid, 107-8. 

20. Helevy, A History of the English People In 1815, p 448; Coupland, Wilber- 
force, pp. 32, 51. 

21. This treatise is incorporated in the Parliamentary Papers (1831-2), Vol. Vm, 
App. 1, p. 3. See also, for Grant’s influence, William Ward, A view of the 
Histor y, Life and Religion of the Hindus, Vol. HI, p. 398. The Calcutta Review 
(XIX, 1848, pp. 244-45) gives a fair though brief estimate of Charles Grant. 
See also Teignmouth, Memoir of the Life and Writing and Correspondence of 
Sir William Jones, p. 46. 

22. See for Grant's observations, Parliamentary Papers, op. cit., p. 60. 

23. Hansard, 1813, Vol. XXVI, p. 858. For Charles Grant's view see Ibid., pp. 449- 
50, and for John Shore, see Lord Teignmouth, Considerations on the Practi¬ 
cability, Policy and Obligation of Communicating to the Natives of India the 
knowledge of Christianity (London, 1806), especially pp. 81, 101. 

24. Parliamentary Papers (1831-32), IX, p. 484. See Minto’s Minute dated 6 March, 
1811, in Sharp Selections, pp. 19-21. 

25. Parliamentary Papers (1831-32), IX, 436, Despatch to the Government of 
Bengal. 

26. Ibid, 437. 

27. Selections from Official Letters and Documents relating to the Life of Raja Rom 
Mohan Roy, Calcutta 1938, p. LXI. 

28. Calcutta Review, XLV, 1867, p. 318. 

29. Parliamentary Papers (1831-32), EX, p. 445. See also the earlier report of 1825, 
p. 436. Despatch to India and Bengal, 16 April, 1834, India and Bengal Des¬ 
patches, I.O.R., pp. 898-914. 

30. F.J. Shore, Notes on Indian Affairs, Vol. I, London 1837, p. 395. 

31. Spear, “Bentinck and Education”, Cambridge Historical Journal, Vol. VI, 
No. 1, Cambridge 1938, p. 81. 

32. See Bentinck MSS. (Nottingham University), Ellenborough, President, Board 
of Control, to Bentinck, 23 September. 1830. 

33. Bentinck MSS., Astell to Bentinck, 4tn October, 1830. 

34. Trevelyan, On the Education of the People of India, pp. 146-48, (Extract from 
a letter from the Secretary in the Persian Department, in the Committee of 

85 






THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 


Public Instruction, dated the 26th June, 1829). Parliamentary Papers, Letter 
in the Public Department to Bengal, 29th September, 1830, p. 497. 

35. Ibid. 

36. Bowring, John, The Works of Jeremy Bentham. Bentham to Col Young, 28 
December, 1827, Works, Vol. X, pp. 576-8. 

37. Bentham MSS., Folder No. 22, Box No. 10. 

38. V.N. Datta, Evidence of Unpublished Documents on William Bentinck’i 
Administrative Ideas, in PJHC, XXXTV, 1958, pp. 153-57. esp. p. 155. 

39. See in particular, Bentinck MSS. Dissent against letter to Supreme Govern, 
ment authorising British subjects to hold land in India on a lease of twenty- 
one years. 

40. Bentinck MSS. Bentinck to Metcalfe, 16 September, 1829. His bias in favruo 
of English is mentioned in the Calcutta Review, Vol. I, 1844, 'Lord William 
Bentinck-Administration’. See also Geoffrey Seed, William Bentinck and the 
Reform of Education, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1952, pp. 66-77. 

41. Bentinck MSS., Bentinck to Mancy, 1 June, 1834. 

42. V.N. Datta, Evidence of Unpublished Documents on C.E. Trevelyan's views 
on education. PIHRC, XXXV, Part H, 1959, pp. 77-78. 

43. V.N. Datta, Evidence of Unpublished Documents of C.E Trevelyan, op. dt, 

p. 80. 

44. See Spear, J1H <1940), p. 104. 

45. Bentinck Manuscripts, E. Ryan to Bentinck, 18th February, 1835. 

46. For Macaulay's role see Percival Spear, Bentinck and Education, The Cam¬ 
bridge Historical Journal, Vol. VI, No. 1, Cambridge 1938. See also G.O. 
Trevelyan, Life of Macaulay , p. 56. Part of Macaulay's Minute is quoted hi 
the Appendix. 

47. Duncan Forbes, The Cambridge Journal (October) 1951, p. 23. For Bentha¬ 
mite influence on Macaulay, see.Eric Stokes, The English: Utilitarians and 
India, Oxford 1959, pp. 191-2 and 320-21. 

47a. Cf. O’Malley, p. 149. 

47b. Orders from Home were not received until 1841. 

47c. Revenue, Judicial and Legislative Committee, Miscellaneous Papers 9. (I.O. 
Records). 

47d. In this Auckland may have been influenced by certain paragraphs of the 
Report of the Committee of Public Instruction for the year 1835 (See Richey, 
Selections, Part II, pp. 71-73), by the petition of Hindus and the memorial 
from the Asiatic Society. 

47e. Auckland to Hobhouse, 20 June, 1836, ADD.Mss., 36473, pp. 70-8. Broughton 
Correspondence (British Museum). 

47f. K.A. Ballahafchet, The Cambridge Historical Journal, Vol. X, No. 2,1951 (Notes 
and Communications), p. 224-29, In this article Mr. Ballah&tchet says that 
the immediate reaction of the Home Authorities to Bentinck’s educational 
policy was decidedly hostile (p. 224), and, again on p. 225, he says that the 
Home Government's influence seems to have been relatively of little import¬ 
ance in the formation of the new educational policy. Mill’s is 

shown to be of little importance on the basis of the evidence that he gave 
before the Select Committee of the House of Commons In 1832. (See Parlia¬ 
mentary Papers (1831-32), IX., paras 401, 402 and 406). Mr. Ballahatchefs 
viewpoint is based on a draft Ttecent changes in Native Education' which was 
not sent to India. It is James Mill's Despatch of 1824 followed by subsequent 
instructions from England which for the first time swung the whole educa¬ 
tional policy ija favour of Western knowledge against the appreciation of 
Oriental learning. 


48. P.N. Bose, m. 157. Three important Missionary Colleges were founded dur¬ 
ing this period namely, ^ Xavier's College (1835), La Martiniere (1836) and 
Doveton College (1836). 

49. Trevelyan, 81-3. 

50. Report of the Education Commission, 1882, p. 17. 

51. Ibid, 25. 

52. Dodwell, 197. 

53. Ritchey, Selections, 402. 

54. Syed Mahmood, p. 92. 

55. Moral and Material Progress and Condition of India, 1823, p. 833. 

56* Report of the Education Commission, 1882, p. 254. 

57. Raleigh, H. 68. 

58. Ibid, 69. 


86 





ENGLISH EDUCATION 


59. Ibid. 

60. Ibid. 

61. Report of the Indian Universities Commission, 1902, p. 8. 

62. Raleigh, H. 70. 

63. Ibid, 53. 

64. Ibid, 70. 

65. Ibid, 31. 

66. Report of the Indian Universities Commission, 1902, p. 8. 

67. Raleigh, II. 33. 

68. Ibid, 41. 

69. Ibid, 33. 

70. Lovat-Fraser, 188-9. 

71. Ibid, 189. 

72. Ibid, 191. 

73. Chirol, India, Old and New, 141. 

74. Lovat-Fraser, 200. 

75. Raleigh, H. 67. 

76. Ibid, 75. 

77. Lovat-Fraser, 196. 

78. Ibid, 189-90. 

79. Ibid, 190. 

80. Ibid, 194. 

81. The account that follows is largely based on W. Adam's three Reports on Ver¬ 
nacular Education, 1835, 1836 and 1838, Sir Thomas Munro's Minute of 10th 
March, 1826, M. Elphinstone’s Minutes of 13th* December 1823 and 13th Decem¬ 
ber 1825, Fisher's Memoir, February 7, 1827, W.D. Arnold's First Report (6th 
July 1857) and Second Report (25th June 1858), Captain Candy's Report on 
Deccan Schools, Report of A.D. Campbell, the Collector of Bellary and Sir 
C.T. Metcalfe (on Education in the Delhi city and territory). Adam's three 
reports on education contain valuable statistics and important information cm 
the intellectual condition of the people in Bengal and Bihar. The investiga¬ 
tion extended over three years. On the nature of Hindu learning see espe¬ 
cially the following works; H.H. Wilson, "Two lectures on 'the Religious prac¬ 
tices and Opinions of the Hindus', delivered before the University of Oxford, 
1849 (especially pp. 36-37). H.H. Wilson in James Mill's * History of British 
India*, Vol. VHI, 1858, p. 409. William Ward, *A View of the History, Life and 
Religion of the Hindu. s', London (1817-29), Vol. IV, pp. 499 and 502. Dubois, 
* Hindu Manners, Customs and Ceremonies*, (ed. H.K. Beauchamp), London, 
1906, pp. 377-378. For Ram Mohan Roy’s letter to Lord Amherst which throws 
light on Hindu learning, see Sharp, Selections from Educational Records, pp. 
99-101. 

81a. See pp. 17 ff. 

82. The Lande Schools in the Pan jab were schools for the commercial and trad¬ 
ing community conducted by ‘Padhas’ in which primarily methods of book¬ 
keeping and systems of accounts were taught. The pupils were expected to 
show remarkable quickness in figures. 

83. The Private Journal of the Marquess of Hastings, II. 346. 

84. Gleig, G.R., The Life of Thomas Munro, I. 61. 

85. Heber 1. 391. 

86. Report of the Education Commission of 1882, p. 182. 

87. Moral and Material Progress and Condition of India during the year 1882-3, 
Part I, p. 335. 

88. Ibid, p. 333. 

89. Gopal, S., The Viceroyalty of Lord Ripon, 72. 

90. Report, p. 112. 

91. Ibid, 174-6. 

92. Datta, K.K., Daunt of Renascent India, 72-91. Cf. also Chapter XLV, Sec. IX. 

93. Monier-Williams, 325-6. 

94. Progress of Eduattion in India, 1897-8 to 1901-2, pp. 298-302. 

94a. The Government started a College at Patna in 1844, but it was abolished in 
1847. Another effort to start a College in 1856-7 also proved a failure, in both 
cases due to the apathy of the people. Cf. A History of the Patna College by 
J.N. Sarkar and J.C. Jha (1963). * 

96. Richey, Selections, II. 94. 

96. Ibid, 91-2. 

87 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


97. Woodrow’s plan was based on the retention of the existing schools which were 
to be formed into circles (sometimes of 3, 4, or 5), to each of which a teacher 
of a higher class was appointed. Under this system of circle schools, one 
superior teacher visited a group of village schools in turn. 

98. Report of the Indian Universities Commission , 1902, p. 5. 

99. The figures are based on Census Reports and Imperial Gazetteers. 

100. The Lancasterian method is the monitorial system of instruction followed by 
Joseph Lancaster (1778-1838) of England in which advanced pupils in a 
school teach pupils below them. 

101. K. Ballahachet, 'Social Policy and Social Change in Western India * (1817-30), 
pp. 248-255. 

102. For educational activities in Western India, see George Smith, 'The Life of John 
Wilson*, London, 1878, especially pp. 47-51, 69, 74. 

103. Dadabhai Naoroji was appointed Professor of JJlphinstone College and thus 
fulfilled the hope expressed that 'the happy period would arrive when natives 
of this country would be found qualified for holding them’. 

104. Richey, Selections, op. cit. p. 29. This fee was estimated by Mr. J.E.D. 
Bethune in his Minute of 23 January, 1851. 

105. See V.N. Datta, Grounds For Differences between Malcolm and Bentinck, 

PIHC, 1958, p. 449. See also K. Ballahaehet, op.cit. pp. 248-52. 

106. Richey, Selections, op. cit. p. 19. 

107. Richey, Selections, Jervis’s Minute, 24 February, 1847, p. 11. 

106. Ibid, Perry’s Minute, 14 April, 1847, pp. 14-16. 

109. V.N. Datta, Grounds of Differences between Malcolm and Bentinck, PIHC, 
1958, pp. 450-52. 

110. Report of the Indian Universities Commission, 1902, p. 5. 

111. Mary Carpenter, Six Months in India, London, 1868, Vol. I, pp. 47-81. 

112. Parliamentary Papers (Appendix 1), Extract of a letter, Court of Director to 
the Governor in Council, Fort St. George, 16 April, 1826, p. 510. 

113. Richey, Selections , p. 181. 

114. At first the High School and the University of Madras were synonymous, and 
later on, when the High School became a Collegiate Institution, it had still 
the designation of the University of Madras. 

115. Report of the Indian Universities Commission, 19Q2, p. 5. 

116. Richey, Selections, p. 49. 

117. Ibid, 228. 

118. A number of villages were linked together in a Halka or circle, and a central 
school under a trained' teacher was established within reach of every village, 
the expense being met by a local cess of 1 per cent, of the land revenue, 
nominally voluntary. Selection of the village was guided by considerations 
of geographical situation. 

119. Richey, Selections, 266-7. 

120. Ibid, 267-8. 

121. Ibid, 259. 

122. Ibid, 265. 

123. Report of the Indian Universities Commission, 1902, p. 5. 

124. Richey, Selections, p. 281. 

125. Report of the Indian Universities Commission, 1902, p. 5. 

126. There is an Interesting account of the aims and objects of the Chiefs Colleges 
in Curzon’s speeches. See Raleigh, op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 255-64 (speech deli¬ 
vered at Daly College at Indore), pp. 265-70 (speech delivered at Rajkumar 
College, Rajkot), and pp. 284-89 (speech delivered at Mayo College, Ajmer). 

127. Report of the Education Commission of 1882, p. 484. 

128. Syed Mahmood, 149. 

129. Ibid, 175. 

130. For further details of Syed Ahmad, Cf. Chapter XLVT. 

131. Syed Mahmood, 168. 

132. Ibid, 186. 

133. Progress of Education in India, 1897-8 to 1901-2, p. 372. 

134. Bentinck (RI), pp. 150-57. 


88 


CHAPTER III (XLI) 


IMPACT OF WESTERN CULTURE 

The introduction of English education broke the barrier which 
had hitherto effectively shut India from the Western world. The 
great Muslim scholar, Al-Blrunl, remarked about 1,000 A.D. that 
the Hindus kept themselves aloof from the, outer world and were 
ignorant of the arts and sciences of the West. 1 This glaring defect 
of the Hindus was equally evident eight hundred years later. But 
a great change came over them at the beginning of the nineteenth 
century A.D: English education opened the flood-gates of the 
Western ideas which almost overwhelmed them at the beginning. 
Fifty years of English education brought greater changes in the 
minds of the educated Hindus of Bengal than the previous thousand 
years. 

« 

The principal reason for this is that India came into contact 
with Western ideas at a most opportune moment. It was the Age 
of the French Illumination when the spirit of rationalism and indi¬ 
vidualism dominated European thought. It proclaimed supremacy 
of reason over faith, of individual conscience over optside authority, 
and brought in its train new conceptions of social justice and poli¬ 
tical rights. A new ideology suddenly burst forth upon the static 
life, moulded for centuries by a fixed set of religious ideas and social 
conventions. It gave birth to a critical attitude towards religion 
and a spirit of inquiry into the origin of State and society with a 
view to determining their proper scope and functions. 

To put it in a concrete form, the most important result of the 
impact of Western culture on India was the replacement of blind 
faith in current traditions, beliefs, and conventions—characteristic 
of the Medieval Age by a spirit of rationalism which seeks to in¬ 
quire and argue before accepting anything. The revolt of the mind 
against the tyranny of dogma and traditional authorities, beliefs, 
and customs, is the first requisite for freedom of thought and cons¬ 
cience which lies at the root of progress in social, religious and poli¬ 
tical spheres of life. Indeed this is the reason why progress in all 
these different spheres is inter-dependent to a certain extent. In 
Bengal the rationalising effect of English education at first manifest¬ 
ed itself more in religious and social ideas, but it was not long be¬ 
fore it profoundly affected also the political consciousness of the 


89 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

people. The Brahma Samaj was the outcome of the first, and it 
has often been claimed that it has contributed largely to J,he ideals 
of political freedom. 2 It would perhaps be more correct to say that 
both are the results of the same rationalistic urge which was creat¬ 
ed by Western culture. In any case, it is impossible to deny that 
these movements were linked together to a certain extent, and it is 
therefore necessary to give some account of the transformation of 
social and religious ideas before we go into details of the evolution 
of political ideas. 

It was almost inevitable that the first effect of free thinking on 
the immature minds, of the young men who drank deep into the 
English literature would be more destructive than constructive, 
particularly in social and religious matters. The challenge of ra¬ 
tionality is almost sure to generate, first of all, a deliberate revolt 
against beliefs and practices which rest solely upon the sanction of 
ages, unsupported by reason or argument. That was undoubtedly 
the case with the English-educated youth of Bengal. The evils that 
followed were much exaggerated at the time, because they gave a 
rude shock to the orthodox people, and created a vague alarm in 
their minds about the total wreck of the general framework of Hindu 
society which they held so dear. We find pointed references to it 
in eight letters, 3 published in Bengali periodicals between Novem¬ 
ber 6, 1830, and October 22, 1831. One gentleman laments “that 
his boy, educated in the Hindu College, has given up the old dress 
and customs. He dresses his hair, wears English type of shoes, 
does not put a garland round his neck, eats before taking bath, and 
neglects other rules of ceremonial purity”. More serious is the 
charge made by another, that when he took his son, also a student 
of the Hindu College, to the temple of goddess Kali at Kalighat, the 
boy, instead of prostrating himself before the deity, like others, 
simply accosted her by saying, “Good morning, madam”. 3 * Among 
other complaints may be mentioned the habit of talking and writing 
letters in English, signing names with English initials, neglecting 
useful information or knowledge of India while concentrating on 
Europe, and holding the views of atheists like Charvaka. 

It is known from other sources also that a section of boys of the 
Hindu College gave up old religious ideas and social customs and 
deliberately adopted practices most offensive to Hindu sentiments, 
such as drinking wine, eating beef etc. There was a general outcry 
and, according to a Bengali Weekly of April 30, 1831, nearly 200 
boys out of 450 or 460 left the college. 4 Derozio’s teaching was 
supposed to be at the root of all evils, and he was dismissed from 
service. Some correspondents suggested that the authorities of the 


90 


IMPACT or WESTERN CULTURE 


Hindu College should issue definite orders to the teachers and 
students that unless they adhere strictly to the ancestral customs 
and beliefs they should be expelled from the college.' 6 Others sug¬ 
gested that the Government should authorize the Magistrates to. 
punish those who do not observe the orthodox rules and practices. 6 

But the defenders of the Hindu College were, also not wanting. 
They pointed out that many young men used to violate social cus¬ 
toms even before the establishment of the Hindu College and were 
guilty of other moral lapses from which the boys receiving English 
education were comparatively free. Thus one correspondent re¬ 
fers pointedly to the habits of drinking and keeping Muslim mistres¬ 
ses, freely indulged in by the rich Hindu young men, and their parti¬ 
cipation in various types of bad associations, long before the establi¬ 
shment of the Hindu college. He referred in particular to the lurid 
picture of society drawn in a book entitled Navab&bu-vilasa, which 
fortunately is still available. 7 Another writer points out that out 
of four or five hundred boys reading in Hindu College and Mis¬ 
sionary schools, only about thirty or forty have given up religious 
beliefs or violated social customs. 8 

Even long after 1831 A.D., when the above letters were written, 
some of the evils complained of continued in full force. Rajnarayan 
Basu, the Father of Nationalism in Bengal, throws interesting light 
on this in his autobiography. Along with his friends he used to 
take forbidden meat and wine in the park facing the present univer¬ 
sity buildings and was forced to leave the Hindu College in 1844 on 
account of illness caused by excessive drinking. He remarks that in 
those days the students of the Hindu College looked upon drinking as 
a mark of civilization and found nothing wrong in it. The young men 
of the preceding generation, said he, did not drink, but were addict¬ 
ed to other evils such as visiting prostitutes, taking intoxicants like 
ganja and char as, and indulged in bullml-fight and gambling over 
kite-flying. Hindu College students were free from these, and 
would not have taken to drinking wine if they had not regarded it 
as a badge of civilization. 9 It is interesting to note that Rajn§rayan*s 
father asked his son to join with him in taking food cooked by Mus¬ 
lims and drinking moderately in his presence, in order to cure the 
habit of excessive drinking. 10 

There is no denying the fact that the English education brought 
about a great change in social and religious outlook. The extent to 
which it was healthy and good for national life, or was instrumental 
In demoralizing or denationalizing the people, is a matter of opinion 
and a subject of dispute, to which reference will be made in a subse¬ 
quent chapter. For the present it is necessary to examine the positive 


91 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCES—II 

contributions of this education to the national welfare, which are often 
lost sight of. 

As noted above, the first and foremost positive effect is that it 
instilled into the minds of Indians a spirit of rational inquiry into 
the basis of their religion and society. This spirit is typified by the 
personality of Raja Rammohan Roy and led to the foundation of 
Brahma Samaj. The Raja challeh&ed the current religious beliefs 
and social practices of the Hindus as not being In consonance with 
their own scriptures. 11 He tried to show that the belief in a multi¬ 
plicity of divinities and worship of images, which formed the essence 
of the current and popular Hindu religion, was opposed to the teaching 
of the Vedas. How far his views are historically correct, or moral¬ 
ly sound, is a matter of secondary importance. What really 
matters is his open and public protest against the blind acceptance 
of whatever passed current on the authority of priesthood or its in¬ 
terpretation of scriptures. The standard of revolt he thus raised 
against the medieval tyranny of dogmas unleashed forces which 
created what may be called Modern India and makes him worthy to 
rank by the side of Bacon and Luther. “The first assumption of 
Raja Rammohan Roy is that there is a universal reason at work in 
nature and in society, and that religions in their pure and pristine 
form are the expression of that reason in man. The task of reason 
today is to disentangle the elements of permanent and universal 
truth in each faith from the mass of accretions which has gathered 
round them and to return to them as the basis of our religious life”. 12 

How much the Hindu society needed this element of reason to 
overcome the tyranny of gross superstition is illustrated by the prac¬ 
tice of sati or burning of widows along with the dead bodies of their 
husbands. This inhuman practice, though widely prevalent, hardly 
shocked the sensibilities of any, and when Rammohan and others pro¬ 
tested against this cruel custom, quite a large number of educated and 
respectable Hindus came forward to defend it till the very last. 

Rammohan assailed the strongest part of the citadel of Hindu re¬ 
ligion and society. He opposed the worship of images of gods and 
goddesses, denounced sati 9 polygamy, and abuses of the caste system, 
favoured re-marriage of Hindu widows, and set at naught the prohi¬ 
bition of crossing the sea by his voyage to England. By these succes¬ 
sive shocks he galvanised the dormant Hindu society and set in motion 
that liberalism in thought and action which has enabled it to shake 
off the fetters of ages. 

But “the Raja’s movement could hardly be called a movement of 
religious and social revolt . While claiming the right of private judg- 


92 


IMPACT OF WESTERN CULTURE 

ment in the interpretation of ancient scriptures, the Raja never re¬ 
pudiated their authority; nor did he, while seeking to assert the right 
of individual conscience to determine for itself what was right or 
wrong, ever repudiate the authority of that social conscience which 
spoke through ancient social laws and sanctified social traditions. He 
tried really to reconcile individual reason with ancient scriptures 
and individual conscience with social authority/' 13 

Devendra-nath Tagore, who succeeded Rammohan as the head 
of the Brahma Samaj, “proclaimed the supremacy of human reason, 
which was in its original intuitions really the Eternal Light of God 
reflected through the mind of man, over all scriptures and hallowed 
injunctions.” Keshab-chandra Sen, who followed him, “carried this 
protest still further and proclaimed the absolute supremacy of the 
individual conscience over every form of outside authority in the 
determination of human conduct, either of scriptures or traditions 
or customs, however immemorial or sanctified these may be. De- 
bendra Nath gave us a new faith that sought to make us free in 
spirit; Keshub Chunder gave us a new moral test that made us free 
from all social bondage. Raja Rammohan Roy proclaimed the Unity 
of the Godhead to a people who believed, against the teachings of 
their highest scriptures, in a multiplicity of gods. Debendra Nath 
proclaimed the freedom of our reason from the bondage of aftcient 
scriptural authority. Keshub Chunder proclaimed the absolute 
freedom of the individual conscience from the bondage of caste and 
customs. The Raja’s was not, strictly speaking, a movement of 
active revolt; Debendra Nath’s was really a movement of religious 
revolt; Keshub Chunder’s, representing the third stage in the evolu¬ 
tion of the Brahma Samaj, was a movement of social revolt. In this 
way, step by step, the freedom movement in modern India grew and 
developed, becoming larger and larger under the inspiration of the 
Brahma Samaj.” 14 

Although the Brahma Samaj was the visible embodiment of the 
new spirit, it never became a powerful movement. It began to dwin¬ 
dle in importance in less than half a century after its foundation, 
and the number of its members is not at present more than five 
thousand. Its history will be dealt with in the next chapter. 

The impact of Western culture on Hinduism has been des¬ 
cribed as follows by one of its greatest philosophers: 

“The spread of western education and ideals stimulated move¬ 
ments within Hinduism designed to preserve its essential principles 
and at the same time to remove excrescences which were opposed 
not only to the spirit of Hinduism but also to the ideals spread by 


93 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—D 


western culture. What is the spirit of Hinduism? What are its 
essential principles? The spirit of science is not dogmatic cer¬ 
tainty but the disinterested pursuit of truth, and Hinduism is infused 
by the same spirit. Fixed intellectual beliefs mark off one religion 
from another, but Hinduism sets itself no such limits. It is compre¬ 
hensive and synthetic, seeking unity not in a common creed but in a 
common quest for truth. Hinduism is more a way of life than a form 
of thought. It insists not on religious conformity but on a spiritual 
and ethical outlook in life. It is fellowship of all who accept the law 
of right and earnestly seek for the truth.” 16 

This is quite true. The Brahma Samaj has perhaps lost a great 
deal of its force and vitality by formulating a religious creed, with 
fixed intellectual beliefs, outside the pale of Hinduism, though its 
social separation as a community was perhaps less a choice than a 
necessity. 16 But be that as it may, the Brahma Samaj has effectively 
helped the progress of Hindu society; first, by stemming the tide of 
conversion to Christianity; secondly, by holding a living example of 
society based on progressive and liberal Views; and thirdly, by sup¬ 
plying eminent persons who advanced liberal ideas in other spheres 
of life such as politics. This last point requires some elaboration. 


It is not a mere accident that Raja Rammohan Roy who intro¬ 
duced rationalistic principles in social and religious ideas, was also 
the pioneer of political reforms in modern India. Human mind is a 
composite whole, and it is quite natural that if it is actuated by liberal 
and rational ideas in one sphere of life, it would follow the same ten¬ 
dency in other spheres as well. The spirit which revolts at the 
tyranny of priesthood is more likely to raise its voice of protest 
also against the oppression of the State;—the mind which does not 
accept the religious and social abuses, simply because they are cur¬ 
rent and followed without question, is less likely to accept, without 
demur, the evils of subjection to an alien power on the ground of 
long-standing tradition of loyalty, rendered possible by lack of poli¬ 
tical consciousness. Further, even those who were not bold or 
strong enough to follow in actual life rational principles in social 
and religious spheres for fear of the extreme violence of the inevi¬ 
table reaction, were inspired by these environments to hold advan¬ 
ced ideas in political life,—which were less likely, at that time, to 
involve him in immediate troubles. In any case there is hardly any 
doubt that the liberal movements for religious and social reform are 
closely connected with the movement for political emancipation. 
“It is impossible to understand I ndi an political aspirations and acti¬ 
vities if one divorces them from that nation’s great nett spiritual 
urge towards Truth and Justice—aye, and Love—of which the one 


94 








IMPACT OF WESTERN CULTURE 

and the other alike are but outward manifestations”. 17 The truth 
of this remark, apparent at almost every stage of national evolu¬ 
tion in India, comes to the fore by the study of such notable persona¬ 
lities as Raja Rammchan Roy, Dayanand Saraswati, Swami Vive- 
kananda, and Mahatma Gandhi. The Renascence of India like her 
great Banyan tree, threw numerous shoots, which might appear as 
separate, but had all a common root. 

Life in India, more than in any other country, is dominated by 
religious and spiritual forces. To minimise the influence of these 
forces in political and national evolution is to lose the correct perspec¬ 
tive. The impact of rational ideas on our-religion no doubt proc iced 
some evil consequences at the beginning. But they were transitory 
in character like a high tidal wave and soon passed away, leaving rich 
deposits of fertilising soil. A great philosopher of India has drawn a 
very lucid and correct picture in the following lines: “With the 
growth of the British power the old order weakened and the confi¬ 
dence of Indians in their own culture diminished. Many were daz¬ 
zled by the civilization of the West, which seemed to be better adapt¬ 
ed for the acquisition of temporal power. A few were so enchanted 
by it that they took to western culture with the enthusiasm of neo¬ 
phytes and endeavoured to westernize themselves completely; some 
became Christians. Proclaiming the futility and worthlessness of 
India’s social and religious institutions, they wished to rebuild the 
structure of national life on new foundations. Not so the great 
majority. In the Mughal period those who wished to take service 
under the Mughals acquired a knowledge of Persian, but such an 
acquisition did not make them less Indian or more attached to the 
religion of their rulers. So now the classes educated in English did 
not, as a rule, give up their traditional ways of life and habits of mind, 
but used western learning for improving their own culture and adapt¬ 
ing it to the new impulses created by contact with the west”. 18 

So far we have indicated, in a general way, the nature of the im¬ 
pact of the West on India and the consequent changes it wrought 
upon the social, religious, and political ideas. If we analyze the pro¬ 
gress of Indian people during the nineteenth century, it will appear 
that there was hardly any aspect of life and society which was not 
deeply affected by the impact. Side by side with the rise of new 
religious sects, we find a profound change in the orthodox Hindu 
religion. There was a persistent demand for the removal of social 
abuses and the introduction of social reforms on modem lines. The 
ideals and method of education underwent a revolutionary change. 
Equally revolutionary was the change brought into the domain of 
literature, and modern Indian literatures in spoken languages in 


95 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 


different localities had their birth. The periodical literature was 
an innovation with far-reaching consequences. The printing press 
made an epoch-making change in the spread of education among the 
people. All these factors combined to generate among the Indians 
a strong sense of patriotism and nationalism which had hitherto been 
lacking. All these, which will be discussed in detail in the subse¬ 
quent chapters* transformed India from the Medieval to the Modern 
Age. The nineteenth century was the great dividing line, and these 
hundred years changed the face of India far more than did the pre¬ 
ceding thousand years. This gives a measure of the effect of Western 
impact on India. 


1. See above, Vol. V, p. 127. 

2. B.C. Pal—II, 14 ff., 66. 

3. B.N. B&nerji, H. 165-76. 

3a. Ibid, 171. 

4. Ibid, II. 13, 27; m. 199. 

5. Ibid, H. 172. 

6. Ibid, H. 171. 

7. Ibid, H. 167-8. 

8. Ibid, H. 169. 

9. Atmacharit (autobiography) of Rajnarayan BasU, p. 45. 

10. Ibid, 47. 

11. The Raja was influenced both by Western ideas and Muslim theology. But that 
his teachings were widely accepted was undoubtedly due to Western influence 
alone. 

12. Buch—I, 65. 

13. B.G. Pal—II, 17. 

14. Ibid, 25-6. 

15. O’Malley—I, 339. 

16. Cf. the opinion of M.G. Ranade on this subject quoted in Chapter VII. 

17. Zacharies, 15. 

18. O’Malley—I, 338-9. 



96 






CHAPTER IV (XUI) 

NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 

i 

I. THE BRAHMA SAMAJ. 

1. Rammohan Roy 

Reference has been made above to the rationalistic ideas of Raja 
Rammohan Roy which ultimately led to the establishment of Brahma 
Samaj as a separate religious and social community. Rammohan 
Roy never regarded himself as the founder of a separate sect or 
society, but lived and died as a reformed Hindu, wearing its most 
prominent symbol, the sacred cord (yajriopavita ), till the last day of 
his life. 

Of the early life of Rammohan Roy we know very little that is 
certain. He was bom, probably, in 1774 1 in an orthodox and wealthy 
Brahman family, at the village of Radhanagar, Burdwan District, in 
West Bengal. He studied Persian and Arabic at Patna and this had 
enormous influence on his subsequent life. The Muslim culture and 
philosophy, particularly the Sufi ideas, got a strong hold upon him. 
His habits and tastes were those of a Muhammadan. He wore Mu¬ 
hammadan dress and took Muslim dishes even at home. Probably, as a 
result of the study of the original Q’uran in Arabic, he became convinc¬ 
ed of the errors of worshipping images of gods. It is said that so deep 
was this conviction in his mind, that shortly after his return from 
Patna, while he was about sixteen or seventeen, he wrote a treatise 
calling in question the validity of the idolatrous system of the Hindus 
in which he had been brought up. His father, after a hot discussion 
with him on this subject, drove him out of his house. Rammohan then 
led a wandering life for three or four years, in course of which he is 
believed to have visited Tibet. After his return he settled down at 
Varanasi (Banaras) and studied Sanskrit language and sacred lite¬ 
rature of the Hindus. 2 On the death of his father in 1803, Ram¬ 
mohan moved to Murshidfibad and wrote a Persian treatise entitled 
TuhfaUuUMuwahhidin, or “A Gift to Monotheists”, “a work protest¬ 
ing against the idolatries and superstitions of all creeds and trying 
to lay a common foundation of Universal Religion in the doctrine of 
the Unity of the Godhead”. 3 

From 1805 to 1814 R&mmohan was in close touch with Mr. John 
Digby, a covenanted servant of the East India Company. Twice 

97 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

during this period Rfimmohan was employed in the Company’s ser¬ 
vice for short terms under Mr. Digby. The second time he was offi¬ 
ciating Dewan under Digby, who was then the Collector of Bangpur. 
After serving in this capacity from December 1809 to March 1811, 
he had to leave the service as he was not made permanent in spite of 
the strong recommendations of Mr. Digby. But Rfimmohan conti¬ 
nued to stay in R&ngpur, being privately employed by Mr. Digby. 4 

“The period of his residence at Bftngpur (1809-1814) was a fruit¬ 
ful one. On the one hand, during his residence there, he improved 
his own mind by acquiring varied knowledge, and, on the other, by 
holding discussion-meetings with representative men of various 
sects, such as Hindus, Mahomedahs and Jainas, he tried to dissemi¬ 
nate his principles among all classes of people. In addition to a 
knowledge of the old Vedantic literature of the country, he is said to 
have made a careful study of modern Tantric works with the aid of 
Harihara nanda TtrthaswimI, a Bengali Tantric mendicant whose 
acquaintance he made there, and also to have mastered the contents 
of the Kalpa Sutra and other works of the Jaina religion. Some¬ 
thing like an informal club used to meet every evening at his resi¬ 
dence, which attracted all classes of people and gave rise to earnest 
discussions on various religious topics. 

“In the midst of his arduous duties and his frequent discussion- 
meetings, Rammohan Roy found time to improve his knowledge of 
English by private study commenced in his twenty-second year. It 
is also stated by Mr. Digby that, with the progress of his knowledge 
of the English language, Rammohan Roy began to take, while at 
Bangpur, a keen interest in European politics, specially in the course 
of the French Revolution.” 6 

In 1814 Rfimmohan retired from service and after some time 
settled down in Calcutta. 6 Here he came into contact with a number 
of persons whose minds were influenced by the Western education 
and who therefore fully sympathized with his rationalistic views and 
principles. With their co-operation Rfimmohan founded, in 1815, 
the Atmiya Sabha, which held weekly meetings for propagating the 
monotheistic doctrines of the Hindu scriptures. In a famous debate 
on idol-worship in 1819 RSmmohan vanquished Subrahmanya &astri, 
an erudite Brahmin of Madras. In 1825 he established the Vedfinta 
College for teaching the monotheistic doctrines of the Vedfinta “as 
a means for leading his countrymen into pure and elevated 
theism”. 

Rammohan also turned his attention to the publication of tracts. 
“During the course of his researches into the domain of Sanskrit 









NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


literature, Rammohan Roy was struck by the purity of the mono¬ 
theistic doctrines of the Upanishads, and at once decided to publish 
some of them with his preface and translations. This he considered 
to be most effective means of rousing his countrymen to a sense of 
the superiority of the monotheistic creed. Nor were his expecta¬ 
tions disappoined. Their publication soon produced an intense and 
wide-spread agitation in Indian society, the like of which had sel¬ 
dom been witnessed in Bengal.” 7 

Rammohan says in his autobiographical sketch: 8 

i 

“After my father's death I opposed the advocates of idolatry 
with still greater boldness. Availing, myself of the art of printing, 
now established in India, I published various works and pamphlets 
against their errors, in the native and foreign languages. This raised 
such a feeling against me, that I was at last deserted by every per¬ 
son except two or three Scotch friends, to whom, and the nation* 
to which they belong, I always feel grateful.” Deserted by his 
friends and relatives Rammohan carried the fight single-handed. In 
1820 he published the book entitled The Precepts of Jesus, the 
Guide to Peace and Happiness, embodying the moral and spiritual 
precepts of Jesus without the narratives of the miracles. It called 
forth hostile criticism from the Baptist missionaries of Serampore 
and “gave rise to a controversy which finally turned upon the doc¬ 
trine of Trinity, and Rammohun Roy successively published three 
Appeals to the Christian public , the last appearing in 1823, in which, 
by a rare display of polemical skill, as well as of profound Biblical 
learning, he tried to uphold his favourite doctrine of the unity of 
the Godhead. It is evident that during the course of his researches 
into the Christian scriptures he had not confined himself to the 
English rendering of the Bible alone, but had acquired Hebrew and 
Greek in order to be able to refer to the originals”. 0 It is unneces¬ 
sary to dwell at length upon the keen and protracted controversy 
between Rammohan and the orthodox Christians. The conversion 
of a Baptist missionary, Mr. William Adam, to the Unitarian princi¬ 
ples of RSmmohan embittered the controversy and led to the founda¬ 
tion of a Unitarian Mission in Calcutta by their joint endeavour. 

Far more important was the foundation of the Brahma Saml&j. 

“There are two accounts current about the establishment of the 
Brahmo Samaj. One is, that seeing the failure of his Unitarian 
Mission Mr. Adam himself suggested it as a substitute; the other is 
that one day while Rammohun Roy was returning home in his car¬ 
riage from the service of Mr. Adam, his young disciples Tarachand 
Chakravarti and Chandra Sekhar Dev, who were with him, com¬ 
plained of the necessity of attending a Unitarian place of worship, 

99 










THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

in the absence of one entirely suited to their views and principles. 
Rammohun Roy took this complaint to heart, and forthwith pro¬ 
ceeded to call a meeting of his friends, at which it was decided to 
open a place for the unsectarian worship of the One True God. Many 
of Ibis rich friends came forward to meet the expenses, and a house 
was rented to accommodate the first theistic congregation. Here 
on the 6th of Bhadra, Sakabda Era 1750, corresponding to the 20th 
of August, 1828, the first Samaj was opened with Tarachand Chakra- 
varti as its Secretary. Meetings of the Samaj were held every Sa¬ 
turday evening and the following order of service was observed:— 
Two Telugu Brahmins used to recite the Vedas in a sideroom, 
screened from the view of the congregation, where non-Brahmins 
would not be admitted.” 10 The Sanskrit texts of the Upanishads 
were read and translated into Bengali, and sermons were preached 
or read. This Samaj was also known as the Brahma Sabha or the 
“One God Society”. 104 The wrath of the orthodox community knew 
no bounds and their hostility was further increased by the aboli¬ 
tion of the Satx rite in 1829 as Rammohan was closely associated 
with the agitation against this cruel rite. 

The Brahma Samaj began to attract gradually increasing num¬ 
bers from the educated middle class, though there were perhaps 
more sympathisers than formal members. But Rammohan and others 
raised sufficient funds for purchasing a house for the Brahma Sam&j 
before the end of the year 1829. All this provoked the 
orthodox Hindu community to organize a rival association called 
Dharma Sabha. Its secretary and guiding spirit was Radha- 
kanta Dev, the recognized leader of the orthodox Hindu community 
in Calcutta. The two associations had two daily papers as their 
organs—the Sambada-kaumudi and the Samdchdra-chandrikd —which 
poured forth abuses on each other, and the whole of Calcutta was 
strongly agitated over the rise of the reformist party under Rfim- 
mohan Roy., People of all classes, castes, and shades of opinion 
took part in the great controversy, and the number was certainly 
against K&mmohan, who had more than a fair share of abuses and 
ridicule, and even threats of personal violence. The agitation gra¬ 
dually spread into the interior and the entire Hindu society was 
convulsed in a manner to which there was no parallel within living 
memory. 

In the midst of this country-wide agitation Rammohan opened 
his Church on the 11th Magh, the 23rd of January, 1830, before a 
gathering of 500, and placed it in the hands of a few trustees. In 
a manifesto, which formed part of the trust-deed, it was clearly laid 
down that the building could be used by anyone for “the worship 

100 





NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


and adoration of the otie Eternal Unsearchable and Immutable Beings 
who is the Author and Preserver of the Universe, but not under 
or by any other name, designation or title”, and no image or picture 
should be admitted. The new church was, therefore, not intended 
by the Raja as special property of any particular sect but “a meeting 
ground of all sects for the worship of One True God”, 11 bis one and 
ultimate object being, to. ‘revive monotheism in India on the basis of 
the Vedanta*. As Siva-nath Sastri says, “the mission of Rammohan 
Roy was simple, namely to call his countrymen to discard idolatry 
and come to the worship of the One True God. His work was mainly 
negative and reformatory and not positive or constructive’*. 12 

% Devendra-n&th Tagore 

The newly formed Brahma Samaj, latterly known as the “Cal¬ 
cutta Brahmo Samaj”) was reduced to a moribund condition after 
the death of Rammohan Roy in 1833. It was somehow kept up by 
the joint efforts of Dwaraka-nath Tagore who supplied the necessary 
fund, which was very small, and Pandit Ram-chandra Vidy&b&gish 
who conducted the weekly service and ministered to the spiritual 
needs of those few who cared to attend it. 

New life was infused into the church by the eldest son of Dwa¬ 
raka-nath Tagore, named Devendra-nath Tagore, who had come into 
contact with Rammohan. He was converted to the new faith in 
1838, and next year established a Society, known later as Tattva- 
bodhinl Sabha, which attracted a large number of rich and influen¬ 
tial men. He was soon struck by the miserable condition of Brah¬ 
ma Samaj. The doctrine of Rama’s incarnation was being preached 
from the pulpit. “Most of'those who attended the services were 
idolators at home. There was no organisation, no constitution, no 
membership, no covenant, no pledge.” 13 Devendra-n&th framed a 
covenant for the church on the lines laid down by R&mmohan and 
each devotee, who accepted it, had to declare that he would conform 
to the rules of the religious life laid down by the Vedanta and wor¬ 
ship God daily by the Q&yatrt-vrvoLntra. In 1843, Devendra-nfith, 
with twenty associates, took formal initiation at the hands of R&m- 
chandra Vidy&bagSsh and signed the covenant. This was a memor¬ 
able event, being the first step so far taken towards converting the 
Bn&hma Samaj into a distinct spiritual fraternity. It is to be 
noted, however, that the mode of initiation adopted by Devendra-n&th 
was strictly in accordance with the injunctions of the Mah&nirv&na 
Tantra. 

The church now entered upon a career of useful activity, and 
the TattvabodhinI Sabha served as its missionary organization. Many 


101 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

of the works of Rammohan Roy were republished and a monthly 
journal, called the Tattwbodhim Patrikd, was started under the edi- 
torsrip of Akshay-kum&r Datta. A number of preachers were em¬ 
ployed for propaganda in mofussil, and many Scim&jas sprang up in 
provincial towns. A school was also established for the religious 
instruction of young men. 

In course of a controversy with the Christians (in 1845) the 
Vedas were publicly proclaimed as the basis of the religion of the 
Brahma Sanaaj, which was held up as Vedfintism. Prominence was 
also given to the doctrine of ‘infallibility of the Vedas.’ This 
was not liked by a strong section, headed by Akshay-kumar Datta 
whose “rationalistic nature found it difficult to reconcile itself to 
that doctrine.” 14 In order to reconcile the differences, four Brah- 
maga youths were sent to Banaras in 1845 to study the Vedas and 
in 1847 Devendra-nSth himself went there to form a correct idea of 
the teachings of the Vedas. As a result of these studies and investi¬ 
gations the doctrine of the infallibility of the Vedas was given up, 
but Devendra-nath decided to keep the movement as much as possible 
on the old lines of reverence for the ancient Hindu scriptures. Ac¬ 
cordingly he made a compilation of passages from Upanishads, in¬ 
culcating the truth of Monotheism. He also laid down certain fun¬ 
damental principles of Natural Theism and framed a new covenant 
consistent with the principles of Natural and Universal Theism, in 
the place of the old Vedantic covenant. All these took place be¬ 
tween 1847 and 1850. 

3. Keshab-chandra Sen 

The period between 1850 and 1856 witnessed a tendency amongst 
the younger members “not only to broaden the basis of BrShmaism 
by advocating new social ideals but also to apply the dry light of 
reason even to the. fundamental articles of religious belief. They 
advocated female education, supported widow-remarriage, cried 
down intemperance,denounced polygamy, tried to rationalise Brfih- 
ma doctrines and sought to conduct the affairs of the church on stric¬ 
tly constitutional principles.” 14 * 

To this class belonged Keshab-chandra Sen who joined the Sa- 
mSj in 1857, became a wholetime missionary of the Sam&j in 1861, 
and was elevated to the position of the Acharya or the Chief Minis¬ 
ter in 1862. He formed the Sangat Sabhft and infused new life into 
the Samfij. An active spirit of social reform was shown by cele¬ 
brating inter-caste marriages and various other unorthodox prac¬ 
tices. It was mainly due to the personality of Keshab-chandra 
that the Brfihma SamSj gained in strength and number. There 


102 





NSW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


were only six Brfihmasin 1829 , 100 in 1839 , 500 in 1849 and 2,000 
in 1864 . 15 .- But the advanced ideas of active social reforms, such 
as the inter^caste marriage, widow-remarriag^ removal of purdah 
for women, etc. were not liked by the older section. All this led to 
an open conflict between the older and younger sections which was 
brought to a head by the protest of the younger section against the 
custom of allowing Brahma$as with sacred thread to occupy the 
pulpit. 16 Although Devendra-nath at first agreed to their demand, 
he was ultimately induced by the older party ‘not to be drawn away 
from the old Hindu lines laid down by BIjfi Rammohan Roy’. This 
created a definite split between the two sections. Keshab-chandra 
Sen had already organised a Brahma Pratinidhi Sabh£ (Representa¬ 
tive Assembly). He and his followers now seceded from the old 
party led by Devendra-nfith and formed a new organization, called 
“The Brfihma Samfcj of India”, towards the end of 1888. Shortly af¬ 
ter this schism Devendra-nSth retired from active participation in the 
Work of the Adi Brfihma Samaj (as thie older organization was cal- 
led), and Rajn&rflyan Bose became its President. 

In reply to the assertion of the Adi BrShma Samaj of Devendra- 
nath that BrShmaism is Hinduism, the young reformers under 
Keshab maintained that “Brahmoism is catholic and universal”, and 
declared that the renunciation of caste was, as essential to Brfihma- 
ism as the renunciation of idolatry. These were the two main issues 
upon which the two sections parted, to the ultimate detriment of 
both. 


. . • 

Keshab brought to the BrShma SamSj a dynamic force which it 
never possessed before. He had a striking personality; showed cease¬ 
less activity, was marked by a high degree of piety and sincerity 
and, above all, possessed wonderful oratorical abilities. He made 
Brfihmaism a real force all over Bengal and was the first to inaugurate 
an all-India movement of religious and social reforms. He made 
a missionary tour to Bombay ( 1884 ), Madras (1884) and North- 
Western Provinces ( 1868 ). He and his followers carried the message 
of Brahma SamSj all over India, and Brflhma congregations were 
established in many intellectual centres in India, sometimes under 
different names as Pr§rthan& Samaj in Bombay, and Veda Samfej 
(later called Brihma Sam&j) in Madras. It is interesting to note 
that this was the first all-India movement, which was a precursor 
of a similar movement undertaken a few years later by another Ben¬ 
gali, Surendra-n$th Banerji. But while Siirendra-nRth worked for 
political reforms, Keshab’s object was limited to religious reforms 
based on personal liberty and social equality and emancipation. As 
noted above, this might have indirectly influenced the ideas of poli¬ 
tical liberty. But Keshab deliberately eschewed politics; he and 


103 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 

his followers “openly proclaimed loyalty to the British Govern¬ 
ment as an article of the. creed of his Church”. 17 This no doubt 
endeared him to the British Government which was ready to encou¬ 
rage freedom of thought, ideas of social reforms on modem lines, 
and even social revolt, so long as these did not touch upon the dan¬ 
gerous ground of politics. So Keshab was lionised both in India 
and England and was openly hailed as a deliverer of his people by 
Lord Lawrence, the Viceroy. 18 Keshab’s annual addresses at the 
Town Hall were attended by the highest officials. 19 At his request 
the Government of India passed a special legislation for legalising 
Brahma marriages which were not valid in the eyes of Hindu law 
as the idol of BSlagram was not present during the ceremony and 
caste-rules were not followed in selecting brides for bridegrooms. 

The new legislation, called the Native Marriage Act, popularly 
known as the Civil Marriage Act, was passed in 1872. It was appli¬ 
cable to anyone who declared: “I am not a Hindu, not a Mussal- 
man, not a Christian”. The Bill was originally called ‘Brahmo Mar¬ 
riage Bill*, but the Adi Brahma Samaj lodged a protest on the ground 
that, they still regarded themselves as Hindus. Though the Act au¬ 
thorized unorthodox marriages, not sanctioned by Hindu scriptures 
and performed in violation of the restrictions imposed by them, it 
imposed certain new restraints upon those who sought to take ad¬ 
vantage of it. Monogamy was made obligatory and the minimum 
age for the bridegroom and bride was fixed, respectively, at 18 and 
14. The Act facilitated the sweeping social reforms, particularly the 
abolition of caste distinctions, advocated by Keshab, and was justly 
regarded as a great personal triumph by his followers. But the 
passing of the Act was strongly resented by the Hindus and gave an 
impetus to the Hindu Revivalist Movement to which reference will 
be made later. 

Under the inspiration and leadership of Keshab-chandra Sen the 
Br&hma Sam&j launched a comprehensive programme of social re¬ 
forms which formed a vital aspect of Indian Renaissance. Some 
idea of these may be formed from the “Indian Reform Association” 
which was founded by Keshab on his return from England in 1870. 
The programme of the Association was carried through five sections, 
each with a Secretary of its own. These sections were: 

1. Female improvement; 2. Education of the Working Classes. 
3. Cheap Literature. 4. Temperance. 5. Charity. 

The item of cheap literature included the publication of the 
Sulabh Samdchdr , a weekly paper priced at one pice each issue. 
It was a new venture and soon became very popular. 


104 



NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


The education of women was put in the forefront of the pro¬ 
gramme of social reforms from beginning to end. In 1863 Keshab 
started an organization for educating female'members at home. Ano¬ 
ther association was started in the same year for publishing books 
and journals and holding essay competition for the same purpose. 
Several other associations were established by Keshab or other mem¬ 
bers of the Brahman Samaj for the uplift of women. 

While the orthodox Hindu society did not look favourably upon 
the Brahma Samaj for discarding image worship, it imbibed, slowly 
but steadily^ the spirit of social reform inaugurated by it, and almost 
all its items were gradually adopted by the Hindus. Regarding edu¬ 
cation of women and the raising of their marriageable age the pro¬ 
gress achieved by the Hindus far exceeded the wildest dreams of the 
social reformers of the Brahma Samaj. The remarriage of widows 
was accepted by the Hindu society as valid, though it was not much 
in vogue during the period under review. Polygamy also steadily 
declined. 19 * 

Keshab-chandra Sen raised the Brahma Samaj to the height of 
its power by his personal magnetism and radical views. But it is a 
well-known fact in history that revolution, whether political or re¬ 
ligious, gathers momentum as it proceeds, and what was radicalism 
at one stage becomes moderation itself at the next. So, in course 
of a few years, younger men with still more radical views challenged 
the authority of Keshab and deserted him as he had himself deserted 
Devendra-nath. The crisis was precipitated by the marriage of the 
eldest daughter of Keshab with the minor ruler of Cooch Behar. 
Neither the bridegroom nor the bride had attained the minimum 
marriageable age as laid down by the Brahma Samaj and incorpo¬ 
rated in the Native Marriage Act of 1872. Further, the marriage 
ceremony was performed by the Brahmana priests according to the 
Hindu rites in the presence of the images of Hindu deities, and the 
BrShma form of prayer was not followed. There was a great out¬ 
cry at this open violation of the fundamental principles of Brahma- 
ism by the leader himsellf. After a painful controversy and ignoble 
squabbles, there was a second split or secession, and a younger sec¬ 
tion led by Biva-nath Sastrf, Ananda-mohan Bose and others found¬ 
ed the ‘Sadharan Brahma Samaj* on 15 May, 1878. The remnants 
of all the three bodies—Adi (original) Brahma Samaj, the Brahma 
Samaj of India, and the Sfidharan (common) Brahma Sam&j—still 
exist, but the first two are in a moribund condition. Even the third 
is in a decadent state and the Brahma SamSj movement is now a 
spent force. The total number of its members is probably less than 
five thousand. As a writer, himself once a Brfihma Missionary, has 
remarked: *Tt has become a kind of backwater of religious and 


105 


THE BRIUSH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE —TL 

communal life, separated by its own sense of self-satisfied superiority 
from the main currents of national life, which flows past it with a 
power and rapidity, which it can neither appreciate nor evert under¬ 
stand”.? 0 

Although the observation is substantially correct, it does not 
contain the whole truth. It ignores the rich legacy which the Brfih- 
ma Samfij has bequeathed to the Hindus. Not only the rationalistic 
spirit and freedom of individual conscience on which the Brahma 
Samfij was founded, but most of its social ideas and a great deal of 
its moral and religious precepts have been imbibed by the Hindus. 

Brahmaism must ever remain an important episode in the his¬ 
tory of India. Apart from specially emphasizing the social and per¬ 
sonal freedom which was bound to evoke the sense and value of politi¬ 
cal freedom, Keshab-chandra Sen indirectly contributed to the growth 
of nationalism in several other ways. The great respect which he 
commanded among all sections in India, including "Europeans and 
Christian missionaries, and the honours heaped upon him during his 
visit to England, increased the self-confidence of the Indians and 
helped the growth of Indian nationalism as will be stated more fully 
in Chapter Xni. A larger number of individual ipembers of the Brfih- 
ma Samfij also made valuable contributions to India’s struggle for 
political freedom. 


H. THE PRARTHANA SAMAJ 

As mentioned above, the tour of Keshab-chandra Sen led to the 
foundation of the Prarthana Samfij (Prayer Society) in Bombay. 
Keshab first visited Bombay in 1864 and the Prarthanfi Samfij was 
inaugurated in 1867, its leader being Dr. Afmarfim Pandurang 
(1823-1898). In 1868 Keshab visited Bombay again and strengthen¬ 
ed the organization. Two years later, R. G. Bhandarkar and M. G. 
Ranade joined the Samfij and infused new strength in it. 

The two main planks of the Samfij were theistic worship and so^ 
cial reform. It did not produce any new philosophy and literature, nor 
had much missionary activity. As Ranade wrote, the Samfij seem¬ 
ed to have been “perfectly satisfied with a creed which consists of 
only one positive belief in the unity of God, accompanied with a 
special protest against the existing corruption of Hindu religion, viz. 
the article which denounces the prevalent idolatry to be a sin, and 
an abomination”. 21 Ranade himself tried to give the Samfij a more 
comprehensive meaning and philosophic basis, and his essay entitled 
“Theist's Confession of Faith” 22 was an attempt in that direction. 


106 






NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


The greatest service of the Samfij, or rather of its individual 
members, was the organization of social reform movement. The Sa¬ 
maj laid special stress on the abandonment of caste, introduction of 
widow remarriage, encouragement of female education, and the 
abolition, of purdah and child marriage. The principles of social re¬ 
form enunciated by Ranade himself will be discussed in chap¬ 
ter Vn (XLV). 

Broadly speaking, the PrSrthanfi Samaj subscribes to the beliefs 
of the Sadharan Brthma Samaj. Although their theism is derived 
from Hinduism they do not regard the Veda as divine or infallible, 
nor believe in the doctrine of transmigration and incarnation of God. 
Nevertheless, the Prarthana Samaj had some characteristics which 
distinguished it from the Brahma Samfij. As Miss. S. D. Collet 
wrote in her Brahma Year Book in 1880, the Pr&rthana Samaj “never 
detached itself so far from the Hindu element of Brahmaism as many 
of the Bengali Samajes, and both in religious observances and social 
customs, it clings far more closely to the old models”. 23 Another 
writer put it more bluntly: “The Prarthana Samfij may be said to be 
composed of men paying allegiance to Hinduism and to Hindu society 
with a protest. The members observe the ceremonies of Hinduism, 
but only, as mere ceremonies of routine, destitute of all religious 
significance. This much sacrifice they make to existing prejudices. 
Their principle, however, is not to deceive anyone as to their reli¬ 
gious opinions, even should an honest expression of views entail un¬ 
popularity”. 24 As a matter of fact, a rigid exclusion of idolatry and 
a definite break from the caste system were not regarded as essential 
conditions of membership as was the case with the Brahma Samaj of 
Bengal after its secession from the Adi Brahma Samaj of Devendra- 
nath Tagore. The Prarthanfi Samaj draws its nourishment very 
largely from the Hindu scriptures, and uses the hymns of the old 
Marat ha poet-saints in its service. 

The Prarthana Samaj has not spread widely. Several societies 
originally associated with it changed their name to Brfihma SamSj. 
On the other hand, the moderate views of the Prarthanfi Samfij made 
it popular in the Telugu country and eighteen out of the twenty-nine 
Brfihma Samajas in the Madras Presidency bear the name Prfir- 
thana Samfij. 26 

in. THE ARYA SAMAJ 26 
1. Day&nanda Sarativati 

The Brahma Samaj inspired similar or parallel movements in 
other parts of India. The most important of these was the Arya Sa¬ 
mfij founded by SvfimI Dayfinanda Sarasvati in 1875. 


107 




THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

Dayananda, known in early life as Mula Sankara, was bora in 
1824, in an orthodox Brahman family living in the small town of Tah- 
kara in the old Morvi State in Gujarat. At the age of fourteen 
his father took him to a temple on the Sivaiatri night in order to 
observe the custom of worshipping and keeping vigil the whole 
night. Both Dayananda’s father and the priest of the temple fell 
asleep after midnight, but the young boy kept himself awake. Sud¬ 
denly he found that a mouse crept on the image of the deity and took 
the offerings placed before it. This scene set the boy furiously to 
thinking. If the deity, thought he, could not protect himself from 
the impertinence of a mouse, he coiild not be &iva, the almighty 
God, and the image was evidently a helpless inanimate object. He 
awoke his father who argued with his son, but to no purpose. DayS- 
nanda went home, broke the fast, and fell asleep before the night 
was over, much to the chagrin of his father and other relatives. 

This episode was a turning-point in the career of the boy. He 
lost his faith in traditional religion and began to think for himself. 
Five years later died an uncle of Dayananda who loved him very 
much. In the spirit of the Buddha, Dayananda asked his friends 
and many learned men how death could be overcome. He was told 
in reply that the practice of yoga was the only means to salvation. 
Dayananda now looked upon the world and its attractions as merely 
transient and of no value in comparison with the bliss of salvation. 
When, therefore, the parents of Dayananda made arrangements for 
his marriage, he stealthily left home and adopted the life of an asce¬ 
tic ( sddhu ), in order to solve the mystery of life and death and attain 
salvation. He was at first a brahmachdri (novitiate) but was for¬ 
mally initiated into ascetic life within a few years. For fifteen years, 
from 1845 to 1860, he wandered all over India. He practised yoga 
all the while; for days he ate nothing but wild fruits and for months 
he lived on milk only. He received his education at the feet of 
Swam! Birajananda. When he completed it and took leave of his 
guru, the latter asked him, in lieu of the payment of the usual fee, 
to take a pledge to devote his life to the dissemination of truth, the 
waging of incessant warfare against the falsehoods of the prevailing 
Puranic faith or orthodox Hinduism, and establishing the right me¬ 
thod of education as was in vogue in pre-Buddhist time. He willingly 
gave the pledge, and it has been justly remarked that “never was 
any human pledge kept more loyally and faithfully”. 

For two years after this Dayananda preached his views at nu¬ 
merous public meetings. They gradually excited some interest on 
account of their heterodox character, and Dayfinanda was challenged 
to defend his point of view in a public meeting at Kfisi (Banaras). It 
was presided over by the MahfirajS of Banaras, and Day&nanda with 

108 



NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


a few associates were pitted against three hundred leading Hindu 
scholars, of that great centre of orthodox Hinduism. As could be 
expected, and much to the disappointment of thousands who had 
assembled at the meeting, the result of the disputation was incon¬ 
clusive, each side claiming victory. But this public discussion made 
Dayananda a renowned public figure and a recognized preacher of 
new religious views. From this date may be counted the effective 
beginning of Dayananda’s mission. Among other places he visited 
Calcutta and there was some talk of his rapprochement with the 
Brahma Samaj. 

Although there are many points of agreement between the Brah¬ 
ma Samaj and the Arya Samaj, there are also differences. The 
latter insists upon veneration of cow and the offer of a daily sacrifice 
of butter in the hearth-fire. It condemns not only polytheism but 
also monotheism as preached by Christianity and Islam. The 
Brahma Samaj was based on rationalistic movement of the West; its 
appeal was to the English-educated classes, and its object was to 
form an elite. Dayananda did not know English and he appealed 
to the emotion of the masses. 27 

It has been held by some that Dayananda “at first tried to come 
to terms with Brahma Samaj, and there was a conference in Calcutta 
in 1869, but it came to nothing”; he also tried to capture the Prarthani 
Samaj of Ahmadabad, but failed. But the Arya SamSjists put the 
whole thing in a different way. According to Lala Laj pat Rai the 
leaders of Brahma Samaj wanted to win over Dayananda to their 
society. 28 But the Brahma Samaj did not accept the infallibility of 
the Vedas or the transmigration of souls, as it was pledged to the 
negation of both; on the other hand, Dayananda could not ignore 
either. There seems to be no doubt that whichever side might have 
made the first approach, there was some sort of negotiation, but it 
foundered on his doctrine of the infallibility of the Vedas to which 
reference will be made later. But Dayananda’s association with the 
leaders of the Brahma Samaj produced one good result. Keshab- 
chandra Sen suggested to him the supreme importance of carrying 
on propaganda in the language of the people; he gratefully accepted 
it and made Hindi the vehicle of his teaching. After spending another 
two years in preaching his doctrines from place to place he proceed¬ 
ed to Bombay where the first Arya Samaj was established on 10 April, 
1875. 

During the remaining eight years of his life Dayananda devoted 
himself to preaching his new gospel, writing iJobks embodying his 
teachings, and organizing Arya Samaj as throughout India. He tour¬ 
ed extensively over all parts of India except Madras, translated the 


109 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 

Vedas and wrote three books: (1) Satyartha Prahad, in Hindi; (2) 
Veda-Bh&shya Bhumika, an introduction to his Vedic commentary, 
partly in Sanskrit and partly in Hindi; and (3) Veda-Bh&shya r a Vedic 
commentary in Sanskrit on the Yajurveda and major part of the 
ftigveda. His mission proved very successful in the Panjab, and to 
a certain degree also in U. P., Rajputana and Gujarat. But at the 
tim e of his death in 1883, the total membership of the Arya Samaj 
did hot probably exceed twenty thousand. In the census of 1891 it 
was less than forty thousand. 

2. The Arya Samaj . 

The constitution which was drawn up for the Arya Samaj on 
the occasion of its foundation in Bombay in 1875 laid down some of 
the fundamental doctrines and rules of conduct. Three of these may 
be noted below: 

1. The (Arya) Samaj shall regard the Vedas alone as indepen* 
dently and absolutely authoritative. 

2 . Every member shall cheerfully contribute a hundredth part 
of the money he has earned towards the fund of the Samaj, the Arya 
Vidyalaya and the AryaPrakad paper. 

3. The Vedas and the ancient Arsha granthas shall be studied 
and taught in the Arya Vidyalaya, and true and right training, cal¬ 
culated to improve males and females, shall be imparted, on Vedic 

lines. 

Two years later (1877) this creed and constitution were replaced 
by the Ten Principles. Instead of No. 1 above it was simply laid down 
that the Vedas are the Books of True Knowledge which the members 
should study. The other nine principles merely inculcated virtue 
and morality to which no religion can possibly take any exception. 
Dayananda believed, like Raja Rammohan Roy, that the reform of 
Hindu society could only be effected by reviving Vedic rituals and 
institutions which had been hidden under the excrescences of the 
later Puranic age. So he adopted a programme of social reform. 
He rejected the hereditary system of caste and did not recognize the 
authority pr even superiority of the Brahmans merely on the ground 
of birth. He proclaimed the right of everybody to study the Vedas 
and other Hindu scriptures. He denounced the worship of gods and 
goddesses and preached that only the Supreme Being should be 
worshipped. Inter-caste marriage was encouraged and child- 
marriage was decried—the minimum marriageable age for boys and 
girls being fixed, respectively, at 25 and 16. Dayananda was, how- 

110 



NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


ever, opposed to the remarriage of widows. He held that ordinarily 
neither widower nor widow should remarry, but this rule may be 
relaxed, in letter or spirit, in the case of both. So he would permit 
a childless husband to remarry and a widow to procreate sons by 
others according to the system of niyoga (levirate) prescribed in the 
Vedas! But this does not seem to have been carried out in practice. 

The most characteristic feature of the Arya Samaj is the empha¬ 
sis if laid upon the work oi Suddhi. This means the reconversions 
of those Hindus—millions in number—who had once been willingly 
or forcibly converted into other religions like Islam or Christianity, 
but were now willing to come back to the fold of Hinduism. Ortho¬ 
dox Hinduism had always barred its door against them; the Arya 
Samaj threw it wide open. As a matter of fact, this aspect of the 
Arya Samaj excited the greatest interest in it among the people out¬ 
side its own ranks. It was strongly resented by the Muslims and 
was a source of almost chronic feud between the two. At the same 
time the Suddhi was looked upon by the Arya Samaj as a potent 
instrument for effecting that religious, social, and political unity of 
India which came to be cherished as its great ideal by the Arya 
Samaj. 

Two distinctive features of the Arya Samaj are social services 
like famine-relief, and the spread of English education. The Dayfi- 
nanda Anglo-Vedic School at Lahore, soon developed into a college, 
has become the pattern of many educational institutions maintained 
by the Arya Samaj. The curriculum in these colleges was not exact¬ 
ly in the original spirit of Dayfinanda, and so the more orthodox sec¬ 
tion founded the Gurukul at Haridwar. It is a unique institution to 
perpetuate the educational ideals of ancient India. But the DA.V. 
(Dayananda Anglo-Vedic) College at Lahore has also great, achieve¬ 
ments to its credit. Under Lfilfi Hansraj, who remained its Principal 
for 28 years, “it became the foremost agency for planting a sturdy 
and independent nationalism in the Punjab”. 

3. The great split 

There was a serious split in the Arya Samaj in 1892, ostensibly 
on the difference of views on the two following questions: 

1. The righteousness of meat diet. 

2. The lines on which the D.A.V. College, founded in 1886 in 
memory of Dayananda, was to be conducted. 

These differences were, however, based on some fundamental 
principles. The unorthodox party pointed out that although Dayfi- 

111 







THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

nanda had expressed an opinion unfavourable to meat diet, the Ten 
Principles which formed the basic doctrine of the Arya Samaj were 
quite silent about it The members, it was argued, need believe in 
the Ten Principles only and in nothing else, and the Samaj had no 
right to question the individual's right of judgment in matters not 
strict./ covered by the Teh Principles. It was argued by one of the 
most trusted disciples of Dayananda that the great leader had wisely 
excluded from the Ten Principles the doctrinal principles and philo¬ 
sophical questions, so that the members may enjoy freedom of 
thought. 

The orthodox party, on the other hand, held that the teachings 
of Dayananda, though not embodied in the Ten Principles, constitu¬ 
ted the creed of the Arya Samaj, for all practical purposes. They 
maintained that so long as a greater authority on the Vedas was not 
bom, the Arya Samaj was bound by the teachings of Dayananda 
and by his interpretation of the Vedas. 

The true ring of liberalism in the voice of the unorthodox party 
is likely to draw public sympathy towards it. It is to be remem¬ 
bered, however, that if their views are to be carried to their logical 
conclusion, there would be hardly any raison d’itre for the Arya 
Samaj as a separate organization. The Ten Principles are worded 
in such a way that no Hindu can possibly take exception to them, 
and there is nothing in them which can serve as a bond of union to 
the extent of a cohesive organization. Dayananda himself refused 
to join hands with the Brahma Samaj,—though there were many 
points of agreement—because the latter did not accept the infalli¬ 
bility of the Vedas and the doctrine of transmigration of souls. Yet 
neither of these two finds place in the Ten Principles. To any im¬ 
partial observer it would appear that it is the doctrine preached by 
Dayananda, rather than the Ten Principles, which gave the dynamic 
force to the Arya Samaj and made it what it is today. One might 
go even further and say that the seeming obscurantism or rigidity of 
Dayananda’s teachings really imparted to the Arya Sam£j that cha¬ 
racter and drive which made it a powerful national force. In view 
of its great importance this point requires a little‘elucidation. 

The absolutely authoritative character of the Vedas, and Vedas 
alone, formed the fundamental creed of Day&nanda. At first he in¬ 
cluded within the Vedas both Brahma^as and Upanishads, but wfcen 
it was pointed out that the Upanishads themselves repudiated the 
authority of the Vedas as the highest or the only revelation, Daya¬ 
nanda modified his views. Ultimately the Samhita portion of the 
Vedas, and particularly the Rigveda Samhita, was alone held to be 
the real Vedic revelation, at least for all practical purposes. 20 


112 





NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


In accepting the Vedas as the only authority Dayananda was 
practically on a line with Raja Rammohan Roy. But while the Raja 
‘‘accepted the authority of the Vedas as interpreted by the exegetics 
and apologetics of ancient Hinduism”, 30 Dayananda altogether re¬ 
jected the commentaries of Sayapa and Mahldhara and did not con¬ 
sider any other commentary as binding on anyone. 31 Dayananda 
therefore gave his own interpretation, and though theoretically 
every member of the Arya Samaj was free to form his own conclu¬ 
sions, in practice, the Samhitd of the Jjiigveda, as interpreted by 
Dayananda in his books mentioned above, formed the bed-rock on 
which stood the entire structure of the Arya Samaj. His interpre¬ 
tation, which is supposed to contain the whole truth, differs in many 
cases fundamentally not only from that of modern scholars but also 
from the old Indian commentaries. To take an extreme example, 
Rigveda 1, 2, 7, which is usually regarded as an invocation to Mitra 
and Varupa, is translated by Dayananda to mean that ‘water is gene¬ 
rated by the combination of hydrogen and oxygen*. Such interpre¬ 
tations and Dayananda’s claim that the Vedas alone are authorita¬ 
tive, have a deep significance which has thus been explained: 

“.... The nature of scriptural authority in Hindu culture dif¬ 
fered from the scriptural authority recognised by the other great 
world religions in this, namely, that while Christianity or Islam 
claimed more or less exclusive divine authority for their own books, 
the Vedas never put up any such claim. Modern Hinduism suffered 
in some sense from a great disability, as compared to Christianity 
and Islam, owing to the universal character of their scriptures, parti¬ 
cularly of the Vedas. Dayananda Saraswati recognised this dis¬ 
advantage and was evidently moved by the militant spirit of evange¬ 
lical Christianity and Islamic missionary propaganda to create and 
foster a similar militancy in Hindtiism itself. He was, therefore, 
moved to advance for the Vedas exactly the same kind of super¬ 
natural authority and exclusive revelation, which was claimed by 
the Christians for their Bible, and by the Muslims for their Quran. 
In this Dayananda Saraswati practically made a new departure from 
the line of ancient Hindu Fathers, from Jaimini and Vyasa to Raja 
Ram Mohan; and at the same time practically denied the very funda¬ 
mentals of modem world-thought. But even by thus deviating from 
the ancient line of Hindu evolution he rendered an immense service 
to the new nationalist movement in India. He saw that both Chris¬ 
tianity and Islam were making fatal inroads upon Hinduism. He 
realised that unless this process of conversion to Christianity and 
Islam of increasing numbers of Hindus could be stopped, India would 
cease in course of time to be the land of the Hindus, the main body 
of the people being divided into Moslems and Christians, Moslems 

113 


B.P.I.R—• 





THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-II 


in Upper India and Christians in the South. Christianity and Islam 
must, therefore, be fought with their own weapons, and Hinduism 
must find this weapon in the Vedas, proclaimed as an exclusive re¬ 
velation without which there is and can be no salvation for man, 
whatever may be his country. Christian and Islamic universalism is 
based upon the universality and infallibility of the Christian and the 
Islamic scriptures. Whoever accepts the authority of the Bible and the 
doctrine of salvation through Christ proclaimed by the Bible becomes 
entitled to enter the Kingdom of Heaven absolutely regardless of his 
birth or parentatge or his native country. It is so with Islam... .We 
had nothing like it in ancient or mediaevel Hinduism. Hinduism 
believes in the universality of man’s salvation. It believes in the 
universality of God’s love and grace... .And as Hinduism never con¬ 
ceived of a heaven to which Hindus alone would be entitled to enter 
or of a hell to which all non-Hindus would be condemned, it never 
set up the dogma of infallible scriptural authority familiar to credal 
systems like Christianity or Islam. Dayananda was, however, pro¬ 
foundly influenced by what might be called the credal universalism 
of Christianity and Islam to seek for the foundations of it in his own 
national religion. This was, it seems to me, the real psychology of 
the doctrine of Vedic infallibility set up by Dayananda Saraswati, 
upon which he wanted to build up the Hindu society and the Hindu 
nation inspired with a great mission among the peoples of the world. 
_The Satyarth-Prdkash, which contains the teachings of Daya¬ 
nanda, clearly proves this interpretation of the psychology of the 
Arya Samaj. Whatever may be the philosophical value of these 
teachings, and however much these may be discordant with some 
of the bedrock doctrines and ideals of Hindu Universalism, it cannot 
be denied that the movement of Dayananda Saraswati, as organised 
in the Arya Samaj, has contributed more than the rational movement 
of the Raja’s Brahmo Samaj to the development of a new national 
consciousness in the modern Hindu, particularly in the Punjab. It 
was no small thing for the Hindu suffering for centuries under what 
the psychologists now call the ‘inferiority complex’, to be able to 
challenge aggressive Christianity and Islam by setting up this dogma 
of Vedic infallibility against their dogma of supernatural revelation; 
while at the same time he was able to appeal to the social economy 
of the Vedic Hindu not only to remove the numerous social disabili¬ 
ties under which the present day Hindu laboured, but also to claim 
a social order based upon the teachings of the Vedas which was from 
some points of view even superior to the advanced social idealism 
inspired by the dogma of Liberty, Equality and Fraternity of the 
French Illumination. India did not stand in need of going to Europe 
either for a purer religion or for a purer social order. This could be 


114 


NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


found in the ancient scriptures of the people themselves. This was 
really the beginning of that religious and social revival among 
the Hindus of India to which we owe so largely the birth of 
our present national consciousness”. 32 

This view has considerable force. 

IV. NEO-HINDUISM 

Brahmaism was the result of an effort to check Christianity and 
influence of Western ideas by emphasizing the essential principles 
of Hinduism. These were regarded as free from the evil accretions of 
a later date, which formed the chief target of attack by Christian mis¬ 
sionaries and were held out to be opposed to the true spirit of Hindu¬ 
ism. This rationalistic attitude provoked a reaction in Bengal which 
gathered force in the second half of the nineteenth century, and 
gave rise to what may be called neo-Hinduism. Its common characte¬ 
ristic was the glorification of Hindu religion and society in their cur¬ 
rent forms, and a spirited defence of these against hostile criticism 
both by Indian reformers and European missionaries. It took vari¬ 
ous forms. An extreme point of view is represented by Pandit &a£a- 
dhar Tarka-chudamani who addressed many public meetings in de¬ 
fence of popular Hindu ceremonialism, image-worship and current 
Hindu social institutions. He sought “to reconcile ancient Hindu 
ritualism and mediaeval Hindu faith with modem science”. No one 
would be disposed today to put much value on his arguments. But, 
as Mr. B. C. Pal observes from his personal experience, “all the same 
it went down with large numbers of our country-men”, who felt a 
new pride in their culture. 33 

Kyishna-prasanna Sen represented a more popular, but less 
refined, aspect of this school. “One of his most popular presenta¬ 
tions of the superiority of Hinduism was a pun on the words ‘God* in 
English representing the Supreme Being and ‘Nanda-Nandana’ in 
Sanskrit and Bengalee, representing the Vaishnavic Deity Shri Kri¬ 
shna. ‘If you reversed the alphabets composing the word God you 
would find it converted into dog; if you reversed the letters Nanda- 
Nandana in this way, you would find no change in it”. 34 This was 
a typical presentation of Kjdshija-prasanna Sen. “He was 
sentimental, vulgar and abusive, but this very sentimentality, vulga¬ 
rity and abuse went down with a generation of half-educated Ben¬ 
galees who had been wounded in their tenderest spots by the vulga¬ 
rities of the Anglo-Indian politicals of the type of Branson and igno¬ 
rant and unimaginative Christian propagandists”. 36 

The other extreme of this neo-Hinduism is represented by Ban- 
kim-chandra Chatterji, perhaps the greatest intellectual giant of 

115 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-11 


this period. He “openly attempted a ‘re-examination, a re-interpre¬ 
tation and a re-adjustment’ of our old theology and ethics in the light 
of the most advanced modern thought and in accordance with the 
new rules of literary criticism and scriptural interpretation that had 
been so powerfully influencing current religious life and thought in 
Christendom itself”. 36 His classical work in this field was a bio¬ 
graphy of Lord Krishna, whose early life, particularly amours with 
the cowherd girls, formed a subject of cheap criticism, satire, and 
vehement denunciation, not only by Christian missionaries but also 
by a number of Indian rationalists. Bankim-chandra has tried to 
prove, by following historical method, that Krishna was the Ideal 
Man. Here, again, it is futile to argue about the correctness of Ban- 
kim-chandra’s method or conclusions. Krishna is regarded as the full 
incarnation of God by the Hindus. The resuscitation of his moral 
character and personality from the gross abuses of modern calumni¬ 
ators by one of the greatest intellects of the age had a tremendous 
effect on the orthodox Hindus, and increased their self-confidence 
beyond measure. It strengthened the Hindu revivalist movement • 
and helped the growth of the nascent national sentiment. 

An intermediate position between the two extremes is occupied 
by two persons, the poet Nabln-chandra Sen and the essayist Bhudev 
Mukhopadhyay. Nabln-chandra sought to re-interpret the Puragas 
in the light of western science and humanism. Bhudev also upheld 
the Puranic religion but laid special stress on preserving the Hindu 
social institutions some of which were the principal targets of attack. 
Both of them were highly proficient in English literature and brought 
a high degree of western rationalism in supporting their standpoint. 

V. RAMAKRISHNA MATH AND MISSION 
1. Ramakrishna Paramahaihsa. 37 

Gadadhar Chattopadhyaya, who was known in later life as 
R&makpshpa Paramahamsa, was bom in 1836 in a poor Brahman 
family in a small village called Kamarpukur in the District of Hoogh- 
ly in West Bengal. For the sake of convenience he may be referred 
to as Kamakfish^a even before he formally came to be designated as 
such. His early boyhood was spent in the village and he got a very 
rudimentary training in the three R’s in the village school. His for¬ 
mal education did not proceed much further beyond this elementary 
stage as he had no liking for school and enjoyed far more the society 
of the s&dhus or ascetics who passed through the village. For he 
was of a religious and contemplative mood, and is said to have occa¬ 
sionally fallen into trances even from the early age of six. At the 
age of about seventeen he came to Calcutta, and three or four years 

1X6 




NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


later (1856), he adopted the vocation of a priest in the terhple of God¬ 
dess Kali, founded a short while ago by an aristocratic lady named 
Rasmani, at Dakshinesvar, on the bank of the Gahga about five miles 
to the north of Calcutta. This was the turning-point in the life of 
Ramakfishpa. While serving as priest he was gradually seized with 
the idea that the Goddess Kali, whose idol he worshipped, was not 
an image of clay, but the Goddess herself, personified. He looked 
upon K&ll as a visible deity who should talk with him and share his 
joys and sorrows. This idea became an obsession with him. He 
could not follow the normal procedure of worship, but became God- 
intoxicated and yearned with his whole soul for the realization of 
God or ultimate reality. In this, he is believed to have succeeded. 
For, later in life, when questioned by his famous disciple Narendra- 
n&th (Swami Vivekananda), he told him that he had seen God, as will 
be related later. 

According to the account of his devotees based on what they 
heard from him, he reached this stage fairly early, not long after he 
became a priest or worshipper of Kali. Nevertheless, we find him 
making an earnest endeavour to realize God in various aspects. He 
led a God-centred life characterized by constant search for, and con¬ 
tinuous approach to God, through various modes prescribed by tradi¬ 
tion. All the while he lived as an ordinary man in Dakshinesvar; 
but though he was in the world, he was not of the world. From an 
early period he showed the characteristics of the state of mind, 
known in religious parlance as divyonm&da , God-centred frenzy, 
which puzzled everybody. He sometimes discarded clothes, and 
taking money in one hand and a clod of earth in the other, used to 
say, ‘money is earth, earth is money*. These and other eccentricities 
need not be described in detail, and in the light of later events can 
only be looked upon as spiritual powers latent in him. The crucial 
fact remains that his early life shows no preparations for reaching 
this stage of God-intoxication or attaining this spiritual urge. It 
seems as if he was born with that spirituality which others acauire 
by exertion. For, if the accounts be true, he secured in an incredibly 
short time, sometimes in a few days, success or salvation in each 
mode of sadhand (religious exercise) which others, including his 
gurus who initiated him, failed to attain even after many years of 
- intense exertion. One of his gurus, Tota-purl, exclaimed in surprise 
that he reached in one day that state of nirvikalpa sauuLdhi which 
he himself could attain only after forty years of rigorous asceticism. 
The same thing was true in respect of all the modes of sGdhanas which 
he followed in search of God. 

It is difficult for a layman to trace in detail the various kinds or 
stages of the sddhana (search for God) which he performed during 


117 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

the first eleven or twelve years of his stay in the temple (1855-67); 
but we may state a few essential facts known on fairly good authority. 

From the very beginning he used to retire at night to the jungle 
outside the temple, and sat there in deep meditation under the shade 
of a tree. At day-time he used to cry piteously to the Goddess in 
the temple to have a direct vision of her. “His whole soul, as it 
were, melted into one flood of tears, and he appealed to the Goddess 
to have mercy on him and reveal Herself to him.” In his extreme 
distress at this desire not being fulfilled, pne day he rushed and seized 
a dagger in the temple in order to kill himself, when he lost all sensa¬ 
tion and saw the Goddess Kali in a vision. Henceforth he was al¬ 
most always in a state of frenzy. He discarded the formal rites and 
ceremonies of worship which a priest was expected to perform and 
behaved like a child to his mother, often crying with anguish of 
heart to get again a vision of the Goddess. The visions were repeat¬ 
ed and his trances became longer and longer in duration. At last 
things came to such a pass that he was regarded as mad and was re¬ 
lieved of his formal duty as a priest. He went back home and was 
married, at the age of 24, to a girl of five. But shortly after 
marriage he returned to Dakshinesvar temple. Then began that 
tapa&ya or ascetic exercises which lasted for nearly twelve years. 
Looking back to this period of his life he said later that a great reli¬ 
gious tornado, as it were, raged within him during these years and 
made everything topsy-turvy. First he met a Bhairavl, a Brfihmapa 
lady who had practised yoga and was roaming at large in the red 
garb of an ascetic (sannyasim ). She told the people that what they 
regarded as eccentricities or signs of madness in Ramakyislipa were 
really the physical manifestations which are noticed in an ardent 
lover of God, and she proved it by citing incidents from Chaitanya’s 
life as recorded in the Vaishnava scriptures. The Bhairavl herself 
initiated Ramakrishna into the TSntrik mode of s&dhana. He prac¬ 
tised it for two years and passed successfuly through all the stages. 
He then followed the mode of s&dhana laid down by the Vaishnava 
cult and is said to have obtained a vision of Krishna. He was next 
formally initiated into ascetic life by Tota-puri, a great saint who 
had realized in his life the highest truths of Vedanta, and practised 
the Vedantic sadhand. Ramakrishna was then initiated into the 
Sufi doctrine of Islam and followed all the rites prescribed by that 
religion. He ate and dressed like a Muslim, offered regular prayers 
to Allah, ceased to visit Hindu temples, and in three days obtained the 
vision of God. Later, he practised similar sddhand according to 
Christian rite, and on the third day obtained the vision of Jesus 
Christ. Shortly before this, his wife SSradamani came to Dakshi¬ 
nesvar, walking on foot all the way from her village home—a dis- 


118 


NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


tance of thirty to forty miles. Ramakrishna received her kindly, 
but said he could not look upon her as his wife and saw in her the 
Goddess Kali. So saying, he addressed her as mother and worship¬ 
ped her with flowers and incense. But Sarada was the worthy 
wife of a worthy husband. She said, she wanted nothing from him 
as her husband; but he should teach her how to realize God and 
allow her to stay with him to cook his meals and look to his health 
and comfort. This arrangement cpntinued till the last day of 
Ramakrishna’s life, a detached room outside the temple compound 
being set apart for her residence. However strange all these might 
appear to us, the different forms of the religious practices by Rama¬ 
krishna are vouched for by reliable evidence. He was occupied with 
them for about twelve years from 1856 to 1867. Then the storm-tossed 
soul found peace at last. After a short pilgrimage for a period of 
four months in course of which he visited Vaidyanath, Varanasi, 
Prayag (Allahabad), and Vrindaban he returned to Dakshinesvar. 
His name and fame as a great saint, who possessed wonderful spiri¬ 
tual powers and realized God, spread in all directions and attracted 
pious devotees to his small room within the precincts of the Dakshi¬ 
nesvar temple o,n the banks of the Ganga. Even the renowned 
Brahma leader Keshab-chandra Sen visited him and became his ad¬ 
mirer. Keshab, or one of his followers at his instance, published a 
short sketch of the life and sayings of Ramakrishna. All this created 
great interest in wider and wider circles and highly educated men 
and women of all ranks of life began to visit Dakshinesvar temple 
in ever increasing number to get a vision of the wonderful yogin 
and hear his religious discourse. Ramakrishna also did not spare 
himself, and for hours—-sometimes literally from morning till even¬ 
ing, occasionally even at night—talked with the assembled peo¬ 
ple in his characteristic manner about the knowledge (jnana) of, and 
devotion ( bhakti ) to God and narrated his own experience of spiri¬ 
tual life. Many, who attained to fame in later life, visited him, 
the greatest of them being a young Bengali graduate, Narendra-nath 
Datta, better known as SvamI Vivekananda. Though Thakur Ra- 
makfishna Paramahamsa—as he then began to be called—sometimes 
visited Calcutta and saw some distinguished persons of the time, 
his life was mostly spent in Dakshinesvar, surrounded by an ever 
increasing number of devotees who were charmed and ennobled by 
his religious discourses in the form of short pithy phrases punctuat¬ 
ed by appropriate anecdotes and illustrations from daily life. He 
never gave what may be called religious lectures, and founded no 
sect or dSram. People who flocked to him were mere visitors lead¬ 
ing household life and returning home after the visit was over. Some 
of them, being of ascetic temperament, were more intimate with the 


119 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

saint and came to him more frequently, but their number was very 
small; they were not regularly initiated by Ramakfishiia and did 
not formally renounce their life as householders. 

It is not possible here to give a detailed account of this type of 
life which Ramakrish^a led for nearly twenty years till he was at¬ 
tacked by cancer. On 16 August, 1886, he left this mortal frame 
and entered the final samadhi (trance) from which there is no 
return to earthly life. 

RSmalq-ishna is one of the few religious leaders and ascetic 
saints of the highest order of whom we possess so much authentic 
contemporary account. It is not therefore difficult to describe the 
essential characteristics of his life and teachings. 

The first thing that strikes one is his spiritual life and God- 
consciousness. He fell into ecstatic trances on merely hearing of 
God or thinking of Him. An eye-witness describes it as follows. 

*‘During the state of samadhi he was totally unconscious of him¬ 
self and of the outward world. At one time he fell down upon 
a piece of live coal during this stage. It burned deep into his flesh, 
but he did not know for hours, and the surgeon had to come in to 
extract the coal, when he came back to consciousness, and felt the 
wound.” 38 It has again and again been witnessed by many that his 
body was very sensitive and immediately reacted to the touch 
of anything impure. Once a woman touched her feet and be 
automatically shrank back, and it was later found out that she was 
a bad sort. Like many other saints, he had aversion to wealth 
and refused with scorn the gift of money and costly things. But 
what was peculiar in him is that he could not bear the touch of gold 
or silver coins, and ‘a simple touch, even when he was asleep, would 
produce physical contortions\ 39 He was renunciation incarnate, 
and detachment from everything was the chief tenor of his life. 

Strange fits of God-consciousness often came upon him. He 
would then speak of himself as being able to do and know every¬ 
thing and even declare himself to be the same soul that had been 
bom before as Rama, as Rrishuja, as Jesus, or as Buddha. He had 
told Mathur Babu long before that many disciples would come to 
him shortly and he knew all of them. 39 * At sight he could read the 
souls of those who approached him. The moment he saw Narendra- 
nfith (future Vivekananda) he instinctively felt that he was the man of 
destiny that would carry his spiritual message to all the world. 
According to a well-authenticated story, to be related later, R§ma- 
krishpa, shortly before his death, transmitted all his spiritual powers 

to Vivekananda, who, when at the height of his power and glory. 

* » 

120 


NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


used to say that R&malqrislma could create hundreds of Vivekananda 
if he willed. Ramalq*ish$a seemed to possess the intuitive know¬ 
ledge of good and evil. One day Rasmapi, his patroness Zamindar, 
while listening to his discourse in the temple, became absent-minded 
at the thought of a law-suit in which she was engaged, with a huge 
amount at stake. Ramakj*ishna slapped her on the face, saying: 
“What! thinking of material things even here?” 

Though RamaJqrishpa had not studied the Vedanta philosophy, he 
lucidly expounded its abstruse teachings. What is more, he was 
thoroughly imbued with the spirit of that philosophy in his life and 
teachings. 

As a practical application of Vedanta, Ramakyishna realized di¬ 
vinity in humanity and emphasized the service of mankind as a 
means to salvation. This will be described more fully in connection 
with Vivekananda. 

The most characteristic trait of his teachings is that he expres¬ 
sed the highest wisdom or greatest truth in simple sentences and 
parables. The theme of all his discoursesLwas the realization of God 
as the highest human ideal, attainable only by development of high 
spiritual life. This was only possible by discarding desire for mate¬ 
rial prosperity ( vishaya-vasanS ) and lure for gold and women 
( hciminukanchana ), and turning all thoughts -and actions towards 
God. But this did not require the renunciation of worldly life 
which is fully compatible with spiritual development if the aim of 
realizing God is steadily kept in view, and the Ultimate Reality—Soul 
or God—, as distinct from the evanescent world, is never lost sight of. 
When asked, how passion can be eliminated, his reply was, why 
should it be eliminated? Give it a new turn and direct it towards 
God. All this idea was illustrated by several parables, two of which 
may be quoted: 

“As a wet-nurse in a rich family brings up the child of her 
master, loving the baby as if it were her own, but knows well that 
she has no claim upon it; so think ye also that you are but trustees 
and guardians of your children whose real father is the Lord God 
in Heaven”. 

“As an unchaste woman, busily engaged in household affairs, 
is all the while thinking of her-secret lover, even so, O! thou man 
of the world, do thy round of wordly duties, but fix thy heart always 
on the Lord”. 40 

Ramakfishna regarded the development of character as superior 
to knowledge. “It is useless to pore over holy scriptures and sacred 
S&stras without a discriminating and dispassionate mind. No spi¬ 
ritual progress can be made without discrimination (viveka,) and 

121 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-II 

dispassion (vairdgya).”*' [ Though preaching against carnal passion 
Ramakrishoa did not hate women nor tried to avoid them as source 
of evils. “One day, when the discussion turned to the need of celi¬ 
bacy, Hari said with an air of bravado, ‘Oh, I hate women, I cannot 
even bear their presence’. Instead of encouraging him, the Master 
came out with the sharp rebuke, “How foolish! What do you mean 
by hating women? They are the representations of the Mother of 
the universe. You should look upon them as your mother and ho¬ 
nour them”. 42 

Thus both by precept and example of his own life Ramalqrishiiia 
brought home to an incredulous world, then under the spell of na¬ 
tural science, the reality of spiritual life. He brought it from heaven 
to earth below. This seems to be his greatest contribution to the 
modern world. Spiritual life and the means to attain it were des¬ 
cribed in ancient Hindu scriptures, but they were either forgotten 
. or disbelieved, and nothing but an actual vision of it in Ramakjrishjia 
could have impressed upon the modern Hindu minds the real mean¬ 
ing, nature, and value of this great treasure of ancestral knowledge. 
RamakfishrLa was a visible embodiment of the spiritual attainments 
of India during three thousand years. 

Next in importance is the revelation of the harmony of all re¬ 
ligions. He demonstrated by precept and example that all the diffe¬ 
rent religions are true in their essence, and may lead to salvation 
if properly pursued. He himself demonstrated, by experiment, the 
efficacy of the diverse modes of sadhand or spiritual discipline pre¬ 
scribed by different religions. His pithy saying that the different creeds 
are but different paths to reach the same God (Yata mat tata path) 
puts on a high pedestal the virtue of toleration and reverence for all 
religions. He made his own life a laboratory for the synthesis of 
different systems of religion;—a wonderful synthesis of higher forms 
of spiritual discipline with rituals and ceremonies; of Sahara (God 
with form) with nirakdra (God without form); of Vedanta with de¬ 
votion; of rationalism with emotion and intuition; of asceticism with 
social and domestic life. He was a store-house of spiritual powers 
—like electricity—which might generate various types of energies or 
powers for various kinds of use leading ultimately to the spiritual 
uplift of the whole world. 

He was asked: “If the God of every religion is the same, why 
Is it then that the God is painted differently by different religionists”? 
He answered: “God is one, but His aspects are different: as one mas¬ 
ter of the house is father to one, brother to another, and husband 
to a third, and is called by these different names by those different 
persons, so one God is descrbed and called in various ways according 


122 


NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 

= £ 

to the particular aspect in which He appears to His particular wor¬ 
shipper. In a potter’s shop there are vessels of different shapes and 
forms—pots, jars, dishes, plates, &c.—but all are made of one clay. 
So God is one, but is worshipped in different ages and countries 
under different names and aspects”. 43 This catholicity of views 
may be regarded as another great contribution of Ramakjishjja to 
the modem world which religion has divided into so many water¬ 
tight compartments. It had a special significance for the orthodox 
Hindus. The worship of images, even of Goddess Kali, which was 
the butt of ridicule by the Christian missionaries as well as Indian 
reformers, was demonstrated by Ramakpshna to be not only not 
incompatible with the highest spiritual development, but also as 
good a means of salvation as the worship of one God without any 
form. “Many are the names of God, and infinite the forms that lead 
us to know Him. In whatsoever name or form you desire to call 
Him, in that very form and name you will see Him”. This teaching 
of Ramakrishoa, supported by parables, and tested by his own life, 
gave the Hindu Revivalism a moral sanction, a philosophical basis, 
and a new spiritual significance of immense value. 

% 

2. SvdmX Vivekdnanda 

The greatest disciple of Ramakj-ishna Paramahamsa was a 
young Bengali graduate named Narendra-nath Datta, who, as SvamI 
Vivekananda, was destined to carry the message of his Master (guru) 
all over India and in Europe and America. Bora on January 12, 
1863, in a Kayastha family in Calcutta, Narendra got English edu¬ 
cation in school and college. He was first attracted to the Brahma 
Samaj and then drank deeply into the philosophy of John Stuart 
Mill, Hume and Herbert Spencer; but he found no peace; his soul 
craved for something more. Towards the end of 1881, when he 
had appeared in the First Examination in Arts of the Calcutta Uni¬ 
versity, he was persuaded by a relative to visit Ramakpishga at 
Dakshinesvar. Hie latter drew him aside and said with tears in his 

eyes: “Ah, you come so late.you are the incarnation of Nfi- 

rayaija, born on earth to remove the miseries of mankind”. Naren- 
dra-nath was taken aback, and doubted the sanity of the saint. But 
he put the question that had been agitating him for some time past. 
“Sir, have you seen God?” “Yes”, was the instant reply, “I see 
Him just as I see you, only in a much intenser sense. God can be 
realized. One can see and talk with Him as I am doing with you”. 
After the interview Narendra summed up his estimation of the Mas¬ 
ter thus: “Even if insane, this man is the holiest of the holy, a true 
saint, and for that alone he deserves the reverent homage of 
mankind”. 


123 




THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

“The second meeting was more interesting. Sri Ramalq-ishpa 
affectionately seated Narendra by his side and quickly placed his 
right foot on the latter’s body. Narendra described the subsequent 
experience thus: ‘With my eyes open, I saw the walls and every¬ 
thing in the room whirling rapidly away and vanishing into naught, 
and the whole universe, together with my individuality, was about 
to be engulfed in an all-embracing mysterious void*. Unable to bear 
this, he cried out, ‘What is it that you are doing to me! I have my 
parents at home.’ The Master laughed out aloud and said, 'All right, 
let it rest now*. And Narendra was himself again.” 44 

t 

It is not possible to describe in detail how the mind of Narendra 
was gradually transformed by close contact with Ramakpishpa, and 
two instances must suffice. 

“One day, some time in 1884, the talk drifted to the Vaishpava 
tenet. In the course of it the Master said: 'This religion enjoins 
upon its followers the practice of three things—delight in the name 
of God, compassion for all living creatures, and service to the devo¬ 
tees of Vishnu*. Hardly had he finished when be fell into a trance. 
Then in a semi-conscious mood he said to himself, ‘Compassion for 
creatures! Compassion for creatures! Thou fool! An insignificant 
worm crawling on the earth, thou to show compassion to others! 
Who art thou to show compassion? No, no, it is not compassion 
for others, but rather service to man, recognising him as the mani¬ 
festation of God V All heard this, but Narendra understood its im¬ 
plication. Outside the room he said to others, 'What a strange light 
I have discovered in those wonderful words of the Master! How 
beautifully he has reconciled the ideal of Bhdkti (devotion) with the 
knowledge of Ved&nta (Monism)! I have understood from these 
words of wisdom that the ideal of Ved&nta, lived by the recluse out¬ 
side the pale of society, can be practised at home and applied to 
all our daily concerns ..It is He who has become all the diffe¬ 

rent creatures—objects of our love; and yet He is beyond all these. 
Such realisation of Divinity in humanity leaves no room for ego¬ 
tism.Service of man, knowing him to be the manifestation of 

God, purifies the heart, and such an aspirant quickly realises himself 
as part and parcel of God—Existence-Knowledge-Bliss. Well, if the 
Lord wills, the day will come when I shall proclaim this grand truth 
before the world at large. I shall make it the common property of 
all—the wise and the ignorant, the rich and the poor, the brahmin 
and the pariah”. 445 The other incident relates how the Master took 
Narendra from the Monism of Ved&nta to the worship of the images 
of God in spite of his Brthma prejudices against idolatry. Reduced 
to extreme penury by the death of his father and failing to secure 

124 




NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


any job, Narendra asked Ramakrishpa to intercede with the Divine 
Mother on his behalf. The latter said, “My boy, I can't make such 
requests. But why don't you go and ask the Mother yourself? All 
your sufferings are due to your disregard of Her". “So Narendra 
at last went to the Kali temple, prostrated himself before the image, 
and forgetting all about his mission, like genuine spiritual aspirant, 
prayed, ‘Mother, give me discrimination! Give me renunciation! 
Grant unto me knowledge and devotion! Ordain that I may have 
an unimpeded vision of Thee!' On his return, the Master found out 
what had taken place, and sent him to the temple a second and a 
third time. But Narendra fared no better. His mind was too highly 
timed to ask for such paltry things from the Mother of the universe 

who was there to end all sense of want for ever.The whole 

of that night he sang of the Mother, only to fall asleep exhausted 
in the morning. The Master was so happy that Naren had accepted 
the Divine Mother." 46 

While Narendra and a few other select young men were slowly 
acquiring a spiritual outlook on life by the precepts and example of 
R§makrishpa, the latter fell ill and had to be removed from Dakshin- 
nesvar, first to Calcutta and then to Kasipur. In these two places, 
particularly at the Kasipur Garden House, the young disciples gathe¬ 
red round the Master to serve him, and thus there grew up a sort of 
brotherhood. Shortly before his passing away Ramakrishga told 
Narenda: “I leave these boys to your care. See that they practise 
spiritual exercises even after my passing away and that they do not 
return home". 

“Three or four days before the final departure, the Master called 
Narendra to his presence, and fixing his gaze on him fell into a 
trance. Narendra felt as though something like an electric current 
was flowing into him, and lost outer consciousness. When he came 
to, he found the Master weeping. On being asked the reason for 
this, the Master said, ‘O Naren, today I have given you my all and 
have become a pauper! Through this power you will do great things, 
and only after that will you return to where you came from". 47 

After the Master had passed away, his young disciples were 
urged by their guardians and advised by others to go back home and 
resume their studies or other duties. Most of them dispersed, but 
Narendra stuck to the idea of setting up a fraternity of monks. By v 
earnest efforts he induced three or four of his associates to leave 
home and live together in a dilapidated house at Baranagar near 
Kasipur. Though faced with the twofold problem of helping his 
own starving family and maintaining the monastery, without any 
regular source of income, Narendra somehow solved both. Gradually 

125 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

the inmates of the monastery increased, and a few, including Na- 
rendra himself, stayed at home and came off and on. And so with 
less than a dozen all-renouncing enthusiasts, all English-edu¬ 
cated Bengalis belonging to middle class families, with only one ex¬ 
ception, the monastery started on its career. 

Referring to these early days of the monastery, Vivekananda 
said in later days: “We were Sannyasins (hermits). We never 

thought of the morrow.We used to live on what chance 

brought. There were days at the Baranagore Maph when we had 

nothing to eat. If there was rice, salt was lacking.Leaves 

of the Bimba creeper boiled, salt and rice—this was our menu for 
months.We were being carried along on a strong tide of medita¬ 

tion and other religious practices. Oh, what days! Demons would 
have run away at the sight of such austerities, to say nothing of 
men.” 48 It was not till some time after the monastery was esta¬ 
blished at Baranagar in A.D. 1887, that about a dozen inmates— 
all close associates of, and receiving their spiritual inspiration from, 
Ramakpisha?a—ceremonially accepted the vows of monasticism in 
a group by performing Vedic rites and accepting monastic names. 
This may be regarded as the formal inauguration of Ramakpishaja 
Order. Henceforth the history of the Order centres round Narendra- 
nath who, after two changes, finally adopted the name Vivekananda, 
and was tacitly acknowledged to be the head of the small band of 
monks. He undertook a pilgrimage over North, West, and South 
India. This was a landmark in his career, for it brought him into 
intimate contact with the peoples of India and enabled him to rea¬ 
lize the true condition of India as he had never done before. “And 
as a common feature of India as a whole, he found poverty, squalor, 
loss of mental vigour and hope for the future, disintegration of age- 
old institutions, conservatism trying to hold its own under the guise 
of spirituality and pseudo-reforms, lack of organised effort, and the 
waves of Western science and culture as well as Christianity beating 
furiously against her shores; in short, he found the glorious India 
of yore fallen and prostrate, the only hope being that she still held 
on to the one source of her life—her religion”. 49 How to help India 
out of this morass, was the problem that deeply agitated him and 
henceforth this question was uppermost in his mind up to the end 
of his life. His mind was working on a somewhat vague plan of 
getting help for India from the West—not as a beggar, but in ex¬ 
change for the spirituality which the West lacked and India alone 
could supply. The idea took shape when he heard of the Parlia¬ 
ment of Religions where representatives of all religions from all 
over the world would assemble at Chicago (U.S.A.) on the 
occasion of the four hundredth anniversary of the discovery of Ame- 

126 






NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


rica by Columbus. How this penniless, lonely monk succeeded in 
reaching the shores of the strange land and without being a delegate 
of any recognized body secured admission into the World Congre¬ 
gation of 1893 as a representative of Hinduism, reads more like a 
romance than historical fact. His success in the Parliament was im¬ 
mediate and absolute. His unusual form of greeting the audience 
as ‘sisters and brothers of America’ in his opening address was re¬ 
ceived with tremendous applause, and won him the love and res¬ 
pect of a section of the Americans which he never lost. The Svamj 
spoke before the Parliament proper no les^ than five times, and also 
a number of times before the scientific section of the Parliament. 
In the opening address he spoke of the catholicity of Hinduism in 
whose dictionary the word ‘intolerance’ never found a place. His 
most significant address was his paper on Hinduism which he read 
on 19 September, 1893. Before reading the paper he made a few 
remarks which created great sensation in the American press. As 
they are not to be found in the official proceedings of the Parliament 
or in his biographies, but throw light on the trend of his political 
thought they are quoted below, as reported in the Chicago Daily 
Tribune of 20 September, 1893. 

“We who come from the East have sat here on the platform 
day after day and have been told in a patronizing way that we ought 
to accept Christianity because Christian nations are the most pros¬ 
perous. We look about us and we see England, the most prosperous 
Christian nation in the world, with her foot on the neck of 
250,000,000 Asiatics. We look back into history and see that 
the prosperity of Christian Europe began with Spain. Spain’s pros¬ 
perity began with the invasion of Mexico. Christianity wins its 
prosperity by cutting the throats of its fellowmen. At such a price 
the Hindu will not have prosperity. I have sat here today and I 
have heard the height of intolerance. I have heard the creeds of 
the Moslems applauded, when today the Moslem sword is carrying 
destruction into India. Blood and sword are not for the Hindu, whose 
religion is based on the laws of love.” 

The reputation won by Vivekananda through the Parliament 
of Religions made him a world figure and raised the prestige of 
India and Hinduism very high. He undertook a whirlwind lecture 
tour, at the rate of fourteen or more per week, and sowed the seeds 
of spirituality in American soil which germinated at no distant date 
and led to the establishment of several centres, on a permanent basis, 
for the study of Vedanta. From America the Svama visited London 
via Paris, and continued the work of lecturing. The great oriental 
scholar Max Muller was so deeply impressed by the account of 
RSmakyishoa given by his greatest disciple, that he first published 


127 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

an article on Ramakjdshna, entitled A real Mahatman, and then a 
biography, called Ramafcfishna—His Life and Sayings . There are 
enough signs already that the sapling which Svaml Vivekananda 
planted in the West, would one day grow into a big banyan tree 
under whose cool shade the world may find refuge from its trials 
and tribulations. 

Early in January, 1897, Svaml Vivekananda returned to India 
and was received with tremendous ovations everywhere he went, 
iiterally from Cape Comorin to the Himalayas. His grateful coun¬ 
trymen offered him homage of respect and reverence for what he 
had done to raise, almost overnight, his country and its culture in 
the estimation of the Western world. But Svamlji knew that the 
real work lay before him. It was a tremendous work,—to uplift 
the masses by removing poverty and ignorance, infusing new vigour 
by invoking the spirit of equality, freedom, work and energy from 
the West, but without detriment to the religious culture and instincts, 
the spiritual heritage of the Hindus. Some of his ideas are best 
expressed in his own words: “Nations, like individuals, must help 
themselves”. “Every nation, every man and every woman must 
work out their own salvation. Give them ideas—that is the only 
help they require—and then the rest will follow as the effect”. 160 
But India must not live in isolation from the rest of the world. 
“I am thoroughly convinced”, said he, “that no individual or nation 
can live by holding itself apart from the community of others, and 
whenever such an attempt has been made under false ideas of great¬ 
ness, policy or holiness—the result has always been disastrous to 
the secluding one.” 'We are to give as well as take from others. 
We should give our ancient spirituality and culture and get in return 
Western science, technology, methods of raising the standard of 
life, business integrity and technique of collective effort.’ 604 

But though he stressed unflinching faith in Hindu religion, he 
did not take it in a narrow spirit. He denounced ‘Dont-touch-ism’ 
and insisted on raising the status of women and the masses, for he 
attributed the degeneration of India to the suppression of such large 
sections of humanity. The masses must be elevated by means of 
education based on religion, and the caste must be restored to its 
original foundation, namely, quality of head and heart and not 
mere accident of birth. But all these must proceed cautiously step- 
by step. “Do not figure out high plans at first, but begin slowly. 
Feel your ground and proceed up and up”. 

But all these merely indicate one aspect of Vivekananda. We 
must take note of the other aspect also—the monk Vivekananda. 
By the time he returned to India, the monastery had been removed 


128 


NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


from Baranagar to Alambazar, but its monastic members were scat¬ 
tered abroad in different parts of India. Vivekananda gave new life to 
the monastery and it was ultimately removed to Belur, at its present 
site, at the beginning of 1899. Definite rules were laid down for 
the guidance of the monks. Two papers—-the monthly Prabuddha 
Bhdrdta in English, and Udbodhana, a Bengali fortnightly—were 
started and Vivekananda’s lectures were published in several vo¬ 
lumes—My Master, Jndnayoga, Rdjayoga , Karmayoga, Bhaktiyoga, 
etc. He wrote, besides, numerous treatises. The result of all this was 
the rapid growth of monasteries all over India. 

But Vivekananda did not rest content with the establishment 
of the old type of monastery, merely as a centre of spiritual culture, 
highly valuable though it was. He added to it a section for the 
social service, so dear to his heart, as an integral part of his life’s 
work. The genesis of the idea is thus described by Swann Brahma- 
nanda, a close associate and apostolic successor of Vivekananda. 
“During his travel in the Western Ghats and the Mahratta province, 
Swamiji used to shed tears at the poverty of the common people 
and the oppression of the rich. He said to us, ‘Mark it, my brothers, 
in the prevailing state of poverty in this country, the time is not 
opportune for preaching religion. I shall talk of religion if I ever 
succeeded in removing the poverty and misery of the country. That 
is why I am going to the land of Croesus, to try my luck to find some 
way out”. 51 On his way to America he wrote from Yokohama on 
10 July, 1893, to his Madras disciples: “How many men—unselfish, 
thorough-going men—is Madras ready now to supply, to struggle 
unto life and death to bring about a new state of things—sympathy 
for the poor, and bread to their hungry mouths, enlightenment to 
the people at large—and struggle unto death to make men of them 
who have been brought to the level of beasts by the tyranny of your 
forefathers?” In the same letter he says, “Kick out the priests”. 
On October 27, 1894, appeared these lines: “Where should one go 
to seek for God? Are not all the poor, the miserable, the weak, 
God?” 62 When Svamlji was still in America a brother monk wrote 
to him of the miseries of the people which he had witnessed during 
his journey through Gujarat and Rajputana, and asked for his ad¬ 
vice. “The prompt reply came. ‘The poor, the ignorant, the illiterate, 
the afflicted—let these be your God: know that service to these is the 
highest religion”. 63 So the first social work began. After his re¬ 
turn to India Vivekananda himself took up the work in right earnest. 
In order to carry out the work in a systematic manner, a new organi¬ 
zation, called Ramakrishna Mission, was instituted on 5 May, 1897. 
The organized social service began with the famine relief work in 

129 


B.P.I.R—0 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

Murshidabad and other places in 1897, followed by plague relief 
in Calcutta in 1898. 

In the summer of 1899 Vivekananda again visited America. 
The Vedanta Society of New York had been placed on a permanent 
footing. The Sv&ml visited California and sowed the seeds of fu¬ 
ture Vedanta centres in Los Angeles and San Francisco. A Santi 
Asram (Peaceful Retreat) was established at San Antone Valley 
in California on a 160-acre plot of land donated by a pious lady. 
In all these places there were monks cf the Ramakrishpa Order, 
lecturing and taking classes. Vivekananda was invited to the Con¬ 
gress of the History of Religions at Paris, and spoke there in de¬ 
fence of Hinduism. After a long tour of Europe he returned to India 
in December, 1900. But he had no rest. He took another strenu¬ 
ous tour in East Bengal, and on return to Belur celebrated‘the Durga 
Puja in the Belur Math according to Hindu scriptures. This re¬ 
moved the doubt and fear caused by his association with the foreign¬ 
ers and scheme of social reforms, and the people were convinced 
that he was Hindu to the backbone. As his health broke down, he 
went to Banaras for a change and there founded what was later 
known as the Ramakjrishoa Mission Home of Service. On return 
from Banaras to Calcutta, Svamijl’s health again broke down, and 
he passed away on 4 July, 1902. 

Svami Vivekananda could only lay the foundation of the great 
organization which bears the proud name of his guru . Its later 
growth, which made Ramakrisbua Math and Mission the greatest 
spiritual force in modem India, will form a subject for discussion in 
the next volume. The Svami never ceased to proclaim that in all 
that he did he merely followed in the footsteps of his guru . This 
may be quite true within a limit. But it is a debatable point whether 
Ramakj-ishaja’s teachings and their practical application in active 
life—both individual and social—would have made any material pro¬ 
gress but for the dynamic energy and great personality of Viveka¬ 
nanda. To give a concrete shape to Ramakrishna’s spiritual teach¬ 
ings, to spread his mission all over the world, and place it on a stable 
basis—these are the greatest achievements to the credit of Viveka¬ 
nanda. 

The practical application of his guru’s ideal of service, as inter¬ 
preted by Svami Vivekananda, paved the way for the regeneration 
of India. His valued contribution to the growth of nationalism in 
India will be discussed later. The work, begun by Raja Rammohan 
Roy, of rejuvenating the Indian life was considerably advanced by 
Svamlji. To use Hegelian terminology, the reforms inaugurated by 
the Brahma Samaj may be taken as representing the Thesis, the 

. 130 



NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


Hindu Revivalism, the Antithesis,, and the Ramakyishoa-Viveka 
nanda Doctrine, the Synthesis. It combined the best elements of 
both and ensured all-round progress of Hindu religion and society 
without destroying its spiritual basis and essential spirit, and saving 
it from destruction by the reactionary elements. To the Hindus, Sva- 
mlji has been a saviour and a reformer. The Ramakyishoa Mission 
deserves great credit for placing Hinduism on a high pedestal and re¬ 
sisting the onslaughts of Christianity and Islam. 

But Svami Vivekananda had also an international or rather 
humanitarian outlook. With his unerring foresight he predicted the 
great crisis which faces the world today. He realized that a very 
critical situation would arise in the West, threatening its total des¬ 
truction, owing to the rapid growth of material power and scientific 
inventions, unaccompanied by a corresponding growth of spiritual 
insight. India suffered, as her spiritual attainment far outstripped 
the material power which alone could sustain it. Swami Viveka¬ 
nanda feared that the Western world would similarly suffer because 
her material power had far outstripped the spiritual attainments 
which alone could keep it within reasonable control. This lack of 
balance, he said, should be made good by mutual give and take be¬ 
tween India and the West. But, he added, the West would not listen 
to the spiritual message of India so long as she continues in this 
abject condition of subjection and poverty. This is why he thought 
that the freedom of India and her material prosperity were needed for 
the salvation of the world. 

Vivekananda also predicted the great change that was coming 
over the world. In a broad survey of the progress of mankind 
through the ages he pointed out how the society was dominated suc¬ 
cessively by the Priests, the Nobility and the Merchants, corres¬ 
ponding to the first three castes of India, namely the BrfihmajLa, 
Kshatriya, and the Vaisya. Then he observed that the next or fourth 
epoch will be ‘under the domination of Sudra (the Proletariat)’, 
the fourth caste. This upheaval, he asserted as far back as 1896, 
“will come from Russia or from China”. “Perhaps”, said he, “Russia 
will be the first Proletarian State in the world”—a prophecy that was 
fulfilled in twenty years’ time. 63 * Vivekananda asked the Indians to 
elevate their masses so that they might use their domination in a 
judicious manner to secure the welfare of their country. 

VI. THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY. 

The Theosophical Society was founded in the United States of 
America in 1875 by Madame H. P. Blavatsky (1831-91) and Colonel 
H. S. Olcott along with others. The main objects of the Society were 
three, namely, 


m 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN KENAISSANCB-II 

1. To form a universal brotherhood of man. 

2. To promote the study of ancient religions, philosophies and 
sciences. 

3. To investigate the laws of nature and develop the divine 
powers latent in man. 

The Brahmanical and Buddhist literature supplied the termino¬ 
logy of the doctrines which were greatly influenced by occultist, 
Indian, and modem spiritualistic ideas and formulas. 54 

The theory of universal brotherhood was based upon the doc¬ 
trine, familiar to students of Indian philosophy, of the ‘One life’ as 
the ultimate reality of which all creations are but different manifes¬ 
tations—the ultimate Oneness which underlies and sustains all 
phenomenal diversity. 

The second object, the study of comparative philosophy and 
religion, soon crystallized itself into a dogmatic belief that all the 
different forms of religion were merely so many diverse expressions 
of one and the same fundamental truth called “Ancient Wisdom”. 
A knowledge of this truth has been held as a sacred possession and 
trust for ages by certain mysterious adepts in occultism, or 
Mahatmas, an Indian term denoting great saints or saintly persons. 
Madame Blavatsky proclaimed that she was in psychical as well as 
in direct physical communication with these Mahatmas. This was 
proved by manifestations of “occult phenomena”, witnessed by 
friends and associates of Madame Blavatsky, which, she declared, 
were the outcome of her connection with these Mahatmas : 5,5 

The fundamental philosophical doctrines of the Theosophica! 
Society, such as karma and nirvana, are common to both Buddhism 
and Brahmanism, and no wonder, therefore, that the Indians should 
be attracted to it. But when Colonel Olcott and Madame Blavatsky 
came to Bombay and announced that the Mahatmas, referred to 
above, still lived in the inaccessible recesses of the Himalayas and 
guided the destinies of mankind by their psychic powers or soul 
force, the Indians welcomed the new message with great enthusiasm. 
There was, moreover, a special reason for the English-educated 
classes to welcome Theosophy. Most of them had no faith in the 
many current religious and social doctrines, customs, and traditions, 
but had not the courage to openly repudiate them for fear of social 
ostracism and other serious consequences that were sure to follow. 
These, “condemned to live in an agonising mental and moral con¬ 
flict”, found in Theosophy a “veritable gospel of peace and salva¬ 
tion”. 56 For, by subtle philosophical theories of graded elevation 


132 


NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


of man by stages, Theosophy defended the current practices of 
Hinduism. It reconciled the ideal of univers-al brotherhood with 
the caste-system, and the fundamental unity of the Supreme Being 
with the worship of numerous gods and goddesses including the 
most recent additions to the Hindu pantheon. Nay, more; it held 
that even such practices as image-worship developed psychic forces. 
By these means Theosophy helped very materially to remove the 
“inferiority complex” from the minds of educated Indians. But 
Theosophy also did some good to them. The great work of Theosophy 
was “in the moral reclamation of many of these educated Hindus 
who readily accepted the somewhat rigid disciplines of the new cult 
that demanded of its votaries complete abstinence from intoxicating 
drinks and absolute social purity for the attainment of that high 
level of psychic and spiritual power which it promised”. 67 

The Theosophical Society, however, did not enjoy its popularity 
for long. The alleged communication from the Mahatmas proved 
the most vulnerable point of attack. “Madame Blavatsky stoutly 
maintained that the Mahatmas exhibited their astral bodies” to her, 
and ‘precipitated’ messages which reached her from the confines of 
Tibet in an instant of time. In order to gain converts and confound the 
sceptics she made exhibition of her powers. These exhibitions of 
“psychical phenomena” were regarded by many as pure jugglery, and 
it is claimed by them that on three occasions her jugglery, though 
cleverly conceived, “was exposed in the most conclusive manner”. 66 
On the other hand, Mrs. Annie Besant, who guided the Theosophical 
Society for nearly half a century after Blavatsky’s death and played 
a prominent role in Indian politics, made a convincing declaration 
in favour of the latter. Mrs. Besant was a highly educated and 
talented lady and her words deserve very careful consideration. She 
not only paid tributes of respect to the personality of Blavatsky but 
made the following statement in 1893 in regard to the much-vexed 
and disputed problem which had been agitating alike the friends 
and enemies of the Theosophical Society: 

“I know, by personal experiment, that the Soul exists, and that 
my Soul, not my body, is myself; that it can leave the body at will; 
that it can, disembodied, reach and learn from living human 
teachers, and bring back and impress on the physical brain that 
which it has learned; that this process of transferring consciousness 
from one range of being, as it were, to another, is a very slow process, 
during which the body and brain are gradually correlated with the 
subtler form which is essentially that of the Soul, and that my own 
experience of it, still so imperfect, so fragmentary, when compared 
with the experience of the highly trained, is like the first struggles 


133 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


of a child learning to speak compared with the perfect oratory of the 
practised speaker; that consciousness, so far from being dependent 
on the brain, is more active when freed from the gross forms of matter 
than when encased within them; that the great Sages spoken of by 
H. P. Blavatsky exist; that they wield powers and possess knowledge 
before which our control of Nature and knowledge of her ways is 
but as child's play. All this, and much more, have I learned, and I 
am but a pupil of low grade, as it were, in the infant class of the 
Occult School;_” 59 

Though the controversy and the so-called exposures of Blavat- 
sky's jugglery considerably lowered the prestige and reduced the 
popularity of the Theosophical Society, still it continued as a power¬ 
ful organization. When Madame Blavatsky died on 8 May, 1891, 
“at the theosophical headquarters in the Avenue Hoad, London, she 
was the acknowledged head of a community numbering not far short 
of 100,000, with journalistic organs in London, Paris, New York and 
Madras". 60 

In India the Theosophical Society fixed its headquarters at 
Adyar, a suburb of the city of Madras. Mrs. Annie Besant, who 
came to India in 1893, infused new life into the Society, and by the 
end of the first quarter of the twentieth century many distinguished 
Indians had become its members. 

VII. MINOR RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 

The religious movements in the 19th century followed three 
more or less well-defined courses, namely, 

1. Reforms, which rejected some of the fundamental doctrines. 

2. Defence of the old systems. 

3. An intermediate course between the two. 

The Brahma Samaj, Prartbana Sarnaj, and the Wahabi and Ah- 
madiya movements may be cited as examples of the first. To the 
same category perhaps belongs also the reform movement among 
the Parsi community. It was inaugurated by a number of English- 
educated Parsi young men who started, in 1851, the Rahnumai Maz- 
dayasnan Sabha, or Religious Reform Association, which had for its 
object “the regeneration of the social condition of the Parsis and the 
restoration of the Zoroastrian religion to its pristine purity.” One 
of the leading personalities of this group, Dadabhai Naoroji, also 
played a distinguished role in the political regeneration of India as 
will be described later. The organ of this association was the Rast 
Goftctr (Truth-teller) to which reference will be made later. 


134 


NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


*‘These early reformers were very cautious, discreet, sagacious 
and tactful in their movement. They rallied round them as many 
Parsi leading priests of the day as they could and submitted to them 
in a well-formulated form specific questions under specific heads, 
asking their opinion if such and such practice, dogma, creed, cere¬ 
mony, etc., were in strict conformity with the teachings of the 
religion of Zoroaster, or contravened those teachings. Fortified by 
these opinions, the reformers carried on their propaganda in the way 
of lectures, public meetings, pamphlets and articles in the Rost Gof- 
tar ” 61 

A fillip was given to this movement by K. R. Cama who studied 
the Avesta in the original under some of the greatest scholars in 
Europe. On his return to Bombay in 1859 he began to teach the 
Parsi scriptures by the Western methods in order to create a new 
type of priests who would understand the real teaching of Zoroaster 
and free the Parsi community “from the thraldom of all those prac¬ 
tices, rituals and creed for which there was no warrant within the 
four corners of the authentic Zoroastrian scriptures”. 62 

The religious reform was accompanied by social reforms. Edu¬ 
cation of women was encouraged and made good progress: the purdah 
system was removed and Parsi women moved freely in public; and 
the age Of marriage was gradually raised. 

To the second of the above categories belongs the neo-Hinduism, 
seen at its best in the Ramalqdshna Mission, mentioned above. The 
Theosophist movement also belongs to the same category. Various 
existing religious sects also reacted in the same way to the new spirit 
of the age. The Madhvas of South India were bestirred to activity 
by Kanchi Sabba Raoji, a Deputy-Collector, and founded an associa¬ 
tion in 1877 with a view to stimulating the systematic study of 
Madhva literature and thereby strengthening the sect. 63 

Another Vaishnava sect, the Srlvaishnavas, also felt the urge of 
the modem spirit. 6rl A. Govindacharya Svami of Mysore city wrote 
a large number of books, both in English and the vernacular, since 
1898, to prove the great value of the teachings of Ramanuja, the 
founder of the sect. In 1902 the Srlvaishpavas of Mysore formed 
an association, evidently in imitation of the Madhvas. 64 

Similar movements were noticed among the followers of Chai- 
tanya cult in Bengal which had languished very much in course of 
time. It resulted in a literary movement to rehabilitate the position 
of Krishna as the full incarnation of God and the author pf the Bha- 
gavadgita against modern critics and Christian missionaries. The 
most outstanding literary work associated with this movement was 


135 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

the Kfishnacharitra of Bankim-chandra Chatterji. It is an effort, 
on modem critical line, to establish the historical character of Kri¬ 
shna, and to depict him as an ideal man. The great achievement of 
this new movement was to popularise the teachings of the Gita or 
Bhagavadgita, which is now recognized as a great religious treatise 
not only in India but throughout the world, and widely read in 
Europe and America. There is some truth in the comment of the 
Christian missionaries that the aim of the neo-Rrishnja movement in 
Bengal is “to persuade the Bengali to put Krishaja in the place of 
Christ and the Gita in the place of the Gospels”. A Bengali who 
took to ascetic life under the name of Premananda Bharati (usually 
called Baba Bharati) “went to New York in 1902 and lectured on 
Kj-ishiia with great success not only in New York, but in Boston, Los 
Angeles (where he built a Hindu temple), and elsewhere.” 65 

The Saivas did not lag behind the Vaishujavas in attempts to 
popularise and strengthen their position. Saiva Sabhas were start¬ 
ed in several localities. That of Palamcottah was founded in 1886, 
with th£ object of “the propagation of the principles of the Saiva 
Siddhanta among Saivas and others, the supervision of religious 
institutions, when funds are mismanaged, the cultivation of the Dra- 
vidian languages, and the betterment of social conditions in South 
India.” 66 

The Lingayats also followed suit. The Lingayat Education 
Association was formed in 1884 for the promotion of modern educa¬ 
tion within the community. Since 1904 an All-India Lingayat Con¬ 
ference meets annually to “discuss problems, both religious and secu¬ 
lar, which affect the life and standing of the sect”. 67 

The followers of the Tantra cult tried to defend their system, 
generally regarded as obscene by all outsiders, by writing books to 
prove that there was a great esoteric meaning behind the seemingly 
obnoxious or abominable practices. The Introduction to the English 
translation of the Mah&nirvana Tantra , the principal work of the 
sect, by M, N. Dutt is an attempt of this kind. 68 

Lastly, reference should be made to the militant orthodoxy of 
a section of the Smartas. The name Smarta is applied to the followers 
of Sankaracharya who are to be found in almost every province of 
India. They accept Sankara’s interpretation of the Vedanta, recog¬ 
nize all the gods of the Hindu pantheon, and strictly adhere to the 
rules and regulations prescribed in the Smritis or Dharma£astras. 
The Advaita Sabha of Kumbakonam was started in 1895 with a view 
to strengthen and defend the whole Smfirta position. It organizes 
an annual assembly of the Brahman Pandits of the school of Sahka- 
racharya which usually meets at Kumbakonam. One of its great 


136 


NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


pillars, Professor Sundararaman, holds the view “that the whole of 
the ritualistic system of Hinduism comes from God, that every detail 
of it is right, that the punctilious observance of all its rules would 
bring health, strength and prosperity to the Indian people, and that 
the decline of India during the last two thousand years is the direct 
outcome of the neglect of these rules by large masses of the popula¬ 
tion.” The following is a paragraph from one of his letters to the 
press: 

“The consequences of rebellion against ritualistic Hinduism are 
writ plainly on the face of the history of India for two thousand 
years and more. Buddha began the first revolt, and since then he 
has had many successors and imitators. The unity and might of the 
once glorious fabric of Hindu society and civilization have been shat¬ 
tered, but not beyond hope of recovery. That recovery must be 
effected not by further doses of “Protestant” revolt, but by the per¬ 
sistent and patient endeavour to observe the injunctions and precepts 
of the ancient Dharma in its entirety”. 69 

So this Professor of History looked upon the whole course of 
Indian history from an altogether different angle, and would fain 
replace Hinduism on its old pedestal by wiping off the traces of all 
changes introduced since the days of Buddha; This may be called 
Hindu revivalism in excelsis. 

We now come to those religious movements which occupy an 
intermediate position between reform and revivalism. The only 
organized movement belonging to this category is the Arya Sarnaj 
which has been discussed above. A few persons of less distinction 
than SvamI Dayananda also made an effort to reform Hinduism on 
similar lines without destroying its essential character. 

6ivanarayan Paramahdihsa, bora about 1840 in Varanasi, led 
the life of a wandering ascetic since the age of 12, and spent most 
of his time in Bengal during the last years of his life. His views were 
compiled in Amfita S&gara (1902) and also expounded in English 
in a book entitled Indian Spirituality; or the Travel and Teaching$ 
of Sivanarayana, written by one of his friends or devotees. He be¬ 
lieved in one God, condemned idolatry and advocated social reforms, 
declaring woman to be equal with man. Though agreeing in these 
respects with SvamI Dayananda, he differed from him in two res¬ 
pects. He did not believe in the infallibility of the Vedas and laid 
no emphasis on the doctrine of Karma and transmigration. Follow¬ 
ing in the footsteps of Ramakrishna Paramahamsa he laid great stress 
on service to mankind. “Looking on all individuals as God and 
your own soul”, so ran one of his teachings, Sl eberish them, so that 
want and suffering may come to none.” T ® One of his sugges- 


137 


THE BRITISH FARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 

tions seems to be very extraordinary. It may be quoted in his 
own words: 

“Let all mankind have a common speech. Compile from all 
the scriptures of the world, in that common human tongue, a scrip¬ 
ture, containing all that is useful for man to know concerning his 
spiritual and temporal welfare. Preserve that one and bum all 
the rest, burying their ashes out of sight”. 71 6ivanaraya$ “ex¬ 
pressly prohibited the formation of a sect. But there is a large num¬ 
ber of men and women in Calcutta and other places, specially among 
the Mech tribe of Assam, who look upon him as a source of spiritual 
inspiration”. 72 A member of this tribe, Kalicharan by name, became 
the leader of a small sect following the doctrine of Sivanarayan. 

The teachings of Ramakrishna that all religions are true—all 
ways lead to salvation—found a concrete illustration in a movement 
called Sadharan Dharma, started in Madras in 1886, the very year 
of Ramakfishoa’s death. It aimed “not to establish uniformity but 
unity in variety throughout the different cults and sects of India, 
and by and by of the whole world”. Those who profess other faiths 
need not disclaim them when they adopt Sadharan Dharma. Its funda¬ 
mental principle was that God may be realized “by the development 
of one’s moral or physical powers and the use of them for the good 
of humanity.” 73 

The Radha Soami Satsang, 74 an esoteric sect, was founded in 
1861 by one Tulsi Ram, a Kshatriya, better known as Siva Dayal 
Sfiheb. He was a banker at Agra and had no Western education. 
The only means of salvation, according to him, was the practice of 
Surat Sabd Yoga (union of the human soul with the spirit-current 
or word) under the guidance of a Sant Satguru or sincere lover of 
the Supreme Being. Siva Dayal died in 1878 leaving his doctrine 
embodied in two books, each named Sdr Bachan i.e. “Essential Utter¬ 
ance”. The second guru, a retired Postmaster-General of U.P., 
was a Kayastha of Agra, known as Rai Saligram SSheb Bahadur. He 
was the head of the sect from 1878 to 1898 and organized the Sat- 
sang. It was his vigorous and orderly mind that systematized its 
teaching and gave it its modern character. The sect recognizes no 
god of the Hindu pantheon, nor any temples or sacred places except 
those sanctified by the presence of the guru or his relics. But most 
of the conceptions of the sect are Hindu arid of these the majority are 
Vaishpavite. God, the world, and the soul are recognized as realities; 
the spirit-current (Sabda), which streams from the Supreme and 
is the source of all things, corresponds to the Sakti of the Vaishpava 
and sSaiva systems. The method of religious exercise is unknown, 
for it is imparted by the guru to the disciple under a vow of secrecy. 


138 


NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


The third guru was a Bengali Brahman named Brahma Sankar 
Mi£ra, an M. A. of the Calcutta University. He drew up for the 
Satsang a regular constitution and gave it a definite organization. 
He wrote two brief expositions of the faith and a book called Dis¬ 
courses on RadJiaso&mi Faith. When he died in 1907 he left Satsang 
a powerful organization, within narrow geographical limits, and it 
was destined to achieve fame and distinction as a religious com¬ 
munity-organization with a good many special features of its own. 

The Deva Samaj 76 was founded by Siva-narayap Agnihotri 
belonging to a Brahma^a family of U.P. He was educated in 
the Engineering College at Rurki and was initiated with his wife 
by a member of the college in Sankaracharya's Vedanta philosophy. 
He next became an active member of the Brahma Samaj at Lahore, 
and carried on a crusade against the Arya Samaj. His domineering 
personality and autocratic temper led to friction with other leaders. 
So he seceded from the Brahma Samaj, and on 16 February, 1887, 
founded the Deva Samaj. The doctrines of the Brahma Samaj were 
adopted with the predominance of the guru as an additional ele¬ 
ment. He was practically regarded and worshipped as a god by his 
disciples who called him Satyadeva, ‘real god\ The literature of 
the earlier period was withdrawn from circulation and the devotional 
meetings and the worship of the guru were held in private. The 
religious text of the Samaj was called Deva £astra, and the teaching, 
Deva Dhatma. The guru claimed supernatural powers of all kinds. 

The history of the religious movements will not be complete 
without a reference to the bands of ascetic saints who were objects of 
veneration over large parts of India. Many of these gathered round 
them a number of devoted followers, and though they did not esta¬ 
blish a regular sect with a definite organization or constitution, they, 
or some of their principal followers, are still venerated as guru by 
large circles of householders, belonging chiefly to the educated middle 
class families. Special mention may be made of Bholagiri, Trai- 
langa Sv&mi, P&harl Baba, Bijoy-krish^a GosvamI, Ka^hiababa, and 
his disciple Santadas Babaji. Some of them were adherents of old 
sects. 

* 

It should also be mentioned that apart from the well-known 
branches of orthodox Hindus, Sikhs,and Jains, many of the old re¬ 
ligious sects still wielded considerable influence among sections of 
people. These included, among others, the Kabir-panthls, Dadu- 
panthls, RfidhSballabhis, Dan<Jis and Da^anSmis, Yogis, Agnoris, Ava- 
dhutas, VamachSris, Sauras, Ganapatyas, etc. A new VfimSchari 
sect, known as Kartabhaja, was founded in 1830 by R&msaran Pal 
of GhoshpSra in Bengal. Its principal features were faith in the ab- 




139 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

solute divinity of the guru as being an incarnation of Krishna and 
the Tantrik ceremony of * Chakra’ or the promiscuous gathering of 
male and female devotees indulging in licentious practices. There 
were numerous disciples belonging to all castes, most of whom were 
women. 76 

VIII. MUSLIM RELIGION AND SOCIETY. 

The first half of the period from 1818 to 1905 was fraught with 
grave concern and anxiety for the Indian Muslims. The East India 
Company, stretching its tentacles wider and wider, swept away the 
last vestiges of the Muslim rule by annexing Sindh in 1843 and the 
kingdom of Awadh in 1856, and finally exiling the last of the Mughul 
emperors, Bahadur Shah II, from the Red Fort in Delhi to Rangoon. 
In the Panjab Ranjit Singh had established a powerful kingdom 
which included a considerable portion of the North-West Frontier 
Province. The Deccan kingdom, no doubt, still survived, but it 
was reduced in extent and its ruler, the Nizam, was practically a sub¬ 
ordinate ally of the British authority. The Muslims all over the 
country, therefore, found themselves in a hopelessly precarious con¬ 
dition, shorn virtually of all political power and a prey to manifold 
inimical forces which threatened their very existence as a separate 
religious community in a land which they had ruled for the last 
six centuries. 

This sad state of affairs was naturally bound to have important 
and extensive repercussions on religion and society. The rapid de¬ 
cline of the Mughul empire and the loss of one territory after another 
had left the majority of the Muslims dazed and perplexed, but some 
of the more serious-minded among them had been striving, vainly 
perhaps, to discover the cause of this decline and to find out appro¬ 
priate remedies to check it. Their thoughts had naturally turned to 
religious reforms, for, according to their diagnosis, the chief cause of 
the malaise that had seized the Muslims in India was the fact that 
they had drifted away from the teachings of Islam and had adopted 
ways and manners alien to its puritanic spirit,—a development which 
the spread of Sufistic ideas had, they believed, helped to a great 
extent. It was, therefore, necessary to purge the Indian Muslims’ 
religious beliefs and social customs of all extraneous growths and to 
lead them back to the pristine purity of Islam. The most notable 
attempt in this direction was made as early as the 17th century by 
the so-called Mujaddid Alf-i-Sani, 77 Sheikh Ahmad Sirhindi, in 
the days of Emperor Jahangir, when the Mughul empire was still 
at the zenith of its power, but the Muslim society had already become 
largely Hinduised, thanks mainly to the tolerant attitude of the Chish- 
tiya Sufi saints and the conciliatory policy of Emperor Akbar. 

140 ' 


NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


A similar attempt was made during the period under review 
by one of the most remarkable persons that the decadent Muslim 
society of India was able to produce, namely, Saiyid Ahmad of Rai- 
Bareilly, who was actively helped by a band of zealous and staunch 
followers, notably Shah Muhammad Isma‘il known as the Shahid 
(martyr) 78 and Maulana Abdul Hayy. Saiyid Ahmad, however, did 
not confine his activities to the field of social and religious reform 
but embarked on a military campaign to rid the Panjab Muslims of 
Sikh domination. Detailed account has been given above 79 of his ini¬ 
tial success and subsequent defeat and death at the battle of Bala- 
kot on 6 May, 1831. But one must not suppose that he and his fol¬ 
lowers had sacrificed their lives in vain. The emphatic gesture 
made by them had focussed the Indian Muslims* attention on their 
own debased and degenerate religious and social condition and had 
successfully roused in their hearts an ardent desire to improve it. 
They had perished, but the seed sown by them was to sprout and to 
grow into a vigorous tree in the years to come. 80 

It was not many years after the tragic end of Saiyid Ahmad’s 
campaign, that the Indian Muslims had to face another catastrophe, 
greater, perhaps, than any other in their chequered history. The 
great outbreak of 1857, in which the Muslims had taken a very active 
part, resulted most disastrously for them; their forlorn hope of re¬ 
viving the Mughul empire was cruelly shattered and they found 
themselves in a precariously weak economic condition which was 
sure to have a very demoralising effect on them. The victorious 
British made them the special target of their wantonly revengeful 
deeds of murder and rapine. Thousands of them were massacred in 
Delhi alone, while whole families had to quit their homes, leaving 
behind all their earthly possessions and seeking shelter in alien and 
not always very congenial surroundings. In Delhi, where before the 
outbreak practically all the house property had belonged to the Mus¬ 
lims, there now remained only a few of them who could still boast 
of having a roof of their own over their heads, and the conditions 
in most of the other important cities in Northern India were not 
much better. When it is remembered that the majority of the Mus¬ 
lim population of North-Western India in those days—as indeed it is 
even now—was concentrated in the cities, the extent of the disaster 
which this upheaval spelt for the Muslims can be easily imagined. The 
intense feeling of frustration and despondency that prevailed among 
them is reflected in the writings of most of the contemporary 
poets and thinkers such as Ghalib, Bahadur Shah Zafar and Sir Syed 
Ahmad. The last, as a matter of fact, thought at one time of leav¬ 
ing India and migrating to some other country, because he could 
not bear the sight of so much misery and distress around him. 


141 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

The reform movement initiated by Saiyid Ahmad Barelvi 
and his pupils gained fresh strength after the Mutiny and mani¬ 
fested itself in different garbs. There was, in the first place, a group 
of religious thinkers who had been visibly affected by the Wahabi 81 
ideology, first preached by the great Arab scholar, I bn Taimiya 82 , 
and they now started preaching the new ideas and gaining new 
supporters. The majority of the Indian Muslims were still staunch 
adherents of the Hanafi school, with strong leanings towards Sufi- 
ism, and consequently could not easily be won over to the soul-less, 
dry and rigidly puritanic Wahabi discipline. The net result, there¬ 
fore, of the zealous preachings of this school of theology was to drive 
them more forcibly and in larger numbers into the Sufi fold. It 
is thus that we find both the Chishtiya and the Naqshbandiya, the 
two main Sufi silsilas in India, flourishng more than ever during 
this period and their teachings not infrequently degenerating into 
rank superstition and blind saint-worship in the hands of unscrupu¬ 
lous pirs, which, in its turn, produced a strong reaction in the minds 
of the more sensible and thoughtful Muslims. The foundation of 
the Dar-al-UKim at Deoband in A.D. 1866, which has continued to 
attract students not only from different parts of India but from the 
neighbouring Muslim countries also, was the greatest achievement 
of the Wahabi school of thought in India 83 , whereas the Madrisa- 
i-Qadlma of Farangi Mahal established during the reign of Aurang- 
zeb 84 continued to represent the old Hanafi school, maintaining a 
via media between the extreme and diametrically opposed Wahabi 
and Sufi doctrines. A third important institution with a distinctly 
religious bias and with an ideology not very different from that 
which guided the scholars of the Farangi Mahal, was founded in 
1898 by the famous scholar, Shibli Nu'mani, and others in Lakhnau. 
The Nadwat al-‘Ulama, as the new institution was called, has, how¬ 
ever, shown a more realistic and progressive outlook since its very 
inception, and has produced a number of distinguished scholars 
whose writings have profoundly affected the more religious-minded 
Muslims of India. It has successfully discarded from its curriculum 
the time-worn skeleton of the Darsi-Nizami 815 , which, in the opinion of 
many enlightened educationists, has been responsible for stultifying 
the mental and intellectual outlook of the Indian Muslims and has 
been producing a type of scholars utterly unfit for the present-day 
requirements. 

But while the religious and social reformers were busy all over 
the country, very little attention was paid to the fast-deteriorating 
economic condition of the Muslim masses. With the gradual de¬ 
cline and final extinction of the Mughul empire, they had been losing 
all the old privileges which they had so far enjoyed, while the anti- 


142 


NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


Muslim policy of the new rulers of India and their own foolish pre¬ 
judice against modem education had deprived them of all new op¬ 
portunities of material progress and prosperity. The doors of Gov¬ 
ernment employment were virtually closed to them, and their only 
other source of livelihood—landed property—was rapidiy slipping out 
of their hands due to their own improvident ways of life. Religious 
fervour, such as the reformist movement inspired, or emotional 
ecstasy which the protagonists of the Sufi cult promised, could not 
be a substitute for meat and bread, nor was poverty the surest means 
of attaining the higher spiritual ideals. Some idea of the low state 
of moral degeneration and economic depression to which they had 
sunk, can be had from Sir William Hunter’s book, The Indian Mussul¬ 
mans, written by him at the instance of Lord Mayo, then Viceroy of 
India, in the year 1871, which, though dealing primarily with the 
Muslims of Bengal, gives, nevertheless, a painfully realistic picture 
of the plight of the Muslims generally throughout India 86 . Some¬ 
thing had, therefore, to be done immediately to stem this rot and to 
save them from the abysmal doom towards which they were head¬ 
ing. The crying need of the moment was to try to overcome the 
reluctance of the Indian Muslims to adapt themselves to their 
changed circumstances and at the same time to gain the confidence 
of the British rulers who had so far looked upon them with sus¬ 
picion and distrust. This was by no means an easy task, but luckily 
for them, at this critical juncture, there appeared on the scene one 
of the greatest men—if not the greatest—that Muslim India has pro¬ 
duced in recent times. The man was Sir Syed Ahmad Khan, who 
set upon this Herculean task with a wonderfully clear vision and 
an extraordinarily firm resolve, disdaining alike the open hostility of 
the conservative ulema and the veiled gibes of some of his own 
close friends and colleagues. 

Bom in Delhi in the year 1817, Sir Syed Ahmad Khan had in¬ 
herited the best traditions of a culture which was developed in that 
city through the long centuries of Muslim rule in India. His pa¬ 
ternal grandfather, Syed HadI, and maternal grandfather, Khwaja 
Farid, had both held high and responsible posts under the Mughul 
emperors and the East India Company, and he had received his early 
education under their direct supervision from some of the ablest 
scholars of the day. His family members, especially his father, Mir 
MuttaqI, were spiritually attached to the Naqshbandiya school, the 
most prominent representative of which in Delhi in those days was 
Mir Ghulam Ali for whom Sir Syed Ahmad always cherished a tender 
and affectionate regard. He was, however, born with a restless and 
sceptic mind and could not reconcile himself to a blind belief in re¬ 
ligious dogmas, handed down from one generation to another. He 


143 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

wanted to exercise, as some of the other daring individuals had 
done before his time, his own intelligence in understanding and 
interpreting those dogmas 87 . This is precisely why we find him 
appearing in the role of a religious reformer in his early social career 
after his retirement from service. His articles in the magazine, 
Tahzib al-AJchldq, which he started in 1870 shortly after his return 
from England, as well as some of his other writings 88 , gave evidence 
of a marked rationalistic and non-conformist trend of thought, which 
brought upon him the wrath of the orthodox divines who all too 
readily dubbed him a naturalist and a kafir , an unbeliever or heretic, 
to be shunned by pious Muslims. 

Sir Syed Ahmad Khan was not the man whom such condemna¬ 
tion could easily intimidate; but he was a wise man, too, and rea¬ 
lized that he could make little headway in the field of religious re¬ 
form against the bitter opposition of the commonly recognised cus¬ 
todians of the shariat, and so turned his attention mainly to social 
reform and specially to education, and it is now mostly as an edu¬ 
cationist that his memory is revered by the Indian Muslims. 

His first achievement in the educational field was the establish¬ 
ment of two madrasas of pre-eminently old type at Moradabad and 
Ghazipur, which were soon followed by the foundation of a school 
on modern lines at Aligarh, which made rapid progress under the 
able supervision of his friend, Maulavi Sami'ullah Khan. This school 
in the course of time developed into the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental 
College 89 with the active help and encouragement cf the British 
authorities whose attitude towards the Muslims had undergone a 
radical change by now, thanks mainly to Sir Syed Ahmad Khan’s 
relentless efforts 90 . He was helped in his task by a band of devoted 
friends and followers, the most notable among whom were the two 
Nawabs, Muhsin’ul-Mulk and Vaqar’ul-Mulk, the well-known 
scholar, Dr. Nazir Ahmad, and the famous poet, Altaf Hussain Hali 91 , 
with whose active co-operation he was also enabled to lay the founda¬ 
tion of the Muhammadan Educational Conference 92 soon after the 
inception of the Indian National Congress. 93 

The yeoman’s service which the M.A.O. College,—now a full- 
fledged University—rendered to the cause of the education and social 
advancement of the Indian Muslims cannot be over-estimated. It 
has produced some of the most eminent Muslim scholars of modem 
times and its alumni, distinguished by a peculiar intellectual outlook 
and cultural polish, have held responsible Government posts with 
marked success. It should not, however, be presumed that the 
foundation of this College was generally hailed by the Muslims. On 
the contrary, Sir Syed Ahmad Khan had to fight hard to make his 


144 



NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


new venture a success and to convince his critics of its utility. The 
opposition came not only from the more religious-minded Muslims 
who looked askance at the modernisation of education and Euro¬ 
peanisation of the Muslim society, such as the College was calculated 
to bring about, but, strangely enough, from a number of enlightened 
individuals, like Shibli Nu‘mam and Akbar Allahabadi, who ought 
to have known better and to have behaved more sensibly. The 
main reasons for this opposition, however, were apparently not so 
much ideological as personal, and were, in any case, not weighty 
enough to appeal to the rank and file of the Muslim community 
which soon came to look upon the College as the most useful avenue 
of educational and economic progress open to them. 

The progress of Muslim education in India was further helped 
by two other institutions of a quasi-modern type established by Go¬ 
vernment initiative, namely the Calcutta Madrasa and the Anglo- 
Arabic School (later College) of Delhi, both of which acquired 
considerable reputation as centres of learning and had the distinction 
of having on their staff able scholars like Dr. Nazir Ahmad, Shams- 
ul-Ulama Maulavi Zia-ud-din, and others. 

In another part of India, the Panjab, in the meantime, the Wah¬ 
abi influence, to which we have referred above, was responsible for 
the emergence of two “ghair-muqallid” (non-conformist) schools of 
theology. These became known as Ahl-i-Hadls (people of the 
apostolic tradition) and the Ahl-i-Qur’an (people of the Qur’an), be¬ 
cause they regarded, respectively, the Hadis of the Prophet (plus, of 
course, the Qur’an) or the Qur’an alone to be the final authority for 
the correct interpretation of Muslim rituals and dogmas, thus practi¬ 
cally cutting themselves off from the four recognised schools of juris¬ 
prudence which came into being in the second century of the Hijra. 94 
Nawab Siddiq Hasan of Bhopal and Syed Nazir Husain were 
the most prominent representatives of the first school in the latter 
half of the 19th century, while Maulvi Abdullah Chakralavi, after 
whom the Ahl-i-Qur’an are often designated “Chakralvis**, founded 
the second. Their influence, however, was not deep or widespread, 
and it is really difficult for a layman to understand in what material 
respects they differed from the parent Hanafi school from which 
they had chosen to secede. 

The same remark is more or less true of another sect, also 
founded in the Panjab, namely the Ahmadis or Qadianis, followers 
of Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, bom at Qadian, a small town in the Gur- 
daspur District, in 1837. Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, a good scholar of 
religious sciences as well as the Arabic and Persian languages, and 
gifted by nature with an eloquent tongue and a strong reasoning 

145 


B.P.I.R—10 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

faculty, was evidently influenced by the rationalist movement pion¬ 
eered in India by Sir Syed Ahmad Khan, Maulavi Charagh Ali (d. 
1895) and others. He, too, was moved by an ardent desire to re¬ 
form Islam and to present its beliefs and tenets in a logical and 
reasonable form in order to be able to defend them better against 
the onslaughts of the Christian missionaries, particularly of the 
Scotish Church, who were fairly active in those days, and the ag¬ 
gressive and militant Arya-Samajists. As a champion of Islam 
against its critics and enemies, he acquired wide popularity among 
his co-religionists in his early career, and his work, the Bardhini- 
Ahnvadiya , published in 1880, was very well received by most of 
them. When, however, in 1891, he put forth the tall claim to be a 
prophet, the Mahdi and the promised Messiah, and even an incarna¬ 
tion of Krishna, they turned bitterly hostile to him, for according to 
the popular Muslim belief Muhammad is the last of the prophets and 
any one claiming prophet-hood after him is a fraud and a preposter¬ 
ous liar. He was, nevertheless, able to gain a number of . adherents 
and earned on his mission through his writings and articles in an 
English journal, the Review of Religions , started from Qadian in 
1892. He died at Lahore in 1908 and was buried at Qadian^ 6 . The 
Qadianis, while conforming in general to the orthodox Hanafi school 
and differing from it only in certain matters of belief, such as that 
of the immaculate conception of Christ and his ascension to heaven 
alive, the bodily ascension of the Prophet of Islam (on the night of 
the Mi‘raj), etc., yet consider themselves to be a separate religious 
group and regard all those who do not believe in their leader’s pro¬ 
phet-hood to be unbelievers (kafirs). The more moderate among 
them, however, do not, at least openly, share in this view, but are 
none the less regarded with suspicion and distrust by the, orthodox 
Muslims. Whatever one may think of Mirza Ghulam Ahmad’s 
claim, there can be no doubt that his preachings infused a fresh 
and vigorous religious spirit among the Muslims and that his fol¬ 
lowers have shown commendable missionary zeal, both in India and 
abroad, constituting, as they do, the most closely knit and perhaps 
the best organised Muslim religious group in the country. 

Our review so far has only dealt with the Sunni School of theo¬ 
logy and its various offshoots and ramifications. A large number oi 
Muslims in India are Shi‘as, who have often played a conspicuous 
part in their political, social and cultural life. Their belief in the 
divine character of the Imams who consequently are the only ac¬ 
credited interpreters of the teachings of the Prophet, has exercised 
a restraining influence on their rank and file, and rebellious move¬ 
ments like the Babi and the Baha’i, originating in Iran, have not 
affected them materially. They, moreover, do not consider the door 


146 


NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


of ijtihdd 96 to have been closed for all times, as do the majority of 
the Sunni Muslims, and their faith in their dd‘is 97 and mujtahids 98 
who can look after their spiritual and material welfare under chang¬ 
ing circumstances has deprived them of any serious urge for reli¬ 
gious reform, or secession from the parent body. Their religious 
life has, therefore, pursued an even and smooth course, unruffled 
by the disturbances which have been agitating the majority Sunni 
group. They, however, have not been oblivious of their educational 
progress and social uplift, and during the period under survey they 
founded or reorganized a number of schools and colleges for the 
special benefit of their community, the most notable among which 
are the Shi‘a Arabic College, the Nazimiya College and the Sultan 
al-Madaris in Lakhnau (Lucknow), and the Madrasa-i-JawSdiya in 
Banaras. A missionary organization, called the Imamiya Mission, 
which is associated with the Nlazimiya College, has also shown con¬ 
siderable activity in India and elsewhere during the last few de¬ 
cades. 

Another remarkable development of the period, which though 
primarily of literary import is yet of a very considerable social signi¬ 
ficance, was the emergence of Urdu as a literary language. This 
language, born in military camps from the Hindi Kharl Boll dur¬ 
ing the later Mughul period and subsequently finding a fertile soii 
in Lakhnau, had already been used extensively by the Indian poets 
of Northern India and the Deccan, but it was really in this period 
that it developed into a medium of expression for religious, philo¬ 
sophic and scientific thoughts. An Urdu translation of the Qur’an 
was made as early as 1791 by Shah Abdu’l Qadir, but the credit for 
developing a simple, chaste and refined prose style goes to the writers 
of this period. The most distinguished of these were Ghalib", Sir 
Syed Ahmad Khan 100 , Hall 101 , Dr. Nazir Ahmad 102 ,, Maulavi Za- 
ka’ullah 103 and Maulavi Mohammad Husain Azad of Delhi 104 . Urdu 
now also became the common vehicle of conversation and written 
communication, replacing Persian which had so far been the popular 
language of the educated classes. The two earliest Urdu works of 
fiction, namely, the Urdu version of the Bagh-o-Bahar, entitled the 
Qissa-uChahdr Dvhrwesh and the Fas&na<-Ajd’ib m were also writ¬ 
ten during this period by Mir Amman of Delhi and Rajab Ali Surur 
of Lakhnau, respectively, while a beginning in Urdu journalism on 
modem lines was likewise made towards the end of the 19th cen¬ 
tury. Among the earliest magazines deserving special mention was 
the Oudh Punch 106 of Lakhnau, a humorous weekly modelled on the 
pattern of the London Punch, and the Makhzin of Lahore, a literary 
monthly of very considerable merit. 107 


147 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

A marked feature of this period was the rapid modernisation 
of the educated classes in which Sir Syed Ahmad Khan and the 
M.A.O. College, Aligarh, played an important role. Sir Syed 
Ahmad Khan, who visited England in 1869, was greatly impressed 
by the regulated and disciplined life of the Europeans and did his 
best to popularise European dress and manners among his co-reli¬ 
gionists generally, and the Aligarh students particularly. It was 
with this end in view that he founded the English House, a hostel 
meant for boys of well-to-do families run on European lines with a 
European lady superintendent in charge. The uniform prescribed 
for the college students was also a sort of compromise between the 
eastern and -western modes of dress—white trousers of the English 
pattern, a buttoned-up black coat, and the red Turkish cap or fez, 
the last being symbolic of the Indian Muslims* sympathy with the 
Turks which received a great fillip during the Crimean and Greco- 
Turkish wars. The use of tables and chairs now became a common 
practice in enlightened Muslim households and English food served 
in China dishes and plates was no longer a rare phenomenon. 

t 

But while the male section of the Muslim urban society was fast 
taking to these modem ways, the women, generally speaking, re¬ 
mained more conservative and had very few opportunities of getting 
English education. It was only in a few of the more enlightened and 
emancipated families that they were permitted to receive lessons in 
English in their own homes from European missionary ladies. Strict 
purdah was still the general rule, and a respectable woman could 
never dare to go out without a veil and unescorted by a male chaperon. 
Fortunately for women, however, the practice of polygamy, a very 
common feature of the Muslim society in the preceding centuries, 
registered a marked decline, thanks mainly to the prevalence of mo¬ 
dem ideas and the decline in material prosperity. Some of the more 
daring among them actually took up the cudgels against their men¬ 
folk in the matter, and gave vent openly to their natural resentment 
against the practice. They were, nevertheless, hampered in their 
task by the lack of an appropriate and convenient forum for the ex¬ 
pression of their views, but succeeded towards the end of this period 
in starting magazines of their own, among which the weekly TdhjSb- 
i-Nisw&n of Lahore was the earliest and the most conspicuous. 108 
The Begum of Bhopal, Sultan Jaban Begum, was among the chief 
patrons of the new progressive movement. The women, however, still 
remained essentially eastern in their general outlook of life, their 
selfless devotion .to their, husbands and children and their strict ob¬ 
servance of religious rites and ceremonies. It was, indeed, chiefly 
due to them that a preponderantly religious atmosphere continued 
to be a noticeable characteristic of a Muslim home, when many of 

148 



NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


their men-folk had already become alienated from religion. In the 
matter of dress also they remained very conservative, only a few of 
them adopting the European styles in the privacy of their homes. 
European, mostly English, governesses and companions were, how¬ 
ever, not uncommon in the households of the wealthier people, 
especially those who had had an opportunity of going abroad. The 
age-old dictum of a woman’s right place being her home still ruled 
supreme, and a Muslim woman could not yet dream of partaking in 
a mixed gathering of males and females or playing any active role 
in the social and cultural activities of the males. Marriages, betro¬ 
thals, the bismillah , 109 'aqiqa 110 and circumcision ceremonies, accom¬ 
panied by a lot of feasting and merry-making, which were quite 
frequent under the joint family system still prevalent on a large 
scale, provided them with enough amusement and excitement and 
helped considerably in relieving the monotony of their otherwise 
drab and confined lives. Although deprived of the benefits of 
modem education, 111 many of them, specially of the middle class, 
were good scholars in Arabic and Persian, and possessed a refined 
taste for Urdu poetry. Widow re-marriage, which had been strict¬ 
ly taboo among the respectable middle classes, due obviously to 
Hindu influence, now became quite common, thanks to the refor¬ 
mative efforts of Syed Ahmad Barelvi and his pupils, and the 
custom of denying to the daughters—against the clear mandate of 
Islam—a share in the property of their fathers, which was prevalent 
in some parts of the country, became gradually obsolete. On the 
whole, therefore, the 19th century may be said to have witnessed 
an improvement in the social status of the Muslim women in India, 
which has helped to pave the way for a complete emancipation, social 
and economic, which is yet in the offing. 

To conclude this brief review, we may say that the period from 
1818 to 1905 was a really critical one in the history of the Indian 
Muslims. It was, on the one hand, a period of frustration and des¬ 
pondency, of political decline and social demoralisation, and finally 
one of economic deterioration. But, on the other hand, it was also 
a period of religious revival, of educational progress, and of a grow¬ 
ing awareness among them of the debased position to which they 
had been gradually reduced in this country as, indeed, in most of 
the other countries which they had once ruled. The great political 
upheavals of this period thus helped in bringing about a renaissance 
of Indian Islam and a re-orientation of the Muslim society in keep¬ 
ing with the changed circumstances in which it was now placed, 
so that in the words of the great poet, Iqbal: 

AfuIJc hdthon se gaya , millat ki ankhen khul gain, 

149 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 

/ ' . t : 

• Surma chashmi-dasht men gard-uram-i-dhu. 

(Sovereignty passed out of its hands, but the eyes of the Mus¬ 
lim community were opened. The dust raised by the flight of the 
gazelle became antimony for the desert’s eye.) 

IX. CHRISTIANITY. 

The Protestant Christian nations of Europe who came to India 
in the seventeenth century differed in one respect from the Catholic 
Portuguese who came a century earlier. Unlike the latter they had 
no proselytising mission, and the English East India Company were 
prohibited by a clause in their charter from sending out missiona¬ 
ries to India. 

It was neither the powerful English nor the Dutch, but the 
Danes who sent the first Protestant mission to India,—to Tranquebar, 
an insignificant locality which they possessed in India. Zeigen- 
balg, the first missionary who reached India in 1706, candidly con¬ 
fessed that his mission had little success. He pointed out that the 
Christians in India were “so much debauched in their manners”, 
and “so given to gluttony, drunkenness, lewdness, cursing, swearing, 
cheating and cozening” and “proud and insulting in their conduct”, 
that many Indians, judging the religion by its effect upon its follow¬ 
ers, “could not be induced to embrace Christianity”. Only a few 
poor or destitute persons were converted, and they had to be fed 
and maintained by the mission. When Ziegenbalg wanted to con¬ 
vert the upper classes by argument, he failed miserably. “In a 
notable debate held under the auspices of the Dutch in Negapatam, 
Ziegenbalg disputed with a Brahmin for five hours, and far from 
converting the Brahmin, the missionary came away with an exces¬ 
sive admiration for the intellectual gifts of his adversary”. 112 

Zeigenbalg’s missionary effort was typical of Christian mis¬ 
sionary enterprise in India during the eighteenth century. No doubt 
the number of converts steadily increased and churches were founded 
in different parts of India. But it was the remittance from Europe 
that supplied the cost of building churches and feeding the congrega¬ 
tion. Abbe Dubois (1,765-1848) published, at the end of the eighteenth 
or beginning of the nineteenth century, his Letters on the State of 
Christianity in India . In these he “asserted his opinion that under 
existing circumstances there was no human possibility of so over¬ 
coming the invincible barrier of Brahminical prejudice as to convert 
the Hindus as a nation to any sect of Christianity. He acknowledg¬ 
ed that low castes and outcastes might be converted in large numbers, 
but of the higher castes he wrote: ‘Should the intercourse between in- 


150 



NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


dividuals of both nations, by becoming more intimate and more 
friendly, produce a change in the religion and usages of the country, 
it will not be to turn Christians that they will forsake their own reli¬ 
gion, but rather.. .to become mere atheists.” 112 * 

The history of the Christian mission in the 19th century in Ben¬ 
gal begins with William Carey, a cobbler in an insignificant village 
in Northamptonshire, who embarked upon an Evangelical mission 
and came to Calcutta in 1793. He earned some money by working 
as the manager of an Indigo factory in the Maldah District, and then 
set up his own factory at Kidderpore near Calcutta. At his in¬ 
vitation four missionaries came from England to join him, but as the 
authorities refused them permission to land they went to the Danish 
_ settlement of Serampore, about 15 miles from Calcutta. Lord 
Wellesley, the Governor-General, demanded the “surrender of the 
fugitives in order to deport them to England”, but the Danish Gov¬ 
ernor refused and the matter was not pursued any further. Carey 
also migrated to Serampore and joined the four; and with the help 
of William Ward and Joshua Marshman—the other two having 
shortly died—built up the famous Serampore Mission whose reputa¬ 
tion was not confined to Bengal but spread to other parts of India. 
“Carey laboured in India for seven years without making a single 
convert”, but he did splendid work in promoting education and im¬ 
proving vernaculars in different parts of India. 113 

Early in the nineteenth century there grew up an agitation in 
England in support of sending Evangelical mission to India. Many 
thought it preposterous that “when non-Christian rulers in Asia 
often gave the missionary permission to preach the gospel in their 
kingdoms, the Christian British should deny this elementary human 
right to the missionary”. 114 But apart from the legal restriction, the 
Englishmen in India, whose easy voluptuous life was the main tar¬ 
get of missionary attack, regarded as obnoxious not only preaching 
but even the very presence of the missionary in India”. 115 One 
Mr. Twining, a tea-dealer, wrote to the Chairman of the East India 
Company: 

“As long as we continue to govern India in the mild, tolerant 
spirit of Christianity, we may govern it with ease; but if ever the 
fatal day should arrive, when religious innovation shall set her foot 
in that country, indignation will spread from one end of Hindustan 
to the other, and the arms of fifty millions of people will drive us 
from that portion of the globe, with as much ease as the sand of the 
desert is scattered by the wind”. 116 This letter stirred up a hornet’s 
nest and there emerged two distinct schools of public opinion. 


151 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 


Their controversy raged with unabated fury and “the climax was 
reached in 1813 when the question of renewing the Charter of the 
East India Company came up before the Parliament. The missiona¬ 
ries valiantly fought for the deletion of the obnoxious clause and 
substitution of a new one giving full permission to Evangelists of all 
denominations to preach the Gospel wherever they pleased in the 
Company’s dominions”. 117 Mr. Marsh, an able lawyer, who spent 
several years in Madras, put the case on the other side in the follow¬ 
ing words: 

“Indeed, when I turn my eyes either to the present condition or 
ancient grandeur of that country; when I contemplate the magnifi¬ 
cence of her structures, her spacious reservoirs, constructed at an 
immense expense, pouring fertility and plenty over the land, the mo¬ 
numents of a benevolence expanding its cares over remote ages; 
when I survey the solid and embellished architecture of her temples, 
the elaborate and exquisite skill of her manufactures and fabrics, her 
literature sacred and profane, her gaudy and enamelled pottery 117 * 
on which a wild and prodigal fancy has lavished all its opulence; 
.when I turn to the philosophers, lawyers and moralists who have left 
the oracles of political and ethical wisdom to restrain the passions 
and to awe the vices which disturb the commonwealth; when I look 
at the peaceful and harmonious alliances of families, guarded and 
secured by the household virtues; when I see amongst a cheerful and 
well-ordered society, the benignant and softening influence of reli¬ 
gion and morality, a system of manners founded on a mild and 
polished obeisance, and preserving the surface of social life smooth 
and unruffled—I cannot hear without surprise, mingled with horror, 
of sending out Baptists and Anabaptists to civilize or convert such a 
people at the hazard of disturbing or deforming institutions which 
appear to have hitherto been the means ordained by Providence of 
making them virtuous and happy”. 118 

Montgomery, who had lived long in India, supported the same 
policy, though from another point of view. “He declared that Chris¬ 
tianity had nothing to teach Hinduism, and no missionary ever made 
a really good Christian convert in India. He, too, like the tea-dealer, 
had a sound respect for the martial powers of the Indians, and con¬ 
cluded that he “was more anxious to save the 30,000 of his country¬ 
men in India than to save the souls of all the Hindus by making them 
Christians at so dreadful a price”. 119 

A number of people, including Wilberforce, sought to refute 
these arguments by painting in black colours the horrible customs of 
the Hindus such as the Sati, infanticide, throwing of children into 
the Ganga, religious suicide, and above all, idolatry. Vivid descrip- 


152 


NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 

tions were given of the massacre of the innocents resulting from the 
car procession of Lord Jagannath at Puri, and the Baptists put down 
the number of annual victims at not less than 120,000. “When chal¬ 
lenged they had to admit that they did not actually count the dead 
bodies but arrived at the figure by an ingenious calculation.” 120 

In any event, the missionaries won the battle and the new Char¬ 
ter of 1813 not only granted them right to visit India but also gave 
them full liberty to preach their religion there. A Bishop, with 
headquarters at Calcutta, was appointed with jurisdiction over whole 
of the dominions of East India Company. The consequence was a 
heavy influx of missionaries into India both from England and Ame¬ 
rica. They first directed their attention to the East India Company 
and asked them to give up such practices as might be construed as 
indirect sympathy or support to heathen practices. In particular 
they took umbrage at the management of the temples by Company’s 
Government, a task which they had taken over from their Hindu 
predecessors and was described by the missionaries as “the office 
of dry nurse to Vishnu”. The other objections would be apparent 
from the memorial submitted to the Government of Bombay in 
1839, pointing out the following anti-Christian practices, among 
others. 

1. The employment of Brahmins and others for the purpose 
of making heathen invocations for rain and fair weather. 

2. The inscription of ‘Sri’ on public documents, and the dedi¬ 
cation of Government records to Ganesh and other gods. 

3. The entertainment in courts of justice of questions of a 
purely idolatrous nature with no civil rights involved. 

4. The degradation of certain castes by excluding them from 
particular offices and benefits not connected with religion. 

5. The attendance of Government servants, civil and mili¬ 
tary, in their official capacity at Hindu and Muslim festi¬ 
vals with a view to participate in their rites and cere¬ 
monies or in the joining of troops and the use of regimen¬ 
tal bands in the processions of Hindu and Muslim festi¬ 
vals or their attendance in any other capacity than that of 
police for the preservation of peace. 

8. The firing of salutes by the troops or by vessels of the 
Indian Navy, in intimation and honour of Hindu festivals. 121 

As a result of such petitions and continued agitation in England 
the Court of Directors ordered “complete severance of Government 
connection from the religious activities of their subjects”. “The 
salute to the gods was stopped; pilgrim taxes were abolished; the 


153 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

superintendence of religious festivals by the officials of the Company 
ceased and their function was confined to policing of the vast gather¬ 
ings; temple lands were made over to Trusts and the Trustees were 
either elected by the congregation or nominated by British authorities 
from among respectable Hindus”. 122 

The pendulum now swung to the opposite extreme. “The seve¬ 
rance of the Company’s connection from Hinduism appears to have 
been followed by an active campaign by the servants of the Company 
to Christianize India, and an interference with Hinduism was re¬ 
ported. For in a despatch of the Court of Directors we find that strict 
instructions were issued to the Governor-General to impress upon the 
servants of the Company the need for neutrality and non-inter¬ 
ference.” 123 But though the Government carried out the instruc¬ 
tions and did not actively support the missionaries, the latter con¬ 
tinued to derive strength and support in an indirect way. This was 
explained by Raja Rammohan Roy and Sir Syed Ahmed, as noted 
above. 124 Reference has also been made to overzealous officers who 
regarded proselytism as a part of their duty as pious Christians. 125 

Apart from the prestige and power which the missionaries en¬ 
joyed as members of the ruling race, particularly among the igno¬ 
rant masses, several causes combined to impart success to their 
efforts. The first and most important cause was the spread of the 
knowledge of English. Educated Indians who were impressed by the 
Bible and Christian literature and repulsed by the superstitious prac¬ 
tices in their own society, embraced Christianity, and their example 
was followed by less discriminating men. This accounts for a num¬ 
ber of converts in the second quarter of the nineteenth century from 
among high class Hindus, such as Madhusudan Datta and K. M. 
Banerji. 

But the conversion of this class gradually dwindled with the 
rise of the reforming sects like Brahma Samaj, Arya Samaj and 
others mentioned above, and by the end of the 19th century new 

converts of this class were almost negligible. 

* 

The English schools opened by the missionaries were mostly 
intended as instruments of conversion, but here, too, the success, 
very limited even at the beginning, gradually became less and less. 
Serious charges were made against the missionaries for making such 
conversions by force or fraud and it led to great commotions. A 
few such instances in Bengal were reported in a Calcutta paper on 6 
July, 1833. 126 As a further illustration reference may be made to 
the conversion of a few well-to-do Parsi young men in Bombay. In 
Bombay “educational activities were taken in hand by the mission¬ 
aries and where years of street preaching yielded nothing, the Eng- 

154 


NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


lish schools began to show astounding results”. 127 “The earliest con¬ 
verts were some well-to-do Parsi young men and their baptism 
caused a sensation in the city, the whole community rising against 
the missionaries. The neophytes were persecuted, the case was 
taken to law courts, and the whole city had to be guarded against 
riots... ”™ 

The most disconcerting feature of the activities of Christian mis¬ 
sionaries in India was the rabid tone of their criticism—rather abuse 
—of Hinduism. Even Reverend Alexander Duff, an eminent mis¬ 
sionary who lived in India from 1830 to 1863 and had done so much 
for promoting education and social reforms, lost all balance while 
assailing Hinduism. The following extract from his book India and 
Indian Missions gives us a fair specimen of missionary mentality: 

“Of all the systems of false religion ever fabricated by the per¬ 
verse ingenuity of fallen man, Hinduism is surely the most stupen¬ 
dous ... Of all systems of false religion it is that which seems to em¬ 
body the largest amount and variety of semblances and counterfeits 
of divinely revealed facts and doctrines”. 

The Tattvabodhin I Patrika, the organ of the Briahma Samaj, cri¬ 
ticised Duff’s book in the most scathing terms. The conversion of a 
student of the Duff School and his wife to Christianity created a 
great commotion in Calcutta, and the orthodox Hindus rallied round 
Devendra-nath Tagore who had launched a vigorous campaign against 
such forcible conversion. These efforts of the Indians were success¬ 
ful to a large extent and considerably reduced the number of conver¬ 
sions to Christianity. An indirect result of this anti-conversion cam¬ 
paign was the establishment of English schools by the Indians in 
order to draw away students from the missionary schools. Thus, as 
a result of the campaign mentioned above, a school was established in 
1845, providing free instruction to about one thousand Hindu students. 

But this subject need not be pursued any further. For the con¬ 
verts to Christianity from educated classes were a miscroscopic mino¬ 
rity, perhaps less than one per cent, of the total during the whole of 
the 19th century. The greatest success of the missionaries was among 
the primitive tribes and the lowest classes among the Hindus 
—the depressed classes and untouchables. Religion always sat 
lightly upon the former and the prospects of material and social 
advance counted for much among them all. It should not be 
taken as disrespect or disparagement to Christianity if truth has to 
be told, namely, that by far the greatest number of those who swelled 
the rank of converts to Christianity was attracted less by the 
teachings of Jesus Christ and more by the prospect of improving 
their social status and the lure of bettering material prospects. 


155 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


These included, besides free food and clothing in many cases, the 
facilities of schools, hospitals, maternity homes and other amenities 
of life which the missionaries were in a position to hold out before 
them,—thanks to the constant flow of money and men from Europe 
and America, and the zeal and ability of a band of hard-working and 
selfless missionaries to run these institutions. In many cases they 
were models which Indians looked upon with envy and despair. 


1. The date of Hammohan’s birth is not definitely known. The date, given 
on his tomb, is 1774, and there seems to be no adequate reason to disbelieve it. 
Miss Sophia Dobson Collet, in her Life and Letters of Raja Rammohun Roy, 
gives the date as 1772, on grounds which do not carry conviction. The bio¬ 
graphy of Rammohan, sponsored by the Committee which celebrated the 
Centenary of his death in 1933 and written by an eminent leader of the 
Brahma Samaj, has accepted the date 1772. Arguments in its favour are 
given in p. 28 of this book. For the other view cf. R&mmohan Ray (in Bengali) 
by B. N. Banerji, p. 12 f.n. 

2. This account of Rlmmohan’s early life is based on the Centenary Biography 
referred to in the preceding note, to be henceforth referred to as * t RammohunJ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 * * 13 14 
But almost every single fact contained in it is doubtful. In particular there 
are no good grounds to believe (1) that Rammohan studied Persian and Arabic 
at Patna and Sanskrit at Banaras, at least for a long time—ten years accord¬ 
ing to Adam,* (2) that he wrote a book against idolatry at the age of 16 or 17 
or even imbibed such ideas at that early age, and consequently (3) that he 
was driven away by his father from home. His visit to Tibet is very unlikely, 
for he never refers to it in his own biographical sketches, though he men¬ 
tions that he travelled in distant lands, 

3. Rammohun, p. 10. 

4. There is no foundation for the general belief that Rammohan was in the 
employ of the East India Company for a long time, from 1805 to 1814. Cf. 
B. N. Banerji, op. cit. 29-31. 

5. Rammohun, 11. 

6. According to some Rammohan settled in Calcutta in 1815, and not in 1814, 
which is the generally -accepted view. 

7. Rammohun, 13. 

8. This biographical sketch was published in the Athenaeum of London, on 
5 October, 1833 (pp. 666-68), i.e. about a week after the death of Rammohan, 
by Sandford Amot. He says that “the Rajah gave this brief sketch of his 
life shortly before he proceeded to France in the autumn of last year (1832).” 
Dr. Carpenter, who was a very intimate friend of Rammohan in London, 
wrote an account of his life in 1833. But there are some discrepancies bet¬ 
ween the two accounts. Miss Collet (see f. n. 1) has referred to the autobio¬ 
graphical sketch as “spurious autobiographical letter published by Sand- 
ford Arnot”. j Mr. B. N. Banerji (op. cit. 42-4) has shown that the statement 
in the autobiographical sketch that Rammohan wrote a bode against idolatry 
at the age of sixteen cannot be reconciled with his own statement in other 
books. For the autobiographical sketch, cf. Rammohun, pp. 119-21. It is 
written in the form of a letter to a dear friend. 

9. Rammohun, 15. 

10. Ibid, 17-8. 

10a. The Brihma Samaj was the original name though it was also known m the 
Bmhmu Sabhi, and not vice versa, as is generally supposed. Ct S. D. Collet 
The Life and Letters of Raja Rammohun Roy, Edited by D.K. Biswas and 
P.C. Ganguli, pp. 239 ff. 

12* jkjJj 72 History of the Brahmo Samaj , 44. 

13. * Ibid' 88-9. 

14. Ibid, 99. 

14®. Ibid. 


g; HIM# (in Bengali), Vol XU, p. m. 

17. B.C. fcal, Memoir# of My Life and Times, U, p. xv. 


156 







NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


18. Ibid, xii. 

19. Ibid. xiii. 

19a. Widow remarriage has since become more popular and polygamy was prohi¬ 
bited by Act XXV of 1955. 

20 . Zacharias, 22. 

21. Earquhar, J. N., Modem Religious Movements in India, p. 78, 

22. Kanade, Essays, p. 250. 

23. Fraquhar, op. cit., 79. 

24. Ibid. 

25. Ibid, 77. 

26. The account that follows is chiefly based on La j pat Rai, Arya Satnaj. 

27. B.C. Pal, op. cit., II. xxxiv. 

28. Lajpat Rai, op. cit., 103. 

29. B.C. Pal, op. cit., II. 77-8. 

30. Ibid, xxxvi. 

31. Lajpat Rai, op. cit., 74. 

32. B.C. Pal, op. cit, xxxvi-xl. 

33. Ibid, I, 437-8. 

34. Ibid, 438-9. 

35. Ibid, 439. 

36. Ibid, 428. 

37. This account is principally based on the Bengali biography of Ramakfishpa 
Paramahamsa by Swami S&radananda. 

38. Max Muller, RQm&krishna, Hit Life and Sayings, 59. 

39. Ibid, 58. 

39a. Ibid. 

40. Ibid, 179. 

41. Ibid. 

42. SwamI Gambhlrananda, History of the Ramakrishna Math and Mission, p. 30. 

43. Max Muller, op. cit. 100. 

44. Gambhlrananda, op. cit, 22-3. 

45. Ibid, 24-5. 

46. Ibid, 27-8. 

47. Ibid, 37-8. 

48. Ibid, 56. 

49. Ibid, 70. 

50. Ibid, 102. 

50a. Ibid. 

51. Ibid, 109-10. 

52. Ibid, 109. 

53. Ibid, 110. 

53a. Dr. Bhupendranath Datta, Swami Vivekananda Patriot-Prophet, pp. 13, 330. 

54. Encyclopaedia Britannica (11th Edition), Vol. IV, p. 48, s.v. ‘Blavatsky, 
Helena Petrovna*. 

55. Ibid, XXVI, 789-90, s. v. ‘Theosophy’. 

56. B.C. Pal, op. cit, D. lii-liii 

57. Ibid, liii. 

58. Encyclopaedia Britannica, s. v. Blavatsky. 

59. Annie Besant, An Autobiography, 345-6. 

60. Encyclopaedia Britannica, s. v. Blavatsky. 

61. Farquhar, op. cit., 84-5. 

62. Ibid, 85. 

63. Ibid, 292. 

64. Ibid, 297. 

65. Ibid, 296. 

66 . Ibid, 299. 

67. Ibid, 302. 

68 . Ibid, 304. 

69. Ibid, 307. 

70. Ibid, 133. 

71. Ibid. 

72. Ibid, 131. 

73. Ibid, 135. 

74. Ibid, 157 ff. 

75. Ibid, 173 ff. 

76. Wilson, Religious Sects of the Hindus. 

77. It means the Reformer of the 2nd millennium of the Hijri era. Ha was the moat 

157 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


redoubtable champion of the Naqsbandi order founded in India by Khwaja 
Baqi Biilah. 

78. He travelled all over the country, visiting one place after another, trying 
to mend the ways of his co-religionists and infuse in them the spirit-—which 
they lacked so sadly in those days—to face boldly the difficulties which sur¬ 
rounded them. Included in his itinerary was Calcutta which he visited in 
1820. 

79. See above, Vol. IX, p. 887. 

80. His teachings are embodied in his work Sirat-i-Mu&tcLqim (the Straight Path) 
edited by his pupils after his death. For a detailed account cf. Vol. IX, pp. 883 ff. 

81. Followers of Muhammad b. Abdul Wahab of Najd who himself was pro¬ 
foundly affected by Ibn Taimiya’s teaching. 

82. Died 1328. He preached against saint worship and all unorthodox practices. 
Ironically enough, however, his own tomb became a place of pilgrimage in 
the course of time. 

83. The Deobandis have never officially seceded from the Hanafi school, but 
there can be little doubt that they have strong leanings towards the Wahabis 
with whom they agree in most matters of ritual and ceremony. 

84. By Mulla Qutbuddin Suhalawi (d. 1691). 

85. Formulated by Mulla Nizamuddin, son of Mulla Qutbuddin, the course was 
based on the study of Arabic grammar, logic, philosophy, mathematics, rhetorics, 
jurisprudence, dogmatic theology (Kaldm), Quranic exegeses (tafsir) and 
Apostolic traditions ( hadis ). For a bitterly critical appraisal of the course, see 
Aslam Jairajpuri’s Maqaldt-i-Axlam. See also Rud-t-Kauthar pp. 405-410. 

86 . A graphic account of their plight is also contained in the famous Musaddas 
of Hah (see below) and Mauj-i-Kauthar pp. 57 ff. 

87. The earliest attempt to reconcile religion and philosophy and to interpret 
the Islamic dogmas rationally was made by the Mu‘tazila in the days of al- 
Mamun, the 6th Abbasid Caliph. 

88 . These include the Khutbdt-i-Ahmadiya and an incomplete commentary of 
the Qur’an. 

89. Inaugurated by Lord Lytton on the 8th of January, 1877. The School was 
inaugurated by Sir William Muir in 1875. 

90. See Vol. X, Ch. XLVI. 

91. Hali’s contribution to the social renaissance of the Indian Muslims about 
this time cannot be too highly praised. His famous poem, the Musaddas, 
particularly achieved a publicity scarcely ever vouchsafed to any other single 
Urdu poem. 

92. In 1886. It was in the Second Annual Session of the Conference that Sir 
Syed Ahmad delivered a vehement speech opposing the Congress ideals. 

93. For his attitude towards the Congress cf. Ch. XV. 

94. The Hanafi, founded by Abu Hanifa (d. 767), the Shafi, founded by al-Shafi’ 
(d. 820), the M a likl . founded by Malik ibn Anas (d. 795), and! the HanbaH, 
founded by Ahmad bin Hanbal (d. 855). 

95. On his death, he was succeeded by one of his close associates, Nuruddin, but 
a split occurred after the latter’s death in 1912, and his followers became 
divided into two groups, that of Qadian led by his son Mirza Bashiruddin 
Mahmud, continuing to believe in his prophet-hood, and the other with its 
centre at Lahore, led by Khwaja Kamaluadin and Maulavi Mohammad Ali, 
recognising him only as a reformer. 

9Q. Exercise of personal judgment in legal matters. 

97. Agents (lit. Callers”) of the Imams, among the Lana'ili Shi'as. 

98. Persons who have obtained an authority from the divines of Iraq to exercise 
personal judgment in legal matters. 

99. In his letters, collections of which have been published by several scholars 
including the late Pandit Mahesh Prasad of the Banaras University. 

100. In his Maz&min (essays), Asar al-Sanddid, etc. 

101. In his Muqaddama-i-Shfr-o-Sh&'iri and Yadg&r~i~GhAlib. 

102. In his lectures and a number of moral, reformative novels. 

103. In his voluminous histroy of India and essays. 

104. His two works, the Darbar-i-Akbari and the Ab-i-Kaydt, are real master¬ 
pieces of Urdu prose. 

105. The first translation of the Bdgh-o-Bah&r, entitled Nau Tarz-Mura&a' was 
made actually by Muhammad Husain Tahsin in 1780, while Mir Amman's 
translation appeared in 1901. The Faedna-i-'Ajd’ib was written in 1824. 

106. Curiously enough the Oudh Punch was in the forefront in waging war 

158 






NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


against Sir Syed Ahmad Khan and his educational ventures, and it was 
through its columns that Akbar Allahabadi used to ridicule the M.A.O. 
College and the Muhammadan Educational Conference (See Mauj-i-Kauthar 
pp. 240-56). 

107. We have already referred to the Tahzib’aX-Akhlaq started by Sir Syed Ahmad. 
According to Muhammad Husain Azad, the first Urdu newspaper was started 
by his father in Delhi in 1836. (Ab-i-Haydt, p. 37). For Urdu cf. pp. 214-5. 

108. That even this step towards social emancipation was not approved ungrudg¬ 
ingly by the educated males is illustrated by Iqbal’s bitter tirade against the 
progressive women in his Zawab-i-Shikwa, in which he says: 

Shauqi-tahrir-i-mazdmin men ghuli jdti hat 
Parde men baith ke be parda hui jdti hai. 

“She (the Muslim woman) is consumed with the desire of contributing articles 
(to journals and magazines) thus discarding the purdah when still sitting 
behind it.” 

109. Hie first lesson given to a child by a maulavi, consisting in the repetition by 
the child of a Qur’anic verse recited by him. 

110. An Arabic word, meaning the natal hair of a child, used in India in the sense 
of the ceremonious removal of such hair. 

111. The first school for girls on modern lines was founded by Shaikh ‘Abdullah 
of Aligarh in 1906, but a beginning had been made in that direction earlier 
by opening a special section for women in the Muhammadan Educational Con¬ 
ference in 1903. 

112. Thomas, P., Christians and Christianity in India and Pakistan, p. 153-54. 

112a. Encyclopaedia Britannica , 11th Edition, VIII. 624. 

113. Thomas, op.cit, 165-6. Cf. pp. 167 ff., 184. 

114. Ibid, 177. 

115. Ibid. 

116. Ibid, 178. 

117. Ibid., 

117a. The original has ‘poetry.* 

118. Thomas, op.cit., 179-80. 

119. Ibid, 179. 

120. Ibid, 180. 

121. Ibid, 182. 

122. Ibid, 183. 

123. Ibid, 185. 

124. See above, pp. 15-16; VoL IX, pp. 419-20. 

125. Cf. VoL IX, pp. 419-20, 629. 

126. Banerji, B. N., C. 172-174. 

127. Thomas, op. cit., 191. 

128. Ibid. 



/ 


159 



CHAPTER V (XLIII) 

LITERATURE 


I. INTRODUCTION 
1. Languages 

Referring to the popular notion about wide diversity of 
languages in India Dr. S. K. Chatterji, the eminent Indian philologist, 
has observed: “The meticulous and all-inclusive classification of the 
languages and dialects current in India and Burma (which, until 
1937, was politically a part of India), as given in the Linguistic Sur¬ 
vey of India, shows a total number of 179 languages and 544 dialects. 
These figures are staggering indeed for any single country or State 
claiming to be a nation, but they are to be taken with sope caution 
and reservation. For instance, of the above numbers, 116 are small 
tribal speeches which mostly belong to Burma. Then, again, the 
consideration of dialects is irrelevant when we mention the lan¬ 
guages to which they belong, for it is the great literary languages 
that really matter”. Dr. Chatterji then points out “that India 
has only the following fifteen great literary languages: (I) Hindi 
and (2) Urdu, which are but two styles of the same Hindustani 
speech, employing two totally different scripts and borrowing words 
from two different sources, (3) Bengali, (4) Assamese, (5) Oriya, 
(6) Marathi, (7) Gujarati, (8) Sindhi, (9) Panjabi, (10) Kashmiri, 
(11) Nepali, (12) Telugu, (13) Kannada, (14) Tamil, and (15) Ma¬ 
lay alam. The various aboriginal speeches current in the jungles 
and hills of the Himalayas, and of eastern, central, and southern 
India, like Newari, Khasi, Garo, Gond, Santali, Maler, Kota, Toda, 
etc., as well as those wide-spread and partially cultivated languages, 
in some cases spoken by millions, like Maithili, Chattisgarhi, Braja- 
bhakha, Marwari, etc., all find in one or the other of the above fif¬ 
teen their accepted literary form. Fifteen languages for a popul¬ 
ation of about 437 millions (1951) is not a proposition that should 
frighten anyone”: 1 

These languages fall under two groups.—Indo-Aryan and Dravi- 
dian, spoken respectively by 73 and 20 per cent, of the total popula¬ 
tion of India (including Pakistan). 

In addition to the above there were three other literary lan¬ 
guages current in India, namely, Sanskrit, Arabic, and Persian. None 

160 


LITERATURE 

of these was a spoken language and inspired a great literature in 
the nineteenth century India. The last remark is also true of -the 
English language, though if was the one and only spoken language 
understood throughout India in the nineteenth century. Although 
the use of these four languages in literature, properly so called, in 
the nineteenth century India, was very limited, each of them pos¬ 
sesses special importance. 

‘The primary importance of Sanskrit lies in not only maintain¬ 
ing but also strengthening Indian cultural and political unity'.** San¬ 
skrit has been, and still continues to be, the one great unifying factor 
for the people of India. India is a multi-racial and polyglot country, 
and in spite of a basic Indianism which embraces all, there is a bewil¬ 
dering diversity (though in non-essentials) in the spiritual approach 
of the Indian peoples. But the basic character of India, her great all 
India background, her Indianism, her Bharata-dharma, or Bh&rata- 
ydna, is linked up with Sanskrit". 2 

"Apart from this very vital matter, Sanskrit is a great treasure- 
house for all Indian literary languages to draw their words of 
higher culture from. Modem Indian literary languages, whether 
Aryan or Dravidian, are no longer 'building languages', Le. they do 
not create new words with their own native elements. With Sans¬ 
krit in the background and being nurtured in the bosom of Sans¬ 
krit, they have all become ‘borrowing languages’. Any word in a 
Sanskrit book or the .Sanskrit dictionary is a prospective Bengali or 
Telugu, Marathi or Malayalam word. The much-needed develop¬ 
ment of a scientific and technological vocabulary mil mean a greater 
and still greater place for Sanskrit in modem Indian intellectual 
and cultural life". 3 

The interest and importance of Arabic and Persian to the Mus¬ 
lims in India resembled very much that of Sanskrit to the Hindus. 
The pan-Islamic view 4 , which occasionally inspired sections of In¬ 
dian Musalmans in the nineteenth century, underlined the import¬ 
ance of a knowledge of Arabic and Persian. 

The importance of the English language was of a different cha¬ 
racter. It was not only the common language of the educated people 
all over India, but also the language mostly favoured by the upper 
and middle classes of people in each region in ordinary business 
and transaction of life. It was the language practically used by 
them in all spheres of life, and in all branches of education and learn¬ 
ing except literature proper. It must be noted, however, that there 
was some English literature developed in India both by Indians and 
Englishmen. 

161 

B.P.1.H—11 





THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

2. General Survey of the Character of the Literatures in the 
Modem Indian Languages . 

Modem Indian literatures are mostly the products of Western 
impact. Contact with the European spirit through English litera¬ 
ture brought in a real Indian renaissance, and gave a new course to 
the literatures in modern Indian languages. English literature it¬ 
self and the literatures of ancient, medieval, and modem Europe, 
to which English-knowing Indians had access through translations 
in English, revolutionised the attitude to life and, literature, and 
inaugurated the current or modem phase in Indian literature. 
This contact with the European mind first began in Bengal and, 
by the middle of the 19th century, the emancipation or modernisa¬ 
tion of the mind of Bengal and of Bengali literature had already 
begun. European methods of literary approach were eagerly adopt¬ 
ed; an expressive prose style was established, and the drama, the 
novel, the short story and the essay were bom during the sixties 
of the nineteenth century. The European type of blank verse, and 
verse-forms like the Italian sonnet were introduced. We have an 
astonishing fioraison of literature in Bengali at first, and then gra¬ 
dually in other languages,—the development following, generally, a 
similar course as English education through schools and colleges 
began to shape the mind of the intelligentsia. India became linked 
up with the modem world in literature and the humanities. 

It will thus be seen that next to English literature, the influence 
of modem Bengali literature has been one of the most potent forces 
in modem Indian literature. This is symbolized by the fact that 
Bankim-chandra Chatterji and Rabindra-nath Tagore have become 
pan-Indian in their effective power. Their writings have been trans¬ 
lated into various Indian languages and not only stimulated their 
growth but influenced their further development in various ways. 

Three other facts, though of secondary importance, considerably 
helped the growth and development of modem Indian literatures. 
The first was the printing press meant to publish books for the people 
which was set up by the Christian missionaries at Serampore in 
Bengal in A.D. 1800, and earlier in Goa and in Malabar. These were 
followed by several others in Calcutta and other parts of India, 
during the next' twenty years, established both by the Indians and 
Europeans. The printing press created a much wider reading public 
and a greater degree of living interest in literature. This not only 
stimulated its further development, but also influenced, to a large 
extent, its future shape and course. 

The second was the growing facilities of communication between 
different parts of India by improvements of road and transport, 

HI 


LITERATURE 


specially the extension of railways, which led to the gradual rea¬ 
lization of a common nationality. Besides, subjection to a common 
administration also indirectly contributed to the development of 
Indian literature by extending the spheres and possibilities of reci¬ 
procal influence through exchange of ideas, widening the horizon 
of outlook, and enriching the contents of literature. 

The third factor was the literary activity of the Christian mis¬ 
sionaries as part and parcel of their proselytizing propaganda. The 
necessity of diffusing the knowledge of tlie Christian scriptures 
among the Indian masses who were iguorant of English forced the 
missions to translate the Bible into various local languages, and the 
missionaries had thus to cultivate their study. To this study they 
brought in their material resources and the scientific knowledge 
of linguistics as it developed in the West. Grammars and dictiona¬ 
ries of various languages were written in order to help to evolve a 
standard prose style which was lacking in most Indian languages at 
the beginning of the nineteenth century, and printing presses were 
set up to publish these as well as religious tracts. This and the 
general interest in local literature displayed by many of the mis¬ 
sionaries laid the foundation, or in any case marked the beginning, 
of a prose style which constitutes an important characteristic of 
modern Indian literature. 

Finally, it should be noted that all the languages dealt with in 
this chapter had evolved before the nineteenth century, and the 
history of their growth, including that of their literature has been 
dealt with in the preceding volumes. This chapter deals only with 
these languages and literatures as they developed in the nineteenth 
century. Many writers and literary schools had their beginning in 
the nineteenth century but their full development took place during 
the twentieth. These will be more fully discussed in the next 
volume. 

n. SANSKRIT. 5 

The orthodox Pandits kept alive the study of Sanskrit during the 
nineteenth century, and their literary output was by no means insigni¬ 
ficant. They were patronized by the Hindu rulers of Tanjore, 
Cochin, Travancore, and Mysore, in the south, and Kashmir and Rfij- 
put States in the north. The old centres of Sanskrit learning like 
Varanasi, Mithila and Nadlyfi also continued to be centres of Sans¬ 
krit learning. 

The Sanskrit works written during the 19th century embraced 
various branches of literature such as religion, philosophy, poetry, 
drama, grammar, medicine, lexicography, and encyclopaedia 

163 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-11 

Vi&vanatha Sirhha Vaghela (1813-54), ruler of Rewa, is the repu¬ 
ted author of no less than fifty works nn Rama cult (exposition of 
the details of Rama worship, poems, songs, and musical plays). At 
K&fichi (Conjeeveram in Madras) a SannyasI gave a systematic expo¬ 
sition of the 108 Upanishads and was hence named Upanishad Brah¬ 
man. A Tamil scholar, Appayacharya (died, 1901 A.D.) wrote a 
large number of philosophical works with a view to effecting a syn¬ 
thesis of Samkhya, Yoga and Vedanta systems (Anubliavddvaita). 
The traditional learning in logic ( navyanyaya ) was kept up in Ben¬ 
gal as indicated by the Adhydtmachanffi of Sivachandra. 

“In the beginning of the 19th century, Raghava Apa Khantfekar 
flourished at the well-known Maharashtra centre of learning, Puoya- 
stamhha, and wrote the lexicon Kosdvatamsa, the astronomical works 
Khepticjiti, the Paddhatichandrika and the Panchdngdrka , and the 
literary work Kfishnavii&sa. More prolific was his Panchavati con¬ 
temporary Achyutaraya Modak, who made varied contributions to 
poetry, poetics, religion and Advaita philosophy, nearly thirty works 
of his being known. The Tanjore Kannadiga authors Vanchchhe£vara 
and his great-grandson and namesake received patronage at Poona 
too; the latter received help at the hands of the Patwardhan Sardars 
and their ministers, and is well known for his Mlmaihsa work Bhdp 
pachintdmani; he wrote also on Dharma and &rauta. In Nagpur 
flourished the poet Gangadhara (1860-65) who produced eighteen 
works including two Gitagovinda imitations, Sangltardghava and 
Gang&shtapadi. Advaitendra Yati (1780), author of Dharmanauka, 
flourished near Ahmadnagar. Raghunatha Sastri Parvate wrote a 
commentary on the Gita called the Padabhushana and then the Ad- 
vaitic polemic against Dvaita, the Adnkaraj^idabhushana, in 1848, un¬ 
der the patronage of Nana Saheb, Minister at Bhor”. 

- : 

“RSmasvami Sastri of Ilattur in Travancore (1823) was a pro- 
' lific writer; his Kirtivilasa Champu is on Ayilyam Tirunal, Sura p- 
ar&ghava, a grammatical poem like Bhaftik&vya, KaivalyapalliparU 
nay a, an allegorical philosophical play like the Prabodhachandro . 
daya, and KshetratattvadipikA, a work on geometry. His pupil Sun- 
dararaja was as prolific and versatile, and one of his best-known 
works is the one-act play on the triumph of the daughter-in-law 
against the mother-in-law, the Snush&vijaya . Keralavarma Valiya 
Koil Tampuran (bom 1845) composed several hymns and poems, 
and when king Ayilyam Tirunal interned him, gave vent to his feel¬ 
ings of dislike against the king in many pieces, and after release 
wrote the Vtiakhavijaya on ViiSkham Tirunfil.” 

“Cochin did not lag behind. During the time of Rama Varma, 
ArOr Bhattatiri (1830) wrote the TJttara Naishadha; Virakerala Var- 


164 


LITERATURE 


ma, king in 1809-28, was an author of hymns; Goda Varma Yuvaraja 
of Cranganore was master of &astra and K&vya, his monologue, Rasa- 
sadana Bhana, being his best known work; his Ramacharita was com¬ 
pleted by Kochchunaji Tampuran (1855-1926) who wrote also Goda 
Varman’s life in Vidvad-Yuvaraja Charita; Kunnikkuftan Tampuran 
of Cranganore wrote also one-act plays and a life of Sankara. The Afa- 
hishamangala Bhana was produced in the time of Rajaraja Varma n 
by the Nambudiri of Mahishamangalam”. 

In Kashmir, the reign of Ranavira Singh (ascended 1857) wit¬ 
nessed a great amount of enthusiasm for Sanskrit. ‘‘Siv&nahkara 
compiled at this time the Dharma£astra digest, Ranaviraratnakara; in 
Vedanta, Vasudeva wrote the Chittapra&pa; Ga^eSa of Jammu wrote 
the Vishaharctantra in medicine, and La la Pa^itSa, the Pra&naratnd- 
vali in Jyotisha. This King appears as the sponsor of no less than 
thirty-two works in all branches of Sanskrit literature. His chief 
Pandit Sahibram wrote, among others, a commentary on the Paneha - 
say aka on erotics. Visvesvara of the same court produced an en¬ 
cyclopaedia called Ranavlravijaya and a treatise on prognostication 
derived from Muhammadan sources, called the Skandhasthiprasna; 
and the Bhiipdlavildsa of Sivarama is another interesting work of the 
same time dealing with different topics of royal interest and games 
and amusements”. 

A Sanskrit ritualistic text of the Bengal Vaishnava sect, Kjish- 
narchana-Chandrikxi, was composed by RadMmohan Sarma who was 
probably also the author of KrUhv^bhaktUstidh&rnava. The re¬ 
nowned Ayurvedic physician, Gangadhara Kaviraja of Bengal (1798- 
1885), wrote the commentary Jalpakalpataru on the famous medical 
treatise Charaka Samhitd. 

“Bengal produced two great encyclopaedic works, viz. Sabddkab 
padruma and Vdchaspatya, compiled, respectively, by Radh&kfinta. 
Dev and Taranath Tarkavachaspati, on modern lines. A third, 
SabdUrthasarvasva, compiled by Paravastu Venkata Rangaclmrya of 
Vizagapatam, is not yet published.” 

Among historical works may be mentioned the Siddhdntavijaya 
dealing with Pratapasimha, Rajfi of Satara. 

Reference may be made to some women writers in the field of 
Sanskrit literature. “Triveol (1817-83), a Vaishajava lady of §rl- 
perumbudur and one who engaged herself also in some public work in 
the religious field, composed hymns, a couple of plays, two imitations 
of Kalidasa’s Meghasandesa and two epic poems. Sundara valli, 
authoress of a Rarwyana Champu , hailed from Mysore. Jnfinasun- 
dari of Kumbhakonam (died 1910) was highly gifted in this line, and 
among three women of recent times who tread the more arduous path 

165 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—U 

of mastering Sastras, mention may be made of a Telugu Brahman 
lady of Mayavaram, Kamakshi (widowed 1871), who has left glosses 
on Tarka and Advaita Vedanta texts, Nilakanfhiya-vishayamald, Ad - 
vaitadtpikd anu Smritiratnaprakd&ka. Lakshml, a princess of Ka- 
dattana^ (died 1900), wrote the poem Santdnagopala , indulging in 
difficult rhymes. Subhadrfi of the Cochin royal house (1844-1921) 
composed devotional hymns”. 

Sanskrit literature also felt the impact of Western influence, 
though it came late in the nineteenth century and was mainly exhibi¬ 
ted in the composition of short stories in prose, translation of poems 
and plays from English, and publication of journals of modem type. 
These new movements and models of composition will be more fully 
dealt with in the next volume. Two examples may be cited here. Raja- 
raj a varm a, a Kerala graduate and author of the grammatical work 
Laghu P&tyiriiya, composed a drama named Avgalasamrdjya which 
was an adaptation of Shakespeare’s Othello. Panchanan Tarkarat- 
na, an erudite Sanskrit scholar of Bengal, voiced the national and 
patriotic sentiments in his poems and particularly in the drama 
Amaramahgala, based on a story of Mewar. 6 

HI. BENGALI 
1. Growth of Bengali Prose 

AM noted above, there was no prose literature in the Bengali 
language before the nineteenth century. We have specimens of 
Bengali prose in the writings of a Portuguese Christian and a Ben¬ 
gali convert which may be dated in the closing years of the seven¬ 
teenth and the first half of the eighteenth century. To the same 
period, or perhaps even an earlier date, belong the official docu¬ 
ments of Tripura (Hill Tippera) State which adopted Bengali as the 
State laiiguage since the 15th or 16th century. Specimens of Ben¬ 
gali prose towards the close of the eighteenth century are furnished 
by the translation of a Sanskrit work Bhasha-parichchheda and the 
official records of, and letters written to the authorities of the East 
India Company by the rulers of Tripura, Cooch Behar, Assam, Ma¬ 
nipur and Gfich&r. The records represent a colloquial style, easily 
understood, which often shows foreign influence and hardly posses¬ 
ses any literary grace. The letters are so full of Arabic and Persian 
words, without any punctuation, that it is quite unintelligible even 
to a modem educated Bengali. 

The history of Bengali prose literature really begins with the 
foundation of Fort William College in Calcutta in 1800 A.1J. This 
college was established with a view to training the officials of the 


166 



LITERATURE 


East India Company in the different languages of this country. It 
had a Bengali section with William Carey, a missionary, as its head, 
and eight other teachers under him. Carey felt very keenly the 
lack of suitable text-books, and the authorities of the college en¬ 
couraged the Bengali teachers in the department to compose new 
books by offering cash rewards. As a result of this, as well as of 
the personal example and encouragement of Carey, a large number 
of books were composed by the Bengali teachers during the first ten 
years. Even outsiders, encouraged by pecuniary help, followed 
their example. Among these authors special mention may be made 
of RSmram Basu, Mptyunjay Vidyalahkar, and Rajib-lochan Mu- 
khopSdhyay, whose first works were published, respectively, in 1801, 
1802 and 1805 A.D. The most eminent among them was Mrityunjay 
Vidyalahkar, four of whose works were published before 1813. He 
developed for the first time an artistic literary style, and fully de¬ 
serves the epithet, ‘father of Bengali prose*. Hie credit is usual¬ 
ly given to RSja RSmmohan Roy. But the first Bengali book of the 
Raja was published in 1815 and his style is heavier and much infe¬ 
rior in literary merit to that of Mrityunjay. Though the numerous 
writings of the Raja in Bengali prose greatly helped its develop¬ 
ment, still, as in the case of English education, he cannot be regard¬ 
ed as a pioneer in the field of Bengali prose literature. 

i 

The early Bengali books were mostly translations from Sans¬ 
krit, English and Persian, but there were three original composi¬ 
tions, all of historical character. R&mram Basu and RSjib-lochan 
Mukhopadhyay wrote, respectively, the lives of Pratfip&ditya and 
Kfishna-chandra Ray, while Mrityunjay Vidy&lankfer wrote a 
history of India from the earliest period to the times of Warren 
Hastings. 

William Carey, to whom reference has been made above, look¬ 
ed to the technical side of the Bengali language and brought to bear 
upon it his knowledge of European languages. He composed a 
grammar of the Bengali language in 1801, and a Rengali-English 
dictionary in 1815. He wrote a book in colloquial Bengali in 1801 
which anticipates the easy-flowing popular style for which credit is 
given to PyW-chfind Mitra. A part of it, if not the whole, was 
written by a Bengali, probably Mjityufijay Vidyalahk&r. Another 
book, written by Carey in 1812, named ItihdtamdlSL or a collection 
of stories, shows his command over easy literary style in Bengali 
On the whole the importance of Carey’s contribution to the deve¬ 
lopment of Bengali prose is very great indeed. The following 
passage from the Introduction to his Bengali Grammar shows his 
apjpedation of the Bengali language and gives us a fair idea of its 

167 




THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

. * . 

status at the beginning of the nineteenth century: *‘Bengalee is a 
language which is spoken, from the Bay of Bengal in the south to 
the mountains of Bootan in the north, and from the borders of Ram- 
gur to Arakan. It has been supposed by some, that a knowledge 
of the Hindoosthanee language is sufficient for every purpose of 
business in any part of India. This idea is very far from correct, for 
though it be admitted, that persons may be found in every part of 
India who speak that language, yet Hindoosthanee is almost as much 
a foreign language, in all the countries of India, except those to the 
north-west of Bengal, which may be called Hindoosthan proper, as 
the French is in the other countries of Europe. In all the courts of 
justice in Bengal, and most probably in every other part of India, 
the poor usually give their evidence in the dialect of that particular 
country, and seldom understand any other... 

“The Bengalee may be considered as more nearly allied to the 
Sungskrita (Sanskrit) than any of the other languages of India;... 
four-fifths of the words in the language are pure Sungskrita. Words 
may be compounded with such facility, and to so great an extent in 
Bengalee, as to convey ideas with the utmost precision, a circums¬ 
tance which adds much to its copiousness. On these, and many other 
accounts, it may be esteemed one of the most expressive and elegant 
languages of the East”. 

Carey has rightly pointed out that Bengali was more nearly allied 
to Sanskrit than other Indian languages. One of its effects was the 
close imitation of Sanskrit prose style by the Bengali writers. Even 
Mfityuhjay Vidyalahkar, who could write easy graceful Bengali, 
adopted Sanskritized style in some of his books. Evidently, the 
father of Bengali prose was experimenting with different styles. 
Unfortunately, his heavy style was also adopted by many writers 
after him. Henceforth we find, in addition to purely colloquial Ben¬ 
gali, an easy, and graceful, as well as a heavily Sanskritized, literary 
style in Bengali prose. The last style, which soon found favour 
among the educated, was mainly inspired by the very common desire 
of the authors to show off their learning and a repugnance to the 
easy colloquial words which were regarded as somewhat vulgar. 
The books written in this style were intelligible only to a few, and 
are now generally forgotten. Nevertheless, their authors did a grtat 
service to Bengali language by saving it from the dominating in¬ 
fluence of Arabic and Persian which overtook Hindi. It is a remark¬ 
able fact that while the languages of Upper India came to be more and 
more Persianized and Arabicized, Bengali language, since the begin¬ 
ning of the nineteenth century, deliberately cast off this foreign in¬ 
fluence and locked for sustenance and development to the rich resour- 


168 




LITERATURE 


ces of Sanskrit and the spoken language of the people. While the 
language was thus being remodelled and simplified, the Bengali 
writers drank deeply at the fountain of English literature which was 
becoming gradually accessible to them as a result of the spread of 
English education. These two factors seem to be at the root of the 
wonderful development of Bengali language and literature in the 
nineteenth century. 

The first manifestation of this new spirit is to be seen in the 
growth of Bengali periodicals. 7 Although English periodicals ap¬ 
peared in Bengal shortly after the foundation of the British rule, 
there was no Bengali periodical before 1818. Three papers were 
published in that year of which the B&hgal Gejepi (Weekly Bengal 
Gazette ), published in May, was probably the first in the field, but did 
not continue for more than a year. The other two were brought out by 
the Baptist Missionaries of Serampore, about 15 miles from Calcutta. 
The first was a monthly journal named ‘Digdariana, which was soon 
followed by a weekly called Sam&charOr^Uirpa^a (Mirror of News). 
This was the most important Bengali periodical of the early days, 
and fortunately almost complete file of its issues has come to light. 
It is thus an invaluable source of information, and has been drawn 
upon for materials in several chapters of this volume. We have the 
additional advantage of learning from it the news and views quoted 
from other papers which are no longer available. 

The first issue of Samdchdra-darpa^ia was published on 10th 
Jyaishtha, 1225 B.S., corresponding to May 23, 1818. It was to be 
published every Saturday morning and the price was fixed at 
Bs. 1/8/- per month. It was announced in the very first issue that 
the regular publication of the following items would form the chief 
features of the Weekly. 

I. Appointment of Judges, Collectors and other officials. 

2 < Acts and Ordinances issued by the Governor-General. 

3. News of India and Europe. 

% 

4. Commercial news. 

5. Birth, marriage, and death news. 

6. New discoveries in Europe and account of the new machines 
and industrial development contained in books imported 
from England every month. 

7. Ancient tystory and culture of India and account of her 

learned men and books. 

• ^ 

J. C. MaT flhman was the nominal editor of the paper, but it was 
actually conducted by Bengali Paints, among whom Jayagop&l Tar- 

and TSrhji-chara^i §iromagi deserve special mention. 


169 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 

At least seven other Bengali periodicals were started between 
1820 and 1850. Raja Kammohan Roy was the virtual, if not also the 
nominal, editor of one of these, Sambada-Kaumudi, started in Decem¬ 
ber, 1821. Here, again, we can hardly support the claim that Raja 
Rammohan Roy was the pioneer in establishing vernacular and Eng¬ 
lish journals in Bengal. In 1829, he, along with others, started two 
papers, Bengal Herald in English and Bangaduta in Bengali. But 
there were English and Bengali journals long before that. 

It is hardly necessary to emphasize the great historical value of 
these old Bengali periodicals. An enterprising Bengali scholar has 
published extracts from these papers in three handy volumes. As 
we go through them a complete picture of Bengal in the twenties and 
thirties of the last century, with all its defects and shortcomings and 
urge for a new life, passes before our eyes, and we can discern in it 
the symptoms of a sudden awakening after lethargy of centuries; of 
new ideas and visions of hope and aspirations, of strange customs 
and beliefs, doubts and dissensions, conflict between the old and the 
new, and the faint beginning and gradual growth of those ideas and 
institutions which have gone to make up Modem India. The might 
of the political authority of the British rulers and the stories of their 
conquests and diplomacy, which have hitherto formed the staple 
food of Indian history, recede into the background; we stand face 
to face with a new generation of people casting off their slumbers 
of a thousand years and trace the travails of the birth of a new cul¬ 
ture and new civilization out of the old. 

But apart from this great value as source-materials of history, 
the Bengali periodicals are of great importance as landmarks for 
the development of Bengali language and literature. The variety 
of topics dealt with by them increased the elasticity of the language 
and made it a suitable vehicle of expression for all types of thoughts 
and ideas. It became gradually free from high-flown Sanskrit 
compounds and was already well on its way to that stage of deve¬ 
lopment which rendered it possible for masters like Kvar-chandra 
VidySsftgar, Bankim-chandra Chatterji, Rabindra-n&th Tagore and a 
host of other great, but less renowned, authors to transform it into 
one of the most beautiful and highly developed languages of the mo¬ 
dem world. The extracts from these old periodicals, even of 1840- 
1850, would occasionally appear crude, and somewhat unintelligible, 
to an educated Bengali of the present day. But thfy were the founda¬ 
tions, well and truly laid by a generation of pioneers, on which the 
noble structure of modern Bengali language and literature was built 
up by the next two successive generations of Bengalis. The Bengali 
periodicals were the first milestone in the road of progress follow- 


170 



LITERATURE 


ed by Bengali language and literature, the end of which is marked 
by pillars now famous all over the world. 

The periodicals were also great mediums for the spread of 
general knowledge and culture, and their value as such was gradu¬ 
ally being appreciated by the people. The following extract from 
Samdchara-dcCrpana, dated January 30, 1830, is an interesting reve¬ 
lation: 

“We find from our survey that the subscribers to periodicals 
have been doubled during the last year. The editors of those 
papers are also publishing information about more and more distant 
countries and this has widened the knowledge of the people. When 
twelve years ago we first brought out this paper, many subscribers 
blamed us for writing about countries whose names were never 
even heard of by them. But we are glad to find that the periodicals 
in Calcutta edited by Bengalis publish news of many countries of 
the world and the people are anxious to know of the events 
happening in foreign countries, specially in England. A strik¬ 
ing proof of this has recently come to our notice. A Calcutta 
Periodical recently gave a list of countries the news of which would 
be specially published in it. A few days later we received a letter 
from a Mofussil subscriber that in case we do not publish the news 
of all those countries he would cease to subscribe to our paper”. 

It is an interesting revelation how Bengalis were put in touch 
with the current affairs of the world. Towards the closing centu¬ 
ries of the Hindu rule, India’s contact with the outside world gra¬ 
dually became less and less. Al-Birum noted this as a great defect 
in the character of Indians as far back as A.D. 1030. It is now 
generally recognized that this complete ignorance of outside world 
was one of the important causes of the downfall of the Hindus. 
Nor was there any great improvement in this respect during the 
Muslim rule, so far at least as the Hindus were concerned. Now 
we find that at one stroke, thanks to these periodicals, the Bengalis 
were learning a great deal of the world outside, and what is more 
important, the value of such a knowledge was being more and more 
appreciated. The influence of this factor on the development of 
culture can hardly be over-estimated. It would be hardly any exag¬ 
geration to say that an average Bengali educated njan of 1830 knew 
more of the world outside in course of the preceding ten years than 
his forefathers did during the previous thousand years. 

2. Poetry . 

While the Bengali prose style was of recent growth, Bengali 
poetical literature had a long history before the nineteenth century, 


171 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


and many high-class works were produced by famous poets like 
Chapdidas, Mukundaram, Bharat-chandra and many others mention¬ 
ed in preceding volumes. These were based on religious themes, 
though occasionally and incidentally some secular topics were intro¬ 
duced. The last great master of the poetical styles which came 
into vogue, late in the 18th century, in poetical contests held in public, 
was Dasarathi Ray (1806-57), best known for his spontaneity of dic¬ 
tion and similes.The first poet to break a new ground was Isvar- 
chandra Gupta (1812-1859) who wrote poems on social and political 
themes and translated English verses. His style was artificial and 
he represented the transition from the old to the new school. The 
first great poet of the new school was Madhu-sudan Datta (1824-73), 
distinguished by the Christian epithet ‘Michael’, who brought about 
almost an epoch-making change both in form and spirit of Bengali 
poetry. He introduced blank verses, hitherto unknown, and his epic, 
Meghanada-vadha-lcavycL, numerous sonnets, and other longer poems 
breathe a new spirit. Madhu-sudan learnt a number of European lan¬ 
guages—English, French, Italian, Greek, and Latin—,and studied 
Sanskrit and Telugu in addition. He used Indian themes but treated 
them in a distinctly modern i.e. European way. This is specially true 
of his magnum opus , the Meghanada-vadha-kavya (1861), a grand 
epic, based on an episode in the Rdm&yana, in which he successfully 
naturalised the European blank verse in Bengali. “In his Virangarva - 
kdvya he essayed the style of the Heroides of tlje Latin poet Ovid, 
but with an epic grandeur all his own. In his Vraj&hgana-kavya, 
based on Radha-Krishna legend, he caught the depth of feeling of 
the old Vaishnava poets, but in his own inimitable apd modem way. 
He wrote a series of sonnets on the model of the Italian and 
a number of effective plays in various moods influenced by his Euro¬ 
pean readings. He also tried to bring an echo of Homer’s rolling 
hexameters into Bengali prose in his unfinished fragment “Hektar- 
vadha” or the “Slaying of Hector”. 8 

Rangalal Bandyopiadhyay (1827-1887) wrote some poems on 
Rajput chivalry and other historical episodes. His famous ode on 
liberty, particularly its first line (Breathes there the man who would 
like to live, though bereft of freedom), has become a permanent 
treasure of Bengali literature. 

Two of the greatest poets of Bengal after Madhu-sudan Datta 
were Hem-chandra Bandy op§dhyay (1838-1903) and Nabln-chandra 
Sen (1847-1909). The former wrote an epic poem Vritra-Saihh&ra 
(a weak imitation of Madhu-sudan’s Meghandda-vadha-k&vya) , but 
is better known for his patriotic poems inspired by fervent nationa¬ 
lism. Nabln-chandra Sen is the author of a triology of epic poems 

172 


LITERATURE 


(Kurukshetra. Raivataka, and Prabhdsa) 9 giving a new interpreta¬ 
tion of the life and message of Sri-Kfishj^a, a theme more philoso¬ 
phically handled by Bankim-chandra in his Krishna-charitra. Nabln- 
chandra wrote three short biographies of Buddha, Christ, and Chai- 
tanya in fine verses. His best known work is, however, Pald&r 
Yuddha, based on the decisive battle of Palasi (Plassey). This great 
epic, and many shorter poems of Nabln-chandra breathe a fervid 
sense of patriotism. Hem-chandra and Nabln-chandra carried the 
Bengali poetry further on the line chalked by Madhu-sudan. These 
three may be regarded as the great classic poets in modem Bengali. 

Mention may also be made of Dwijendra-nath Tagore 8 * (1840- 
1926), the eldest brother of Rabindra-riath, His Svapna-pray&na is 
a unique composition. It is an allegorical poem on a novel plan and 
shows a high flight of fancy and charming poetry. 

The next phase of development was the romantic poems which 
began with Biharl-lal Chakravarti (1835-94) and culminated in Ra- 
bindra-nath. Many other poets like Surendra-nath Majumdsar (1838- 
78), Akshay-kumar Baral (1865-1918), Mrs. KaminI Ray (1864-1933) 
and Dwijendra-lal Ray (1863-1913) were of a fairly high order, but 
have been cast into shade by the great genius of Rahindra-nath. 

3. NotieU 

The Bengali novels reached, even if did not exceed, the height 
of excellence attained by Bengali poetry. This type of literature 
was directly inspired by English novels. The first work which may 
be properly regarded as a novel was written by Bhudev Mukhopa- 
dhyav (1827-1894), a student of the Hindu College. But the 
greatest writer in the field was Bankim-chandra Chatterji (1838- 
94), whose first novel DurgeSa-nandinl was published in 1865, and was 
followed by many others in quick succession. They heralded a new 
era in Bengali literature for two reasons. In the first place, he in¬ 
troduced a new style in Bengali prose which continued to be. the 
standard throughout the nineteenth century. Reference has been 
made above to the Sanskritized style of early prose writers which 
found favour among Bengali writers. Its long compounds and diffi¬ 
cult Sanskrit words made it incomprehensible to most readers. A 
reaction set in and Pyari-chand Mitra (1814-1883) used the collo¬ 
quial style, full of slangs, in his realistic story Al&ler Gharer Dul&l 
published in 1858. It was ISvar-chandra VidyfiSBgar (1820-1891) who 
rescued the Bengali style from the pedantry of the Pandits and the 
vulgarity of the realists. He may be called “the father of literary 
Bengali prose”. His style was graceful and dignified, but still a little 
too heavy, and not very suitable for novels. Bankim-chandra improv- 

173 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

ed upon his style, and the form of Bengali prose introduced by him did 
not lose its mastery fill the later days of Rabindra-nath in the present 
century. 

r n 

Bankim-chandra’s novels showed an astonishing vigour of the 
Bengali language, combined with beauty and simplicity. They also 
revealed a new world of romance and idealism undreamt of before. 
From his pen flowed, year after year, novels of outstanding merit, of 
all types and descriptions,—religious, historical, romantic and social. 
He showed for the first time that the ordinary life of a middle-class 
Bengali can be a subject-matter of a high-class novel, and religious 
and social views can be preached through novels without detriment 
to their artistic merit. He also proved that a book written in Ben¬ 
gali can rank with a first-rate English novel. Some of his novels 
were translated into English, and one in German, and this raised the 
prestige of Bengali literature in the eyes of the educated classes. 
Before him Bengali literature did not occupy a high place in the esti¬ 
mation of the educated Bengalis. The Sanskrit Pandits as well as 
the Anglicised section regarded it as vulgar and beneath notice. 
Proficiency in English was then the only title to fame, and no Bengali 
writer could hope for any credit in their eyes. It is interesting to 
note that even Madhu-sudan Datta and Bankim-chandra, the two great 
pioneers and luminaries in the two main branches of Bengali litera¬ 
ture, fell into the lure and both began their literary career in Eng¬ 
lish. The first poetic work of the former was Captive Ladie (1849), 
and the first novel of the latter was Rajmohan’s Wife (1864). It is a 
great good fortune of Bengali literature that both realized their mis¬ 
take very early, and devoted their attention to Bengali literature. 

Bankim-chandra was a versatile writer. Besides novels, he 
wrote religious treatises and a number of essays on a variety of sub¬ 
jects. He preached his religious views and patriotic sentiments 
through his writings, and made the Bengali language a fit vehicle for 
expressing the highest ideas on all conceivable subjects in the most 
beautiful form. For half a century he remained the uncrowned 
king in the domain of Bengali literature. One of his novels, Ananda- 
math (Abbey of Bliss), which contains the famous song Vande Mdta- 
rum, has attained an all-India fame on account of his patriotic fer¬ 
vour skilfully* depicted in the form of a quasi-historical romance. 
While there is no doubt that Bankim was profoundly influenced by 
European thoughts and literature, his great originality as a writer 
and thinker is beyond all question. 

Bankim-chandra opened the floodgate of novels, and since his 
days they occupy the most prominent place in Bengali literature. 
Among his successors special mention may be made of his brother 


174 


LITERATURE 


Sanjib-chandra (1834*89), Tarak-nAth Gangopadhyay (1845*91) who 
portrayed a realistic picture of the domestic life of Bengal, Ramesh- 
chandra Datta (1848-1909) who wrote several historical and social 
novels, Svanjia-kum&ri (1855*1932), a sister of Rabindra-nath, and 
&ri£-chandra Majumdar (died 1908) who dealt with rural life. 

4. Drama 

The next important line of development was dramatic litera¬ 
ture. Towards the close of the eighteenth century (in 1795 and 1796 
A. D.) a Russian named Herasim Lebedeff staged two dramas in Cal¬ 
cutta with the help of Bengali actors and actresses. These were 
translations of two English works. But it was not till 1831 that the 
first Bengali stage was set up by Prasanna-kumar Tagore. The two 
dramas selected for the first performance were Shakespeare’s Julius 
Caesar and the English translation of Uttara-Rama-charita . One or 
two years later, a Bengali gentleman named Nabin-chandra Basu set 
up a stage in his own house where Bengali dramas were acted. 
Similar stages were set up by other individuals, both in Calcutta and 
mofussil, but the first public stage dates only from December, 1872. 
It was named National Theatre according to the prevailing spirit of 
the time. Since then public stages have continued in an unbroken 
career. 

These performances led to the development of Bengali drama. 
The earlier dramas were either translations of Sanskrit and English 
or based on Puranic stories. The first drama which broke a new 
ground was Kulina-kulasarvasva, a comedy based on the evils of 
Kulinism, written by R§mn&rayan Tarkaratna (1822-1886). But 
in this line also Madhu-sudan Datta was the first great genius who 
infused a new life into the Bengali dramatic literature. His first 
work, Sarmishtha , based on the story of Yayati, was not a great 
success. But his historical drama, Krishnakumari, based on the 
story of the princess of Udaipur, and several comedies, exposing 
social abuses, were works of high order. The next dramatist, Dina- 
bandhu Mitra (1839-1873) also showed great dramatic powers. His 
famous drama Nila-darpaana (1860) which exposed the oppressions of 
indigo-planters, 9 created a great sensation at the time, and Mr. Long, 
a missionary, was imprisoned for publishing an English translation of 
the same. An interesting development was the patriotic or 
national drama to which reference will be made later. Rajakfishi^a 
Rfiy (1849-94) wrote a number of dramas, mostly on Puranic themes, 
and introduced the regular free verse—a remarkable innovation in 
Bengali dramas. Jyotirindra-nfith Tagore (1849-1925), an elder 
brother of Rablndra-nAth, wrote several historical plays, and transla- 


175 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-!! 


ted a large number of Sanskrit dramas in Bengali. The most success¬ 
ful playwright was Gin6-chandra Ghosh (1844-1912). Kimself a 
highly reputed professional actor, he was a voluminous writer of 
dramas of all types—religious, Puranic, romantic, social and histo¬ 
rical. Although many dramatic works were written before him, 
this class of literature was far below the standard reached in poems 
and novels. Girli-chandra’s genius raised Bengali dramas to a high 
level, and he was ably seconded by Kshirod-prasad Vidyabinod 
(1864-1927) and Dwijendra-lal Ray (1863-1913). Mention should also 
be made of Amrita-lal Basu (1853-1929), who excelled in farce and 
satire. 

5. Miscellaneous 

In addition to poems, novels and dramas, the Bengali literature 
was enriched by a variety of other branches. The most important 
of them was religious, philosophical and moral literature. The Tat- 
tvabodhini Patrikd, started in 1843, contained a fine series of articles 
written in lucid style by Devendra-nath Tagore, l&var-chandra Vidya- 
sagar, Raj-narayan Basu (1826-99), Dwijendra-nath Tagore (1840- 
1926) and others, each of whom rose to great fame as writer and also 
in other spheres of life. Akshay-kumar Datta (1820-86), who edited 
the paper, was a versatile writer of great repute and was the master 
of a graceful prose style. Next came Kegab-chandra Sen 9a (1838-84), 
whose great fame as a religious leader has obscured his jngh quali¬ 
ties as a great Bengali writer. Finally, we have to mention 
the great SvamI Vivekananda (1863-1902), the great disciple 
of Sri Ramalqrishpa, and the author of several religious treatises. He 
was a powerful writer both in English and Bengali and evolved a 
Bengali prose style, which was akin to the spoken language, but also 
suitable to serious dissertations. 

The Tattva-bodhirti Patrikd was the forerunner of many great 
periodicals. Reference may be made to Vividh&rtha Sangraha 
published by the Indian Vernacular Society and edited by R&jendra- 
lal Mitra (1822-91). It was a mine of useful information in all bran¬ 
ches of human knowledge. The great Rabindra-nfitb has referred to 
it in flattering terms in his autobiography. He read it with great 
interest in his youth and lamented the absence of similar periodicals 
in his old age. There were a few other periodicals of this nature. 
But by far the best periodical in Bengali was the Bangadariana edited 
by Bankim-chandra from 1872 to 1876. The essays and criticisms 
published in it were of high literary merit and opened a new era in 
Bengali literature. In 1877 appeared the Bh&rati, edited for seven 
years by Dwij endra-nfith Tagore, then by his sister Svars^a-kumirf, 
and lastly by her two daughters. 


176 





LITERATURE 


Reference may also be made to the cheap daily newspapers. 
Ke&ab-chandra Sen first introduced it, and later the HitavddZ, edited 
by Kall-prasanna Ravyav&arad (1861-1907), and the Bctngab&si by 
Jogendra-chandra Bose (1854-1905) became very popular. 

Several great writers have left their chief contributions in the 
form of essays or short tracts. The most notable among them were 
Bhudev Mukhopadhy&y, Raj-naraya# Basu, Ramtanu L&hi$l, Chan- 
dra-nath Basu, Akshay-chandra Sarkar, Kfili-prasanna Ghosh, and 
Hara-pras&d Sastri. 

Some writers of satire, both in the form of novels and poems, 
have attained great fame as Hterary men. Among them may be 
mentioned Kall-prasanna Simha (1840-70), who also translated the 
MaMbharata in prose, Indra-n&th Bandyopadhyfiy (1849-1911), and 
Jogendra-chandra Basu (1854-1905). 

There are several good autobiographies and biographies in 
Bengali literature. The former include lives of R&j-nfiraya? Basu, 
Devendra-n&th Tagore and Siva-rath S&strL Among the latter may 
be mentioned lives of Raja Rammohan Roy by Nagendra-n&ih Chat- 
topadhyay, of Madhu-sudan Datta by Jogfndra-nath Bose, and of 
livar-chandra Vidyasagar by Bihari-lal Sarkfir and Chaarfi-charan 
Banerjee. The lives of great patriots like Garibaldi, Mazzini and 
others by Jogendra-nath Vidy&bhusha^i (1845-1904) contributed to 
the growth of national and patriotic sentiments in Bengal. 

It would thus appear that when RabXndra-n&th Tagore (1861- 
1941) made his debut in various branches of Bengali literature in 
the eighties of the last century, Bengali literature had already attain¬ 
ed a position of eminence. His life is almost equally divided bet¬ 
ween the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. There is hardly any 
branch of Bengali literature which he has not touched, and almost 
everything which he touched he adorned and enriched by his 
contributions. Poems, songs, novels, short stories, dramas, satire, 
autobiography and essays of all kinds—religious, social, political, 
educational and literary—, in every field, he left Bengali literature 
much richer than he found it. But he was the real pioneer in lyric 
poems, in songs in the modem spirit, and in short stories. His 
voluminous contributions in all these fields mark the beginning of a 
new development of Bengali literature towards the dose of the nine¬ 
teenth century, and will be dealt in the n^xt volume. We may, there¬ 
fore, close the account of Bengali literature with Rabtadra-n&th in 
the full blaze of his glory and heralding a new and more glorious era 
in Bengali literature. 

Before we leave this topic it is important to emphasize the debt 
which Bengali prose literature owes to English literature and Wes- 

177 







THX BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AMD INDIAN RKNAISSANCK—II 

tern ideas. One of the most serious charges against the introduc¬ 
tion of English education in this country is that it has diverted our 
attention from the vernacular which has consequently suffered a 
great deal. But the fact remains that the vernacular language and 
literature attained the highest development in Bengal where 
English education was the most advanced. We may contrast the re¬ 
sult with that in Bombay, Madras and other parts of British India 
where the main stress was laid on the vernaculars and not on 
English, as in Bengal. 

i 

IV. ASSAMESE 

As noted above, Assam was conquered by the British in 1826 
and formed a part of Bengal. Assamese was looked upon as a dia¬ 
lect of Bengali, and only Bengali was taught in Assamese schools, to 
the exclusion of Assamese, up to the year 1873 when Assamese as 
the language of the people was restored to its rightful place in the 
schools and the law courts. The Assamese people were educationally 
backward and there was hardly any growth of Assamese literature 
during this period. 

The Christian missionaries, Bronson and others, did pioneer work 
by writing a grammar and dictionary of Assamese, publishing reli¬ 
gious (Christian) literature which helped to set up Assamese for 
modern requirements, starting a monthly magazine in Assamese, 
the Anmodaya Samv&d Patra (1846), and writing text-books for 
schools in history, elementary science, and grammar, besides general 
Readers. A new literary style, based on the spoken language of Central 
Assam, came into being in this way. Anandar&m Dhekial Phukan 
(1829-59) was the first great Assamese writer of the present age. 
His younger contemporaries, who served their mother-tongue 
during the period of its neglect, were Hem-chandra Barua (1835- 
96) and Gusjabhir&m Barua. (1837-95). Hem-chandra was a most 
versatile writer, who composed short novels as well as satirical dra¬ 
mas and a very good dictionary (Hema-kosha). Guqabhir&m brought 
out in 1885 a magazine, the Asam Bandhu. A number of Assamese 
young men, educated in Calcutta, inspired by the phenomenal pro¬ 
gress in Bengali literature, brought out a literary magazine, the 
Jondki (moonlight) in 1889, which had great influence in the build¬ 
ing up of modem Assamese literature. 

The younger writers wrote short poems and lyrics in a modem 
spirit, and Bhola-n&th Das (1858-1929) sought to emulate the famous 
Bengali poet Michael Madhu-sudan Datta by writing an epic in As¬ 
samese in blank verse. But it was not favourably received on account 
of its “highly stiff style and Sanskritised language”. 


178 





LITERATURE 


Lakshmi-nath Bezbarua (1868-1938) is regarded as the greatest 
figure in modern Assamese literature. He was a dramatist, a poet, 
an essayist, a short-story writer and humorist—all in one, and he 
distinguished himself in each line. His sketches of Assamese mid¬ 
dle-class life and the Assamese villager still remain unsurpassed. He 
wrote serious plays as well as farces, and it is difficult to say in which 
branch of literature he excelled more than in others. He was one of 
the founders of the literary journal called Jonaki mentioned above. 

Many other Assamese writers flourished towards the very end 
of the nineteenth century; their activities will be described in the 
next volume. 

V. OKI YA 

Moden Oriya literature was developed, as almost everywhere 
else in India, under the impact of Western influence. Its beginning 
is associated with three eminent writers, namely, Fhakir-mohan 
Senapati, Radha-nath Ray and Madhu-sudan Rao. 

The oldest among these three contemporaries was Phakir-mohan 
(1843-1918). He was a remarkable man in many ways. “He was 
well-versed in at least five languages, with a working knowledge 
of English, and was pioneer printer, publisher and journalist in 
Orissa”. 10 His literary output was prolific. ‘He translated, single- 
handed, both the Rdmdyctya and the Mahdbhdrata, from the original 
into modern Oriya and tried his hand at short stories (the first to be 
written in Oriya), ballads, hymns, narrative poems, rollicking satires 
and an epic on the Buddha’. 11 In spite of his versatility Phakir- 
mohan distinguished himself chiefly as a novelist, a career which he 
began almost at the end of the period under review, with the publi¬ 
cation of his first novel Chha-mana Apa-Gunfha (1901). It is a work of 
outstanding merit, depicting the life of poor villagers, exploited by 
money-lenders or landlords.^ Indeed, it was the striking feature of 
his novels that they dealt mainly with common men and simple vil¬ 
lage-folk—“uneducated weavers, barkers and peasants, the village 
chowkidar who himself was an accomplice of the dacoits, the unscru¬ 
pulous and mischief-mongering maid-servants, etc.” 12 

Radha-nath Ray (1848-1908) ushered in a new age in Oriy& poetry. 
His magnum opus, the Mahay atm, broke entirely new grounds. It 
was the first attempt to introduce blank verse in Oriya poem in imi¬ 
tation of the Bengali poet Madhu-sudan Datta, and, contrasted with 
the early medieval Oriya poetry, shows “an advance or enlargement 
of ideas and thoughts, accompanied by new powers and forms of 
expression”. 13 In particular he freed Oriya verse from the verbal 
gymnastics which had become an indispensable part of poetry be- 

179 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-11 


fore his time. Another striking feature is the rapturous description 
of the natural beauties and past glories of Orissa. In his Mdh%- 
yatrti, based on the story of the last journey of the PajKiavas, he 
made them come to Orissa, and this device enabled him to sing the 
beauty of the hills, rivers, the Chilka lake, and other landscapes of 
Orissa. The Western influence upon Radb§-nath is mainly shown in 
his new sense of patriotism. He makes the Fire-God at Puri tell 
the Bantfavas that all the evils including servitude, from which the 
Aryans (of India) had been suffering, can be traced to the loss of 
spiritual power caused by rituals and ceremonies. He emphasizes 
the unity of India, the provinces being “separate only in name, equal 
in blood they are all”. Besides the Mahayatra, Radha-reath wrote a 
number of small romances in verse, many of them being in imita¬ 
tion of English poets. He was also the pioneer in modern Oriya 
Katha-S&hitya in prose. His It&liya Yuvql (Young Italian) was pub¬ 
lished in 1877. 

Madhu-sudan Rao (1853-1912) wrote in a very forceful prose 
style a number of stories and essays, and his poetic genius was on 
the side of the lyric. His Vasanta-gdthd and Kusumanjali embody 
some of the highest flights of his imagination in the realms of Truth, 
and World, and Time. His sense of patriotism is portrayed in his 
Utkala-g&tha, a volume of lyrics. 

The illustrious trio—Phakir-mohan, Radba-nath and Madhu- 
sudan—who inaugurated the modern Oriya literature were life-long 
friends. Their efforts were supplemented by others. Ram-£ahkar 
Ray introduced the modem type of drama and devoted himself to 
dramatic literature for 37 years (1880-1917). He wrote twelve dramas, 
beginning with the Kfinchfckaveri (1880), which were historical, re¬ 
ligious, social, and farcical. Among other dramatists may be men¬ 
tioned Jagamohan Lala, Kamapala Misra and Raja Padmanabha 
Narayajpa Deva of Parlakimedi (1872-1904) who wrote in collabor¬ 
ation with his teacher Syama-sundara R&ja-guru. The Satind^aka of 
Jagamohan is regarded as one of the best Oriya plays. Among the 
younger contemporaries of the venerable Trio may be mentioned 
also Nanda-kishor Bal, who “distinguished himself in historical and 
nature poetry”. 

A brief reference may be made to the Oriyfc periodical litera¬ 
ture. Two monthlies were started by the Christian missionaries in 
1849 and 1861. The first indigenous newspaper, the Daily Utka]a - 
djpifcfi, appeared in 1866. Five years later came out an Anglo- 
Oriya fortnightly, the English portion of which was called the 
Orissa Patriot , and the vernacular part, Uthala-Hitaishmfi. The 
monthly Utkaja-Darpana and fortnightly Utka]a-Putra both ap- 

180 



LITERATURE 


peared in 1873, followed 14 years later by the weekly 0$va. Se¬ 
veral other papers followed. AH these papers had only a very small 
number of subscribers and hence most of them were shortlived. 

Special reference may be made to the professed objects of two 
of these papers. The Utkala-prabhd , started in 1891, wrote in the 
Foreword to its first issue that “it will be no exaggeration to say that 
there is really speaking no literature in Oriya language”. Referring 
to the galaxy of Oriya poets ending in Upendra Bhanja, it com¬ 
ments: “But the Bhanja poet has churned the ocean in his books 
and raised to the surface the poison of erotic sentiment. Such works 
can but serve to spoil the society. That is true literature by study¬ 
ing which the ordinary people of society are roused to their res¬ 
pective sense of duty, and which helps everybody to proper conduct, 
character-building and social behaviour. The Oriyas have no such 
literature, and so the society of Utkal has no means of progress. 
To supply this want, the Utkala-prabhd has entered the field”. 14 This 
heralded a new age in Oriya literature. The Utkala-prabhd an¬ 
nounced the rise of a new school of poetry and R&dha-n&th’s Mahd- 
ydtrd was serially published in this paper. 

“The Utka\a-Sdhitya, which appeared for the first time in 1304 
Ban, corresponding to 1897, laid down its policy in the Suchana or 
foreword, to keep to the golden mean of appreciating the new lite¬ 
rature while realising the value of the old, as the following relevant 
excerpt will show: 

“Such change as has appeared in all the departments of life in 
the country due to western education had occurred also in things 
relating to literature. This change is very desirable—human society 
cannot continue in the same state, in the same condition. That would 
be unbearable for a living society. i1t is not wise to block the way 
to progress for the sake of tradition. On the other hand, ignoring 
the past, or want of confidence in it for the sake of the present, is, 
highly blameable. Those are wise who can steer clear of rocks on 
both sides. The Utka\a-Sdhxtya has come forward in the hope of 
functioning in a representative capacity for both ancient and modern 
literature”. 15 


VI. HINDI 

The epoch of modem Hindi literature started at the beginning 
of the nineteenth century, but its progress was very small until the 
middle of that century. There was the beginning of a prose lite¬ 
rature but its language—the Khafi-Boli —was roughly the standard 
speech of Delhi, identical in grammar (though not in script, higher 
vocabulary and sometimes syntax) with Urdu, the Muslim form of 

181 


THE BRITISH PARAMQUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

Hindi. The extent of this prose was very meagre, but side by side 
there was a vast literature in verse, almost entirely in other dialects 
and even languages (grammatically looked at)—in Brajbhakha, in 
AwadhI, in Rfijastham and in all mixed forms of speech. But there 
was hardly any poetry in the Khari-Bolx language which was employed 
in prose. This disparity gradually disappeared in the second half of 
the nineteenth century and one common form of Hindi came to be 
used in both prose and verse, though a few authors still wrote in 
Brajbhikha and AwadhI. 

Like Bengali, Hindi prose owes its origin partly to the efforts 
of the Christian missionaries to translate religious texts and of the 
authorities of Tort William College in Calcutta to prepare suitable 
text-books for the use of their students. The first author of note 
is Lalluji L§1 of Agra (1763-1835), a teacher in the Fort William 
College, who wrote his Prem*9d.gar in 1803 on the story of Kpishpa’s 
life as described in the Bhagavata Purana. This work was im¬ 
mensely popular and became the great model and exemplar for 
Hindi prose from the very beginning. It is one of the earliest Hindi 
(Kharl BoU) prose classics, although its language occasionally 
smacks of the Brajbhakha. Pandit Sadal Mi£ra, a Bhojpuri speak¬ 
ing scholar from Bihar, also a teacher of the Fort William College, 
wrote another model work in Khaft-Boli Hindi prose, the Ndsike- 
top&khydn, based on the well-known story of Nachiketas in the Ku- 
fha-upanishad. This work is also regarded as a landmark in the 
early modem Hindi prose. 

The work commenced by the pioneers in the 18th century—-RSm- 
prasad NirafijanI, Pandit Daulatrfim, and above all by Munshi Sadfi- 
sukhM Niyaz,-—came to be stabilized; and the Midland speech in 
its latest phase of a Sanskritised Khari-Boli Hind! started on its 
career of conquering nearly the whole of Northern India. 

From about 1850, the prose style inaugurated by Lalluji Lai, 
Sadal M&ra and others was becoming-gradually established, being 
greatly influenced by the simple prose style of Urdu and the rapidly 
developing prose style of modem Bengali. From 1850 to 1870 there 
was a period of hesitancy in Hindi—as if the people, trained in the 
Urdu language and tradition, were not yet sure of Hindi. 

Then came Harii-chandra of Banaras (1846-1884) who had the 
sobriquet of Bh&ratendu (Moon of India). He is universally ack¬ 
nowledged as one of the makers of modem Hindi. He wrote dramas 
(original, as well as translations from Sanskrit and Bengali), poems 
and essays, and was a versatile writer of genius. He was followed 
in the process of developing modem Hindi by a number of able wri¬ 
ters, including journalists; and, besides, a large number of trans¬ 


it 



UTERATUBK 


lations form Bengali helped to model Hindi prose style on that of 
Bengali. 

The next event of great importance was the foundation of the 
Arya Samfij by Dayananda Skrasvati who adopted Hindi as the lan¬ 
guage of his preaching and propaganda. The progress of the Arya 
SainSj, which has been discussed in the preceding chapter, had 
very great effect in reviving and spreading Hindi in the Panjab, 
Western U.P. (where Urdu was dominating) and RSjputana. 

The progress of Hindi literature was not arrested after the death 
of Harii-chandra (1884). The novel, the short story, the drama, be¬ 
sides new styles in poetry, began to flourish. Lala 6rlnivasa-dfis of 
Mathurfi (1851-1887) was a pioneer dramatist, whose romantic dra¬ 
mas Ranodhtr-PrermiTriohini and Samyogitd-Svayamvar are well- 
known and were very popular. His PcCrtkshd-guru is one of the 
first original social novels in Hindi written in a fresh colloquial 
style. 

In drama the Hindi literature has not made much progress 
save in one branch, namely, one-act plays. The greatest novelist 
and short story writer of modern Hindi is Prem Chand (1880-1936). 
“Apart from his short stories, rivalling the best in any language 
and giving a most convincing and a sympathetic picture of the life 
of the people, he has some half a dozen bigger novels to his credit. 
His novels are social and analytic in their themes and their approach”. 
But his activity really falls in the twentieth century and will be 
discussed in the next volume. 

“The new styles of poetry, with a very large amount of Bengali 
and some English influence, came in during the second half of the 
nineteenth century. Among the more well-known poets mention 
may be made of 6rldhar Pathak (1876-1928), Ayodhyfi Singh UpS- 
dhyay ‘Hari Audh’ (1865-1946), and Maithili Saran Gupta. The 
last-named, bora in 1886, and happily still alive, is the author of a 
number of narrative poems which are recognized among the classics 
of Hindi poetry. 

Hindi journalism came into the field when Pandit Jugal Kishore 
of Kanpur started from Calcutta the first Hindi weekly, the Udant 
M&rtantf (the Rising Sun). Though it had a very short life, it in¬ 
spired others, and a number of Hindi journals began to be published 
from towns all over the Hindl-using area. A Bengali resident in 
Banaras brought out the Sudhdhar (1850) and Munshi Sad&sukhMl 
published Buddhi-prakcti from Agra (1856). 

A number of renowned journalists flourished in the second 
half of the nineteenth century. B&lmukund Gupta of Rohtak (1865- 
1907) and his two associates, Amj-ita-lfil Chakra varti, a Bengali, and 


183 




THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

Prabhu-dayal Pa^Je, from Mathura, edited from Calcutta a weekly 
paper, the Hindi Bangavdsi, which was the most influential Hindi 
newspaper during the two closing decades of the nineteenth cen¬ 
tury and considerably advanced the Hindi prose style. Mahablr 
Prasad DvivedI (1870-1938) was the editor of the well-known Al¬ 
lahabad journal, the Sarasvati, which raised the tone of Hindi 
journalism, in both form and content, and helped a great deal in 
establishing a fine expressive Hindi prose style. 

Vn. MARATHI 

The decline of the political power of the Mar&thas towards the 
close of the eighteenth century was followed by a period of deca¬ 
dence in the Mar&thl literature. The age of Tukaram and Ramdas 
was gone, and the writers of this period, though endowed with some 
poetical fervour, had to remain content with singing the war-like 
deeds of the past and amorous deeds of the present. The last rem¬ 
nants of them lingered even during the period under review in 
Anant Fandi and Prabhakar. 

With the advent of the British rule the people were bewildered 
by the superiority of the British civilisation, and a spirit of defea¬ 
tism overtook them. The link with the old traditional literature 
was broken. The writers of this period, though intellectually very 
high, appear to be struggling—-groping as it were—in the literary 
field. There was a complete blank and the whole thing had to be 
started afresh. Soon the influence of Christian missionaries and 
English education made itself felt in Marathi literature. As in the 
case of Bengali, Carey, with the help of a Marathi Pa^wjit, Vaidyanath 
Samoa, began to develop Marathi. During the period 1805 to 1818, 
ten books were written, including the Grammar of the Maratha 
language (1806), the Marathi-English Dictionary (1810), transla¬ 
tions of stories from the Bible, and the Panchatantra (1815). Three 
others, namely, the History of Raja Pratdpdditya (translated from 
Bengali), BattM-singh&sana and Hitopadeto were really the works of 
Vaidyanath, though often attributed to Carey. 16 * 

The grammar was written in English and the dictionary was 
also very inadequate. Besides, the efforts made by Carey at Seram- 
pore took time to exert influence in the distant Maharfishtra. His 
example, however, inspired Elphinstone to found, in 1820, “The Na¬ 
tive School Book and School Society” and he put Captain George 
Jervis (1794-1851) in charge of it, with a number of SSstrls or Paaj- 
4its to assist him. A Marathi grammar prepared by them was long 
in use and formed the basis of later grammatical treatises. 


184 


LITERATURE 


Jervis also set his Sastrls on the work of a dictionary (1829). 
Later, in 1831, came out the famous Marathi-English Dictionary by 
Molesworth. These pioneer efforts satisfied the initial needs for the 
study of Marathi. 

This period that begins from 1810 or 1818 is pre-eminently a 
prose period. Not that poetry did not appear at all. It appeared, 
but did not thrive as the prose did. This prose again was altoge¬ 
ther a new prose, because the writers themselves did not know that 
there was prose-writing in Marathi in days gone by. The simple 
prose of the Mahanubhavas, the dynamic prose of fiknath, the force¬ 
ful prose of the political despatches of the Peshwas, the beautiful 
prose of the bakhars which continued to be written by M. R. Chitnis 
(1815) and others—this whole tradition of elegant prose-writing was 
scarcely known to them. It is for this reason that the prose-writers 
of this period present in their writing a new form of Marathi lan¬ 
guage and a new style. There is, in it, much influence of Sanskrit, 
as some of the writers were Sastris, of Konkan dialects, as some 
came from Konkan, and of the English language as most of them 
were neo-literates in English. 

The literature that appeared in this period was of a story-type, 
—stories translated from both Sanskrit and English. The most 
noteworthy writer in this early period was Sadashiv Kfishinfith alias 
Bapu Chhatre (1788-1830) who served as a ‘writer’ and later be¬ 
came an assistant to Jervis. Two of his books —Balmitra and Aesop*s 
Fables in MarSfhi (1828)—are well-known. Bapu Chhatrb may be 
said to be the father of modem Marathi prose, and as instructor in the 
school he trained a good many young pupils of his in the art of writing. 
He was succeeded as a secretary by an illustrious pupil of his—Bal 
Gangfidhar Jfimbhekar (1810-1846), who later became the first 
native professor in the Elphinstone Institute (1835). He was noted 
for his high intelligence, for a number of books that he wrote, and 
also as a pioneer journalist in Marathi. He wrote books on grammar, 
geography, history and calculus, but they were all of the school- 
text-book level. Hari Keshavji (1804-1858) was another contempo¬ 
rary writer, who was a good translator and gave us the e *Y&trik 
Kraman”, translation of Bunyan’s Pilgrim*s Progress, in 1841. 

But better known than any one else of this period was Dadoba 
Pa^urang Tarkhadkar (1814-1882), whose Marfithl grammar entered 
every Marfithl school and home, and who, on account of being the 
first recognized propounder of Marfithl grammar, was called the 
Pacini of MarfithI- Dfidoba was a disciple of Bapu-dfistr! and a co- 
student of Jfimbhekar. He served the Government in various capaci¬ 
ties, and succeeded Jfimbhekar as Superintendent of Schools. He 


185 


THIS BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

wrote a number of books; his Marathi Grammar (1836) is the most 
distinct service to Marathi language, and ij still being used at several 
places. His autobiography, though incomplete, and his commentary 
of the Kik&val i of Moro Pant are two other books of recognized merit, 
one depicting the social history of his times and the other evaluating 
his place as a poetical critic. 

The last, but not the least, of this illustrious batch of the four 
stalwarts of the early British period, was Parshuram Balwant alias 
Parashuram Pant Tatya Godbole (1799-1874). He was one of the 
four editors of the Marathi lexicon (1829) which formed the basis 
of the later one by Molesworth. His help was also sought later on 
when another English-Marathl lexicon was undertaken and finished 
in 1847 by Major Candy (1806-1877). But more than as a lexico¬ 
grapher, Parashuram Pant Tatya is known as the editor of the Navneet 
(1854), an anthology of Marathi poetry. This collection of poems 
displays the best qualities of the creative critic that was in him. The 
prologue of the book shows what an appreciative, straightforward 
and modest heart he had. He says that ‘these flowers—the best 
that he could find—the sweetest like a ball of sugar, are put together 
in a garland and offered to the receptive Marathi reader’. The ex¬ 
cellence of this anthology is proved by the several editions that it 
has already gone through. 

Though this period was a preparatory and a school period, still 
it did not fail to educate the public in general. Advantage was 
taken of the newly introduced printing press, and periodicals were 
started. There were the Darpan (1831) and DigdarSan (1841) of 
Jfimbhekar, the Prabhdkar (1841) of Bhau MahSjan, and Jndno- 
daya (1842) of the missionaries. The JwanprdkA&a was started 
in Poona in 1849 and was followed by the Vicharalahan (1852), the 
Vartamdndipikfl (1854) and the InduprdhcUa (1862) in Bombay. 
All these efforts laid a firm foundation of the Marfithl journalism, 
which, with the classical touch of the Nibandhamdld (1874) of Vish- 
XLU^astri Chiplunkar, ripened into an all-sided development, the 
fruits of which we see in the Kisan (1881) of Lokamftnya Tilak, 
Sudh&rak (1888) of Principal Agarkar, the Kdl (1898) of S. M. Pa- 
ranjpe, and many others. 

There is one more characteristic of this period. The success 
of the individual writers inspired some others to collective and co¬ 
operative work and led to the establishment of some literary bodies 
and societies. The Book and Tract Society (1827), The Students’ 
Literary and Scientific Society (1848), and The Jfi&npras&rak 
Sabha (1848), The Dakshina Prize Committee (1851), and many 
others are instances in point. Some of these societies brought out 


186 


LITERATURE 


books, some gave prizes to writers, some conducted schools, while 
others had periodical meetings and discussions. 

There was thus a general awakening all through. Since the 
establishment of the University of Bombay, in 1857, the progress 
both in the spread of education and the creation of literature be¬ 
came regular, orderly and on right lines. Though it was all Western, 
it did not fail to create among the people the spirit of nationalism 
and democracy; nay, it was because of it, that these new ideas were 
imbibed by the people. 

We may now proceed to show how the different literary forms 
developed since the starting of the University. 

The story literature, the first phase of which is seen in the 
v Balbddhmuktdvali (1806), Hit6padesa and Panchatantra (1815), later 
developed into school stories such as B&lamitra and Aesop's tales 
(1828) of Bapu Chhatre, B6dhkath& (1831) and Nitikathd (1838). 
Tales from other languages, like Sanskrit, Persian and English, were 
translated with the same view. Rpshna-£astri Chiplunkar (1824- 
78) translated the famous Arabian Nights (1861-65). Lamb’s Tales 
from Shakespeare was rendered into Marathi by Sakharam P. 
Pandit (1867). Ravji-SastrT God bole translated Robinson Crusoe 
(1871) and Kj:ishi^a-&astrf Chiplunkar and his son translated Rase - 
las in Marathi (1873). From story to novel was not a long journey. 
The social condition of those times—especially the question of fe¬ 
male education, remarriage of widows, foreign travel, and a host 
of other topics—gave rich material to the novelists. B&h& Pad- 
manji (1831-1906) gave the first original novel in Marathi (1857)— 
Yamund Paryatan—the sojourns of Yamuna, a Hindu widow, des¬ 
cribing in it all the miseries that she had to go through, incidentally 
eulogizing Christianity at the cost of Hindu religion. Lakshman 
Moreshwar Halbe wrote two original social novels,— Muktamdld 
and Ratnaprabha (1866). Another compeer of his, Naro Sadashiv 
Risbud, composed ManjughdshSL (1868) and Vishw&sr&o (1870). His¬ 
tory, also, gave enough material for novel-writing, the result of which 
we find in the Mochangad (1871), depicting an incident in Shivfiji’s 
life, by Rama-chandra Bhikaji Gunjikar (1843-1901), and in Ghdshi • 
rdm Kotwal (1873), by Moroba Kanhoba Vijaykar. 

This form of literature was pursued with great success by Hari 
N&rSyan Apte (1864-1919), who combined in him the characteristics 
of Walter Scott, Dickens, and Thackeray. He enriched the Mar£{hl 
literature by writing a number of novels: Apte was a social refor¬ 
mer and wielded his powerful pen in exposing and trying to mend 
the social evils His novels depicting the society of the time, such 
as Madhali Sthiti (1885), Ganpatrao (1887-88), and Pan Lakshat 


187 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 


Kon Gheto (1890-93), have become classics in Marathi. He had an 
equally great success in historical novels as is shown in Gad Aid 
pan Sinha Gild (1903), Ushahhdla and Suryddaya (1905-08). He 
created a tradition and influenced quite a number of both contem¬ 
porary and later writers. Narayan Hari Apte, Vithal Sitar&m Gur~ 
jar and many others belong to this tradition. S. M. Paranjpe 
and C. V. Vaidya—great scholars themselves—successfully tried 
their hands in novel-writing. 

The Marathi drama went in line with the novel in development. 
Though its origin is found in a crude form in Kamillas, Da£avat£ras, 
Gondhals and such other mystery plays, still, owing to the influence 
of both Sanskrit and English drama, it developed into a full-fledged 
one. Vishnu Amritu Bhave was the first originator of modern Mar&thi 
stage. He, with the help of princes of some States started this move¬ 
ment in 1843, by staging his improvised plays based on the incidents 
from the epic legends. The Prasannardghava was the first full-fledged 
play in Marathi (1851). Later on came the plays translated from 
Sanskrit by Parasuram Pant Godbole—the Venis&rhhfrra (1857), 171» 
tara-Rdma-charita (1859), £akuntaU (1861)—and by Kyish$a*j§§str! 
Raj wade~-Mudra-R&kshasa (1867), Sakuntald (1869)—, and from 
English by Mahadeo-4astrI Kolhatkar (Othello). Two historical playg 
were written by V. J. Kirtane (1840-1891), namely, Thorale Mddhav - 
rdo (1861) and Jaypal (1865). Social plays also came to be written 
during the period viz. Mandramd (1871) by M. B. Chitale, and 
Stoairkesha (1871) by Raghunath*4astrl Abhyankar. Music was 
introduced in the play by S6kar Bapuji Trilokekar (1879) and Bal- 
want P&pdurang alias Annisaheb Kirloskar (1880), thus changing 
the prose drama into an opera. Music came to be tried with great 
success later on by the illustrious trio of dramatists—Govind Balia! 
Deval, Krishnaji Prabhakar Khadilkar, and Shripad Krishna Kol¬ 
hatkar—who practically ruled the MarSthI stage for a long time; 
Deval by his Sharada (1905) and Samshyakalldl; Khadilkar by his 
Sawai Mddhaoraochi Mfityu (1893) and K&nchahgadchi Mdhand 
(1898); and Kolhatkar by his imaginative plays, Vxrtanay and Mali- 
vekdr . 

Poetry, the third form of creative literature, was in a decadent 
stage at the beginning of this period. But later on, when it came 
into contact with the Western poetry, from 1857 onwards, it pros¬ 
pered. Hansar&ja (1798-1855) and Dr. KIrtikar B. D. Palande (1832- 
1874) wrote poetry in the old traditional way. Ga^e4-4fistr! Lele 
translated from Sanskrit, and Bajaba Pradhfin, from English. Some 
original poetry was given by Vithoba Am* Daftard&r (1813-1873) 
and Chintfimani Pltbkar (1851-1879). Quite & revolutionary 


188 





LITERATURE 


attempt is seen in the pseudo-epic poem, Raja Shivajl (1868), of M. M. 
Kunte. 

But the real lyric poetry, quite similar to that in English lite¬ 
rature, appears from 1885 onwards in the poetry of Keshavasuta— 
Kjish^iaji Keshav Daml6 (1866-1905). Keshavasuta was the foremost 
of that illustrious band of poets,—Rev. N. V. Tilak (1862-1919), 
Vinayaka Karandikar (1872-1909), MadhaVanuj (1872-1916) and D. 
K. Ghate (1875-1899). This was the new poetry—the poetry of 
love, of nature, of society and nationalism, and. of mysticism. There 
was thus a change both in the content and the Way of expression. This 
particular new form is still domineering in modern Marathi poetry. 

The period (1818-1905), however, though not rising to a high level 
in point of creative literature, is very rich in the other form of lite¬ 
rature, viz. the interpretative one. The high role of the intelligence 
and the might of the pen are seen in the various essays and articles, 
in the dissertations and expositions, in the theses and the commenta¬ 
ries that appeared during this period. The printing press and the 
periodicals gave an impetus to this type of writing. Jamhhekar 
and Mahajan had already prepared the ground, and Gopal Hari Desh- 
mukh alias Lokhitawadi (1823-1892) contributed his ‘Shatpatre ’— 
the Century of Letters—to the Prabhakar of Bhau Mahajan on va¬ 
rious subjects. In fact there was a very good batch of young writers 
formed by G. N. Madgaonkar, Baba Padmanji, Kj:ishna-£astrii Chip- 
lunkar, V. N. Mandalik, Vishnubuwa Brahmachari, Jotiba Phule, and 
others, who wielded their mighty pen in reforming and reawakening 
the society and thus enriched the literature of the time. The top¬ 
most personality, of course, belonged to Vishnu Kfishoa-^astribu- 
wa Chiplunkar (1850-1882), a worthier son of a worthy father. His 
Nibandhamdld (1874) roused the people from their stupor. His was 
a mightier pen nourished, as he says, on the milk of the tigress—the 
English literature. The forceful and elegant prose of Chiplunkar 
was a great source of inspiration to all subsequent writers, the 
most notable among whom were Lokamanya B.G. Tilak (1856-1920) 
and Principal Agarkar (1856-1895). These three masters and 
makers of modern Marathi prose were followed by writers like 
V. K. Raj wade (1863-1926), S. M Paranjpe (1864-1929), N. C. Kelkar 
(1872-1947), K. P. Khadilkar and others. Inspiration from them 
was also taken by novelists, dramatists, poets, and other creative 
writers, the prominent among them being H. N. Apte, Keshavasuta, 
Kirloskar; Deval and others.. These writers, though influenced by 
the Western literature, had much of the East in them. They can 
be rightfully said to be the makers of the classical period of modem 
Mar&thI language and literature. 


189 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY Alp INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

VIII. GUJARATI 

The history of GiQarati literature during the period under re¬ 
view may be conveniently divided into three sub-periods,—the first, 
from 1818 to 1852, the second, from 1852 to 1886, and the third, 
from 1886 to 1905. 


1. 1818-1852. 

This may be regarded as the period of transition from the old to 
the new. It is true that, in point of time, the most creative phase of 
the great poet Dayaram (1776-1852) falls within this sub-period, but 
his works, as well as those of the other great poets of the Svami- 
Naraya&a sect, belong to the earlier period, in inspiration, technique, 
form and idiom. These have, therefore, been dealt with in the pre¬ 
ceding volume. What demarcates this sub-period (1818-1852) from 
earlier period is the effort made under the influence of Western con¬ 
tact to shape Gujarati as a vehicle of modern expression. 

The progress of English education, the foundation of educational 
associations and newspapers, and the efforts of Christian missionaries 
gave a great impetus to Gujarati language. A few landmarks in 
the process of imparting vitality to the language may be noted. In 
1814 Archdeacon Barnes founded “The Society for Promoting the 
Education of the Poor within the Government of Bombay”, usually 
styled ‘Bombay Education Society’. This Society began its active 
career in 1820 by starting six schools—four in Bombay city, one in 
Surat and one in Broach; in 1826 another school was started in Ah- 
madahad. 

About 1825, a branch of the Society acquired the services of 
Ra^chho^bMi Girdharbhai (1803-1873), a young man who had learnt 
English from a retired soldier of Broach. He produced the first 
series of Gujarati text-books, undertook the training of teachers, 
and became the guide, philosopher and friend of almost all the as¬ 
piring young men who, under his inspiration, took to literature and 
social reform. A leading part was taken by the students of the 
Elphinstone College, founded in 1827, and the products of the Bom¬ 
bay University, founded in 1857, carried forward the work from 
about 1885. 

In 1846, A. Kinloch Forbes, stationed at Ahmadabad as an Assis¬ 
tant Judge, began his study of the language and history of Gujarfit 
in right earnest, and soon secured the services of the poet Dalpat- 
ram Pahyabhfti, who collected for him old manuscripts and folk¬ 
songs and folk-tales. In 1848, Forbes founded at Ahmadabad ‘The 
Gujarfit Vernacular Society* (now called the ‘Gujarat Vidyt Sabhfi’) 

190 


LITERATURE 


which, in 1850, started its first fortnightly organ, the BuddhiprahcLs. 
When transferred to Surat, Forbes founded a similar society there 
and promoted a literary journal, the Surdf Samachar. 

Apart from the valuable help he rendered to Forbes, poet Dal- 
patram was an outstanding literary figure in his own right. His 
early inspiration came from the poets of the Svaml-Nar&yaa?a cult, but 
his close association with Forbes inspired in him a zeal for social 
reform which found expression in his poems. Some of these poems 
soon found a place in the early text-books of the language, and exer¬ 
cised a great influence on the younger generation for wellnigh forty 
years. He also wrote a poem, Hunnctrkhanni Cfuuffi (The Invasion 
by Industry), in 1850, on the evil effects of modem industries on 
Indian crafts, possibly the first exposition of Swadeshism. 

2. 1852*1886 

The outstanding literary figure of this sub-period was Narmada- 
shankar Lalshank&r (1833-1886), popularly known as Narmad, 
who was a bom rebel. He fought against caste, orthodoxy and 
social conventions. He was ex-communicated by his orthodox caste 
again and again. He married a widow, challenged orthodoxy when¬ 
ever he could, and bore social persecution with pride. In spite of 
several trials, his faith in human dignity and individual freedom re¬ 
mained unshaken to the last. 

Narmad had a romantic temperament characterised by free 
movements of the imagination, a deep-seated horror of convention 
and an inveterate tendency to exaggeration. His temperament was 
egotistic; his creative power, limited; he was denied the sense of 
delicacy. All these found expression in whatever he wrote, parti¬ 
cularly in his poems. He also wrote a large number of essays. His 
principal works are the Pmgalprakdi , a work on Gujarati prosody 
(1857); Alank&rpraveA, a manual of figures of speech (1858); Ras- 
Pravei and Nayihd-Vishaya-Prave£ t a favourite subject of Sanskrit 
and Vraja poets. He also prepared and published the Narmakosa 
(1873), the first Gujarati dictionary, and compiled the Narma- 
kathakofa, a dictionary of mythology. 

His Dharm-vicMr (1885) is an outstanding work, in which he 
tried to adjust the new, which he had worshipped so far, with the old 
which he had begun to appreciate. He also left an unfinished auto¬ 
biography, the Mari HaJciJcai (1933). * 

Narmad is justly regarded as the father of modem Gujarati 
prose. In his hands GujarfitS prose, used by Raajchho^bhai in his 
earlier text-books and developed by his disciples, underwent a corn- 


191 




THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

* % * 

plete change. In fact, he found it a feeble vehicle of modern expres¬ 
sion and left it a rich language of great promise. He was the first 
author in modem Gujariti who drew upon the memory of past 
greatness in stirring words. 

The only other important prose-writer of this sub-period was 
Navalram Lakshmiram (1836-1888), Narmad’s friend and associate. 
By his essays, he established a sober tradition of literary criticism 
for Gujarat. His prose style, balanced and restrained, was a definite 
advance on Narmad’s. He wrote the Bhat-nu Bhopdlu (1867) (The 
Bha{a’s Exposure), an adaptation of Moli&re's comedy, from Field¬ 
ing’s version; Vxrmatx (1869), a historical play, and Kavi Jivan 
(1888) (The Life of the Poet), being a biography of Narmad. 

Other important works of this period are Vanrdj Chavtfo (1881) 
and Sadhrd-Jesang, by Mahipatram Rupram (1829-1891), and 
Karan Ghelo (1866) by Nandshankar Tuljashankar (1835-1905), both 
being junior associates of Ra^chhcxjbhai. But the best attempt at 
writing fiction during this period was made by Jehangir Ardeshii 
Talyarkhan in his works Ratnalakshmx (1881) and Kulin ane Mudrd 
(1884). 

Bhojanath Sarabhai (1822-1886), under the influence of the Brah¬ 
ma Samaj, burst into psalms, rich in prayerfulness. His lsvar Prar- 
thand Mala (1872) is a landmark in the cultural history of Gujarat. 
Prayer, for the first time ih centuries, emancipated from the Puranic 
imagery, lifted its voice in true humility. 

With the Muslim conquest (1305), Gujarat had lost its stage and 
drama. These were revived by the study of Shakespeare. Ranchhod- 
bhai Udayr&m (1837-1923) wrote the first modern Gujarfiti play, 
Jaykiim&t% in 1862, and translated, in collaboration with others, 
Lamb’s Ten Plays of Shakespeare under the title Shekspi&r-Kathd 
Sam&j. Later, he wrote many plays on Puranic and social subjects 
which were staged; his best known play is LalitMukhdar£ak (1866). 

3. 1886-1905 

A year after Narmad’s death, i.e. 1887, Govardhanrfim Mfi- 
dhavrfim TripSth! (1855-1907) published the first volume of his gigan¬ 
tic Work Sarasvatichandr; its fourth and the last volume appeared 
in 1901. During this sub-period, right up to 1905, when his last 
works were published, he remained the pre-eminent author in 
Gujar&tl literature. 

Govardhanram’s fame rests on Sarasvatichandr, a saga of tike 
new life of India beginning from the eighties of the last century 
with all its beauty and ugliness. Its hero is a product of the new uni¬ 
versity education, a visionary, studious of self-perfection, awakened 

192 




LITERATURE 


to an exaggerated sense of independence, and too self-righteous 
to adjust himself to the realities of life. In this work Govardhan- 
ram, like some other great authors, laid the foundation of the new 
literature of modem Gujarat by displaying the courage to face emo¬ 
tional, intellectual, social and spiritual truths, making the inner life 
of the individual the central theme of literature. 

In this novel, again, Gujarati prose, though at places rather heavy, 
became, for the first time, a fitting medium for conveying the inner 
experience of an educated Indian. For this purpose the author 
pressed into service the traditional style of, Sanskrit prose works, 
the vigour and expressiveness of the English language, the idiom of 
the old-Gujaratl masters, and. the homely phrases current in the 
ordinary life of the day. 

The Sdrasvatichandr, as a work of fiction, is poor, but as a 
record of the impact of the West on the thought, outlook and life 
of India, it is the most outstanding work in Gujarati literature. 
It exerted profound influence on Gujarat during the last decade of 
the 19th century and the first decade of the 20 th. 

GotfardhanrSm’s other works are S&ksharjivan (189&-1903), 
Navalfivan (1891), an essay on Navalr&m, the lAldvatijxvankalcL 
(1905), a short biography of his daughter, and Dayaram-no Ak&har - 
deha (1908). He also wrote a poem, Snehamudrd, in 1889, and an 
English essay, The Classical Poets of Gujarat, in 1894. 

Manila! Nabhubhai Dvivedi (1858-1898) was the second of the 
outstanding trio of this period. He was an erudite scholar, a Vedan- 
tic thinker, and brought into Gujarati language, more than any 
other author, an element of expressive vigour by fusing the re¬ 
sources of Sanskrit and English. His trenchant criticism of the 
school of social reform, which may conveniently be styled Buddht - 
vardhak or Narmad school, served to a large extent as a restrain¬ 
ing influence on the extravagant claims of the iconoclasts. 

Most of ManiM’s works consisted of essays, which were publi¬ 
shed in his magazine Sudar&an, and ultimately collected in what is 
called Sudar&an Gadydvali (1909). His poems were collected under 
the name of Atma-Nimajjana (1895), many of which are ghazals 
after the style of the Persian Sufi poets. His other works are 
Kdntd , a play (1882); Guldbsinh, a novel, being an adaptation of 
Bulwer Lytton’s Zanoni (1897); Bdlavildsa (1893); Siddhants&ra 
(1895), a work dealing with ancient Hindu thought and modem pro¬ 
blems. 

The most outstanding poet of the sub-period was Narsinhrfio 
(1859-1937). His Kusummdld (1887), inspired by Palgrave’s Golden 


193 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


Treasury of Songs and Lyrics, was published in 1887, the same year 
in which Sarasvatichandr, Part I, was published, and laid the founda¬ 
tion of modem lyrical poetry in Gujarati. In this work, as well as 
in the Hyidayavrtia (1896) and the Nupurjhattik&r (1914), one comes 
across odes, sonnets and lyrics, reminiscent of English poetry of 
the age of Wordsworth and Shelley. In the elegy written on the 
death of his son, SmaransathhUa (1918), delicacy of pathos and 
elegance of language are combined to produce one of the finest 
works in modem Indian literature. 


Though essentially a poet, Narsinhrao was equally great as an 
essayist, critic and philologist. His works are: Manomukur (1924), 
a collection of essays; AbhinayakaU (1930) and Vivartltkald (1933), 
—works on the histrionic art; Smaran Mukur (1926), containing his 
reminiscences of some friends and relatives. His diary was publish¬ 
ed posthumously (1956). 

As a critic and a scholar, Narasinhrao still remains unrivalled. 
In the Premfaiand&nd-rtiipiko, he exploded the myth that the dramas 
attributed to the medieval poet Fremanand were genuine. In 1905, 
he wrote Jodayi, a treatise on spelling. In the Wilson Philological 
Lectures delivered in 1915 at the University of Bombay in English, 
and published later (1921,1932) under the heading Gujarati Langu¬ 
age and Literature, he laid the foundation of a historical and 
philological study of the Gujarati language and literature. 


As note£ above, Narshinhrfio’s literary activity was prolonged 
far beyond the period under review. But he essentially belongs to 
the period which preceded the age associated with N&n&l&l’s poetry 
and Munshi’s novels. 


Among other leading poets was Manishankar Ratnaji Bhaft 
(1867-1923), also known as KSnt. Most of his poems are now collect¬ 
ed in a volume entitled P&rvdMp (1923). He also wrote two plays 
Guru Govindsinh and Roman Svar&jya (1924), and translated an 
episode from Goethe’s Wilhelm Meister ,—the Eka Devinu Vpttdnt 
(1897). He was also an accomplished essayist. But his forte was 
lyrical poetry which during this period reached its high-water mark 
in his Vasantvtjay and the Chakravak-MUhun. 


Sursinhji Gohel, Thakor of L&fhl (1874-1900), wrote under the 
pen-name, Kalfipl. He was a sensitive young man and poured out 
his bleeding heart spontaneously when he struggled in vain to love 
two women at the same time. His poems were collected after his 
death and published under the title Kaldpfno KekSrav (1903), giving 
him a prominent place in GujarStI poetry. Another author of great 
distinction was Balvantrfii Kalyftprai Thakor (1869-1952). He wrote 


194 






LITERATURE 


little, but whatever he wrote was perfect, and his works, published 
in the next period, laid the foundation of a new poetical technique. 

Bamagbhai Mahipatram Nilkai^h (1868-1928) reacted against 
the conservatism of Govardhanram and Ma^ilal with characteristic 
humour, a new element introduced by him in Gujarati literature. 
He held up the orthodoxy to ridicule, particularly in his great satiri¬ 
cal work Bhadrambhadra (1900). He also wrote BAino Par vat, a 
play (1914); H&syamandir (The Temple of Laughter), a collection 
of humorous skits (1915); and Kavitde Sdhitya (Poetry and Liter¬ 
ature), a collection of essays on literary criticism in four volumes 
(1926-29). His work as a critic was a distinct advance on the earlier 
authors. He tried to formulate a theory of artistic and literary 
beauty, which was influenced by the theories of eminent English 
critics of his time. 

A number of novels and historical romances were attempted, 
during the period under review, but none of them reached a high 
order of literary technique. In the last ten years of this period, 
the traditions of the Gujarati stage underwent a revolutionary 
change in the hands of the new theatrical companies which had come 
into existence. The plays followed the tradition of Raqchho^ldl 
Udaynam, but were poor in literary worth, till about the end of the 
period, when Ipahyabhai Dho]£aji brought the Gujarati stage to a 
more artistic level, and the plays which he wrote had a literary 
flavour. It was in the next period that these plays roused popular 
enthusiasm and exercised considerable influence on life. During 
this period, works in old Gujarati were rescued by a band of 
enthusiastic scholars, and edited and published mostly under the 
patronage of the Gaekwad of Baroda. 

The phase of Gujarati literature described above came to an 
end in 1995 when a new age began with the publication of Vasantot- 
sav by Nanalal. 

DC TAMIL 

The eighteenth century was a period of stagnation and decay 
in Tamil literature. ThayumSnavar was the inevitable exception 
to the general rule. But already the seeds of a new literary har¬ 
vest had been sown and a cross fertilization of the soil had taken 
place. Islam and Christianity had come to stay in the Tamil country 
and a cosmopolitan culture was in the making. The begin¬ 
ning of the nineteenth century saw the progressive consolidation of 
British power, and the comparative peace and settled condition 
that it brought was auspicious for gifted men to pursue the exacting 
profession of letters. The court of the Mai&thft King, Serfoji, Raja 

195 





THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 

of Tanj ore, now became the meeting ground of men of letters, and 
many a writer received the royal patronage. Tamil classics were 
no longer quite as inaccessible as formerly, and works like Thay- 
umSnavar’s lyrics and the Tiruvilayddal Purdnam were printed and 
widely read. The College of Tamil Pandits at Fort St. George did 
much useful spade work by collecting and publishing old classics. 
The impact of English, at first imperceptible, slowly influenced the 
texture, form and content of the language of the Tamils. Prose of 
a characteristic variety there always was in Tamil—as seen in the 
Silappadik&ram, or in the commentaries on grammatical or other 
works of former times. Intimacy with English led Tamil writers 
to essay prose for various practical as also artistic purposes. In 
1826, Tantfavaraya Mudaliyar issued his prose Panchatantra. By and 
by, there was a flood of Tamil prose—as yet wavering uncertainly 
between unintelligible pedantry and Anglicised jargon-—and works 
of fiction, drama, history, translations and collections of essays, 
popular manuals and biographies, came tumbling firom the new 
printing presses set up all over the Tamil country. The Modem 
Age in Tamil literature had indeed begun—confusedly and .uncer¬ 
tainly, distracted by false lights and half-lights, nevertheless puis¬ 
sant in its suggestion of possibilities and youthful in its wide-awake 
curiosity and scent for adventure. 

The greatest, perhaps, of the Tamil poets of the nineteenth 
century was Kamalinga Swamigal (1823-74), whose Tiruaruppa is 
a marvellous collection of nearly one thousand devotional hymns. 
The lyrics addressed by him reverently to the &aiva Acharyas— 
Appar, Sundarar, Sambandar, and Manikkavachakar—are among 
the best of their kind. Simple and direct in diction, homely in their 
imagery, candid in their utterance, Bamalinga SwamigaPs songs 
appeal to us at once, and several of them achieve a melting grape¬ 
like quality before which criticism is perforce dumb. Ramalinga 
SwamigaPs almost exact contemporary, Arumuga Nflvalar (1822- 
76) of Jaffana, was a staunch Saiva, and he issued reliable editions 
of many standard Tamil works from his printing press at Madras. 
He was a forceful writer of prose and played a notable part in the 
renaissance in the Tamil country. Mlnakshisundaram Pi||ai was a 
profound scholar and voluminous writer of Tamil verse. He was 
doubtless a towering personality, to judge from the testimony of his 
pupil Dr. Swaminatha Iyer. The Christian poet, Krishna PiJJai, and 
the Muslim poet, Umaru Pulavar, were both accomplished versifiers. 
The former’s Rakshanya Ydtrikam and the latter’s Seer a Purdnam~ 
are important period pieces. Another writer of the old school, V. P. 
Subramania Mudaliyar, died in 1946 at the venerable age of ninety. 

196 



IiTERATURE 


His works include a Tamil version of Paradise Lost ,, Book I, and the 
epyilion, Akalikai Venba. 

The nineteenth century saw the publication of Dr. Caldwell's A 
Comparative Grammar of the Dravidian Languages, Anderson’s 
Rudiments of Tamil Grammar, Winslow's Tamil Dictionary, and the 
first serious and popular Tamil periodicals. More and more classics 
were rescued from their obscure palm-leaf existence in maphs and 
given to the world. These early experiments in textual criticism 
culminated in the monumental labours and achievements of the late 
MahSmahopadhyfiya Dr. V. Swfiminfitha Iyer. He started his career 
at the Government College, Kumbakonam, succeeding the eminent 
Tamil Pandit, Tyfigarfija Chetti&r. Towards the close of his long 
life he acted for a time as Professor of Tamil at the Annamalai Uni¬ 
versity. His active period of scholarship and critical exegesis was 
about sixty-five years, and he died in 1942 at the ripe old age of 
eighty-seven. His enormous bibliography includes definitive edi¬ 
tions of £tlappadik&ram f Maniimikhalai, Chintdmani, Ptemn&n&ru and 
several other classics of the gangam age, a standard biography of 
his teacher MfoSkshisundaram PiJJai, a beautifully written candid 
autobiography, and innumerable essays and sketches. Teacher, edi¬ 
tor, critic, biographer, master of a chaste but modem prose, humanist, 
Dr. Swfiminfitha Iyer was a hoary institution. He has rightly been 
described as “a scholar who was also a singer and a saint who found 
and diffused harmony throughout his life." 16 Among the numerous 
other scholars of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, the follow¬ 
ing deserve special and honourable mention: Professors Bangani- 
tha MudaliySr, Sundaram PiJJai, geshagiri gastrl, and Chilvakesava- 
rfiya Mudaliyar; Pandits, M. and R. Raghava Iyengar, Messrs. 
Suryanfir&y&na g&sfri, Nallaswami FiJiai, and Kanakasabhai Pi$ai. 

Under the treble impact of missionary activity, English educa¬ 
tion, and renascent Bengal, Tamil literature quickened into new life 
in the last quarter of the nineteenth century and the opening decades 
of the present century. VSdanSyakam PQlai’s ProtSpa Mudaliydr Cha~ 
ritrom and B. R. Rfijam Iyer's Kamalamb&l ChOritram were the first 
full-length novels in Tamil, and they are popular favourites even 
today half a century after their first publication. Vfidanfiyrnkam 
PiJJai was a Tamil Christian, but his Schrva Samarasa Kfrtanai re¬ 
veals his catholic spirit. The songs in the latter collection are sin¬ 
cere effusions, marked by simplicity and facility. Rfijam Iyer was 
a precocious yogi, who edited the Prabuddha Bhdrata when if was 
founded. His KamaVknbSl Charitram is good as a story and is dis¬ 
tinguished by its descriptions, humour, characterization and loving 
humanity. Rfijam Iyer is one of the never-to-be-forgotten inbo¬ 
rn 



THE BRITISH PABAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

ritors of unfulfilled renown in modem Tamil literature. Other 
pioneering efforts in fiction were SuryanAraya^a SAstri’s Mativ&nan 
Madhaviah’s Padmdmti and Saravana Pifiai’s Mohandngi . 

In drama, Tamil writers of the last century first experimented 
with the epic and Puranic stories and turned them into dramas of a 
sort. Next came the phase of conscious imitation of Western mo¬ 
dels. Professor Sundaram PiJJai’s Mandnmamyam is a poetic drama 
in five acts, full of verbal felicities and packed with incidents. Ro¬ 
mance, politics and intrigue go to make the interesting fabric of 
this drama and some of the characters at least—notably the heroine 
—are well delineated. Shakespeare's plays have been from time to 
time put into Tamil, but rarely have they been successful. 
SuryanaiAyapa Sastri’s Rupavati, Kaldvati and Mdnavijayam, Prana- 
th&rtihara Siva’s Damayanti, and Sambanda MudaliyaVs Manohara, 
Amaldditya (based on Hamlet) and Golden Fetters are good stage 
pieces. There are also compositions like Nandan&r Charitram which are 
operatic in construction and appeal. It must be confessed, however, 
that no first rate dramatic artist has yet arrived in Tamil literature, 
although we have today any number of writers of successful or 
laughable one-act plays, melodramas or farces. 

With the rising tempo of nationalism since the beginning of the 
twentieth century, there has been a great burst of Tamil poetry, 
and we have had a succession of inspired singers like Subramania 
BhArati, Desigavin&yakam PiJJai, Suddh&nanda Bharati, Bharati 
Dasan and Namakkal Ramalingam PiUai. Their literary career real¬ 
ly belongs to the next period. 

X. TELUGU 

As narrated in the preceding Volume, the 18th century witnes¬ 
sed a considerable decline in Telugu literature. The major class of 
literature that flourished during the first half of the 19th century 
was poetry, particularly the &atakas. They were large in num¬ 
ber and showed a greater amount of originality, moral instruc¬ 
tion, social element, human touch and spirit of lyricism than the 
other poetic forms. Phakki Vea?kata Narasayya, Slt&rfimficharya, 
Subrahma^yakavi, Parvatiswara Sastrl, Bhagavatkavi, D&su Srl- 
rfimulu, VasurAyalu and ChellapiUa were some of the eminent &ataka 
writers of the time. There also flourished during this period a host 
of poetesses the most famous of whom was Vefigamma. 

The founder of modern Telugu literature was Rao Bahadur K. 
Vlrttalingam. He was influenced by English literature and wrote 
his first novel, R&ja64khara^hantramu, whose theme was sug- 

198 


LITERATURE 


gested by Goldsmith’s Vicar of Wakefield. It was translated into 
English and favourably reviewed in the London Times in 1887. Vlrfi- 
galingam became a member of the Brahma Sam&j and wielded his 
vigorous pen in advocating social reforms and advanced ideas in all 
spheres of life. He was a versatile and prolific writer and broke 
many new grounds in Telugu literature. He wrote his autobiogra¬ 
phy, the first of its kind in Telugu literature, and was the author of 
a number of stones and fables for women and children. He con¬ 
ducted journals like Vivekavardhani and his Andhra Kavula-chnritra 
was the first fine attempt to write a history of the Telugu literature. 
He also paved the way for literary research and criticism and set up 
models for novel, drama, literary biography, journalism and essay 
on social and scientific subjects. 

The drama of the modern type was evolved from older forms of 
play-writing like the Vidhinfitaka and the Yakshagfina. The age-long 
eminent Yakshagfina had almost developed into full-blown type 
of native drama by the time it made its debut in the 19th century. In 
the first half of this century the composition and the performance in 
many a different technique were in great vogue. The great TVfiga- 
rSja, Melattur Venkatarama Aastri and Sivaji, the last of the Maifi- 
thfi royal line of Tanjore, in the south, and Tarigoitfa Vengamma, 
Slrnfidu Venkatarayakavi and Potfuri Venkatarfiju in the North were 
some of the important Yakshagfina authors of the time. The great 
votaries of the famous Kuchipudi school were putting on board 
Yakshagfinas and winning the approbation of the man in the street 
and the prince in the palace alike. But in the latter part of the 19th 
century, the Dharwar Dramatic Company came into the scene. Telugu 
writers of the time were very much fascinated by their performances 
and took to writing plays on modern lines. Some made translations 
from Sanskrit and English and some tried their hand at new themes 
but adapted either the Sanskrit norms or the English in the techni¬ 
que of composition. Vtr&alingam did a pioneering work in this di¬ 
rection. His Sakuntalam, Ratndvali and some farces were staged, 
won appreciation, and gave an impetus to others who wrote good 
dramas. Among these may be mentioned Chilakamarti LakshmTnara- 
simham, another voluminous writer like VTrfiAalifigam, who wrote 
many dramas, novels, stories, essays and biographies. Two of 
his plays, Prasannayddavam and GaydpdkhySnam, and his two 
novels, H&nalati and Karp&ramaHjari became very popular. During 
the second half of the 19th century appeared a host of prose works 
dealing with moral fables, stories of pilgrimages, subjects like poli¬ 
tics, law, and so on, which were useful to school children, house- 
wives, the government institutions and so on. Chinnayasftri’s Ntti- 

199 






THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

chandrika won reputation as a classical specimen of modern Telugu 
prose in a very chaste and lucid style. Some have employed the 
colloquial style and satisfied the growing need of a vast majority 
of the reading public. As it gained momentum, the novel, the short 
story, the essay and the like, the essential form of which is prose, 
came into being. Vire&ilingam, the first novelist, is hailed as the 
father of modern prose literature in Telugu. Gurajfid* Apparfio 
may be hailed as the father of modern short story in Telugu. 

The Bdlavy&karanam of Chinnayasuri, the PratujLha Vy&kara- 
turn and the Sabda-Ratndkaram (dictionary) of Sitarfimach&rya, the 
lives of Telugu poets of Gurajdda Sriramamurtl, and Amudrita-gran- 
dha Chintdmani of P. Ramakpishajayya deserve special mention here 
as they are some of the rich products of this century. 

Eminent services were rendered by the Europeans to the cause 
of Telugu literature during the first half of the nineteenth century. 
William Carey, A.D. Campbell, William Brown, C. P. Brown, Morris 
and Arden wrote Telugu grammars, mostly for the use of non-Telugu 
people. Campbell, Browns and Gelette published dictionaries. 
Bishop Caldwell paved the way for a systematic study of the Dravi- 
dian family of languages to which Telugu belongs, by the publication 
of his comparative grammar. Col. Mackenzie and C. P. Brown took 
pains in collecting manuscripts of old works. The Andhras are par¬ 
ticularly indebted to C. P. Brown for the many-sided service he did 
for the Telugu Muse. 

XI. KANNADA 

The creation of the new Hindu State of Mysore at the beginning 
of the nineteenth century and the vicissitudes of fortune through 
which it passed during that century, have been described above. 16 “ 
Mysore was naturally looked upon as the centre of Karpataka cul¬ 
ture. Mummadi Krishparfija gathered round him Sanskrit and Kan¬ 
nada scholars and himself composed numerous works in both these 
languages. About fifty works in Kannada composed between 
1815 and 1867, are ascribed to him. Of these seven are Sthalama- 
hStmyas and five are commentaries, mostly in Kannada prose. Three 
works are based on the RamAyana , six on the Mah&bh&rata and the 
Bh&gavata, and four on the Purfipas. His prose version of the Bha- 
rata, called Vai&vilasa Bh&rata, has attained some popularity. The 
stories of Sakuntalft, Nala, Har&chandra, Ratn&vall, DaSakurnAra- 
charita, Uttara-R&ma-charita , MAlavik&gnimitra, Kddambati , and 
VlkramorvaSiya are based on the corresponding Sanskrit Kfivyas. 
Of the popular tales mention may be made of Suka-saptati, Vet&la- 
paftohavkh&ati and Battii-Putthdli-katha. His devotion to the 
Dfcvl is expressed in the translations of Lalitdp&khySna. Devim&hat- 




200 




LITERATURE 


mya, Dtvti&yujya, Steamdlikd and D$vt BMgavata T&tparya . 

He also wrote commentaries on Jdtaka Samr$jya and Bh4- 
rata Sara Samgraha . 

During the fifty years of his active literary work Kiishpar&ja 
patronised a number of scholars of all communities. Among the 
Jain authors were g&ntaz&ja Paaj^it®, Deva Chandra, and Chfiru- 
kirti Papdita. AJiya Linga Raja (1823-74) was an author in Kan¬ 
nada and Sanskrit. His literary activity extended from about 
1852 to 1867, and in a short period he produced more than fifty works 
in Kannada. He employed many forms—Champti, Sangatya, Shat- 
padi, Yakshagana, Lavapi and songs. His Narapati-charita is an 
Alamkfira work in the Champu style. Prab h&vati-parinaya is in the 
Shatpadi metre. Virabhadra-Sataka is addressed to his favourite 
deity and the Mah&libga Sataka is didactic. Devatapurada Nan- 
jupda composed, besides stotras and £a takas, many eulogies of his 
patron, Mummadi Kpishparaja. Kempu Narayapa’s prose version 
of the Mudra-Rakshasa, called Mudra-manjusha had become popu¬ 
lar. Among other writers patronised by Mummadi Kpishparaja 
may be mentioned Venkata Hama Sastrl Subrahmapya, Rangadasa. 
Srinivasa Tammayya, and Maddagiri Nanjappa who composed many 
works in praise of the ruler. 

Outside this coterie of literati in Mysore which followed in 
style and subject matter the conventions of Sanskrit literature, a 
new movement was gathering strength as early as 1830. K?ishpa- 
mach&rya of Sriranga Parana, Vakil of the Sadar Adalat Court of 
Madras, wrote grammar and lexicons for both old and new Kannada. 
His grammar of New Kannada, Hosaganna$a NudiganncujA , was 
printed in A.D. 1838 and is probably one of the earliest works in 
Kannada to be printed. The influence of the Brahma Samaj is found 
in the work of Rama Brahmananda Yogi (c. 1840) whose Bhakti - 
sudh&rasa is written in the Bhamini Shatpadi metre. 

In the latter half of the nineteenth century the writers were in¬ 
spired by the new movements in India and abroad. The missionaries 
of the Mangalore Basel Mission, the Wesley Mission, etc. were res* 
ponsible for the printing and publication of a number of works. 
Reeve compiled an English-Kannada dictionary and he and Sanderson 
issued a Kannada-English lexicon. Carey, Karel, Zeigler, Maben, 
Campbell and Kittel wrote grammars of the Kannada language. 
Kittel produced an excellent Kannada-English dictionary with the 
help of many Papdi tas and edited Sabdanut^iidarpana, and Chhandom - 
budhi. Moegling nd Wiegle also printed Basava Pur&na, Chenna 
Basava Pur&na, Rdjendra Namd, Jaimini Bh&rata, the Songs of the 
D&sas, etc. Rice, the famous epigraphist, edited Kannada classics 


201 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AMD INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 

in the Bibliotheca Carnatica and complied a Gazetteer . He edited 
the Amara-koia in Kannada, and his introductions to the cl assi c a l 
works formed the basis for a more comprehensive history of the 
Kannada language and literature. 

Chama Raja Wodeyar (1881-1894) encouraged dramatic produc¬ 
tions, but the theatre in Karpatka rested on popular support. The 
first Kannada drama to be staged was Basavappa g§strf s rendering 
of Abhijv&na^&kuntala/ which was *so excellent that the Dewan, 
Rangach&rlu, conferred on the author the title of “Abhinava Kali¬ 
dasa *. A number of dramas with original plots as well as those de¬ 
rived from Sanskrit and English came to be staged, and among the 
authors may be mentioned Basavappa gastri, Mo$aganhajJi gazhkara 
gfistri, AyyA g&strt, N. Subba Sastrt, and S. G. NarasizfahSchfirya. The 
stage-technique was also developed during the eighties. 

The novel in Kannada may be said to be due to B. Venkatfi- 
chSrya, whose knowledge of Bengali enabled him to translate the 
masterpieces of Bankim-chandra Chatterji. He rendered the Ara¬ 
bian Nights Entertainments, Tales of Rdjasthdn, Rasselas, etc. into 
Kannada and produced some original works also. The old type 9 ! 
narrative was followed by S. VenkateSa gastri and others. B&lfi- 
ch&rya Sakkari (ganti Kavi) wrote about seventy works, mostly in 
Shatpadi and S&ngatya. Nandajige NSraajtappa also composed several 
works in old style. 

XIL MALAYALAM 
1. The Age of Swathi Thirunal 

The literary and cultural history of Kerala during the period 
under review (1818-1905) has to be viewed against the back¬ 
ground of it $ political condition at the close of the previous century. 
Though divided into three distinct political units, viz. Travan- 
core, Cochin and Malabar, Kerala remained a single cultural unit. 
The British supremacy had become another common binding factor, 
Tranvancore and Cochin having already come under the British 
power by treaty obligations, and Malabar having been merged in 
the Madras Presidency. All the three political units had begun to 
be influenced by the new system of administration established by 
the British in India. 

An era favourable to the growth of literary and cultural activity 
dawned on the country under these changes, which were more or less 
similar in nature to those observed in other parts of India during 
the same period, with the difference that owing to the intense in* 
terest taken by the rulers of Travancore and Cochin in the spread 


202 





LITERATURE 


of education on Western lines and in the adoption of British methods 
of administration, the new orientation of culture got a greater im¬ 
petus in these States. 

The period that followed may rightly be called the age of Swathi 
Thirunal (Maharaja of Tranvancore, 1829-1847), as regards litera¬ 
ture and other arts. He was indeed the most remarkable person in 
Kerala at that time. A great scholar in several Indian languages, 
he tried his hand at poetic and musical compositions in not less than 
seven of them, viz., Malayalam, Sanskrit, Tamil, Telugu, Hindi 
Urdu and Marathi. He was an inspired devotional poet. His learn¬ 
ing in English, a rare accomplishment in those days, received the 
warm eulogy of Europeans. Learned men from all parts of India 
flocked to his court to display their talents and earn their rewards. 
It was the age of Thyagaraja, Muthuswami Dikshithar and Syfima 
tSastrt in South Indian Music, and the Maharaja, being as splendid 
and talented a singer and composer as any of them, attracted to his 
court many of the prominent musicians of the time. 

As regards literature, the leading figures were Irayimman 
Thampi and Vidwan Koithampuran, both court poets of Swathi Thi¬ 
runal. They can truly be termed representatives of the trends of 
the times, since their works abound in a beautiful and happy blending 
of poetry and music. Irayimman Thampi is pre-eminently the most 
musical of the poets of Kerala, and his beautiful lullaby commencing 
with the line Omana Ttinlcajkitdvo has earned for him an ever¬ 
lasting name. His musical compositions, mainly of a devotional 
nature, with their sweet literary flavour, are still widely sung in 
Kerala. But his chief title to the high position he holds in Malayft- 
lam is the singular contribution he has made to the Kathakali litera¬ 
ture by his three works, the Dakshay&gam, Rtehakavadham, and 
TJttaiH-svayamvaram. 

Vidwan Koithampuran, also, was a remarkable poet much liked 
by the Mahfir&ja. He died very young, but his Kathakali work, 
Ravana Vi jay am, has made him immortal in literature. Next to 
Unnai Varier and Irayimman Thampi, he is perhaps the best of the 
Kathakali writers who had in them a true dramatic sense and genius 
for characterisation. 

2. Impact of English Education . 

The spread of English education sponsored by the British ad¬ 
ministrative system had very soon its impact on Malayfilam litera¬ 
ture. Here also special mention has to be made of the role of 
Swathi Thirunal and his successor, Uthram Thirunal (1847-61), 
Mah&iftj&s of Tranvancore, in the encouragement of English educa- 

203 






THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 

tioii in that State, as evidenced by the policy of starting schools in 
important centres, and the assistance given to the Church Mission 
and the London Mission Societies in their efforts to start educational 
institutions. Missionaries who showed interest in literary and 
linguistic studies were encouraged by the MahSrajas. 

The progress of literature in the Cochin and Malabar areas dur¬ 
ing the period was also very much influenced by the advancement of 
English education in those regions. Maharajas of Cochin were great 
patrons of the new system of education, and Malabar, being directly 
under the British administration, took rapid steps in the new ad¬ 
vancement. The educational activities of the Christian missionaries 
belonging to the Basel Mission deserve special mention. It was 
under their auspices that Dr. Gundert, a German missionary of ex¬ 
ceptional linguistic talents, produced by his own personal effort the 
M&lay&lam-English Dictionary which even today remains an autho¬ 
ritative work. 

3. Pro§e Literature 

The establishment of the Madras University (1857), which em¬ 
braced the Kerala region also, marks an important event in the cul¬ 
tural history of Kerala. It is from the products of this University 
that a generation of scholars, well versed in Western literature and 
with a capacity to enrich their own language by adopting Western 
literary trends, came into being. Prose was the first branch to re¬ 
ceive an impetus by the contact with English. Though there was 
no paucity of prose in Malay£lam even in olden times, it had not de¬ 
veloped on modem lines until the writers became familiar with the 
Western modes of prose-writing such as. the essay, the novel, the 
short story and literary criticism. The earliest experiments in mo¬ 
dem prose composition were more or less in the form of conscious 
efforts necessitated by the requirement of textbooks in Malayalam. 
It was left to the far-sighted policy of Ayilliyam Thirunal, MahS- 
rfijfi of Travancore (1881-1880), to start a scheme for the prepara¬ 
tion of textbooks for use in schools in the State. Kerala Varma 
Valiakoithampuran, an erudite scholar in Sanskrit, Malayalam, and 
English and an eminent poet, was appointed the Chairman of the Com¬ 
mittee formed to prepare the textbooks. 

Kerala Varma's prose was modelled on that of some of the best 
English essayists and his experiments in prose-writing set a good 
example to be followed by contemporary writers in MalaySlam. He 
wrote several books suited for various standards in the newly esta¬ 
blished schools. The Mahar&j$ and the heir apparent, Visakham 
Tlrunal, also, were prose writers of no mean ability, and, besides 


204 





LITERATURE 


encouraging other writers, they themselves contributed to the ad¬ 
vancement of modern Malayalam prose. It was at the instance of 
the latter th^t Kerala Varma translated Maunder’s Treasury of Bio¬ 
graphy and a novel named Akbar which was a translation of the 
English version of a Dutch novel of the same name. 

The growth of journalism helped in no small measure the deve¬ 
lopment of prose. Initiated by Christian missionaries for the pur¬ 
pose of religious propaganda, journalism was taken up later by local 
scholars who started newspapers and journals for literary and poli¬ 
tical activities. Some of the journals were solely devoted to lite¬ 
rature, whilst the newspapers set apart special columns for literary 
articles, reviews and poems. These publications served to create 
literary interest among the common man and to encourage talented 
persons to cultivate their literary faculties. 

4. The Novels. 

Another aspect of the new era in literature was the rise of the 
novel. Appu Nedungadi, an early graduate of the newly started 
Madras University, published his Kundalatd in the year 1887. 
Though the work cannot be said to have satisfied the standards of a 
novel, it still marks the origin of prose fiction in Malayalam. Soon 
after this, two other talented writers appeared in the field and con¬ 
tributed some of the most outstanding novels in Malay&lam. Chandu 
Menon, the author of IndulekHa, a great social novel (1889), was the 
first of them, and C. V. Raman Piflai, who wrote his M&rttanda 
varma, a historical novel (1890), the second. Both the works became 
very popular and soon there was an influx of writers who wrote 
after the models set by these veterans. But excepting only a few, 
the works produced were unsuccessful imitations. Later on, 
Chandu Menon himself wrote another social novel, by name Sdrada, 
but could not finish it before his premature death. With these two 
outstanding works, Chandu Menon has won a permanent place in 
the history of Malayfilam fiction. Though C. V. Raman Pityai re¬ 
mained silent for some time after producing his M&rft&ndavarma, at a 
later period he distinguished himself by writing works like Dhar - 
mar&ja and Rdmardja Bahadur, which hold their place as the most 
outstanding historical novels in MalaySlam. 

5. Drama and Poetry. 

As regards poetry there were two main trends—one represented 
by the Venmani Nampoodiris (the Senior and the Junior), and the 
other by Kerala Varma. Kerala Varma’s poetry was modelled on 
the old ManipfOvSla style abounding in Sanskrit words and terms, 

205 










THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTC Y AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 

/ 

but it had a charm of its own when adapted to express new ideas 
in a masterly way characteristic of himself. His translation of 
K&lidasa’s gdkuntalam (1882) marks an important event in the his¬ 
tory not only of Malayalam drama but of poetry as well. There was 
an overflow of translations and original dramas following the ap¬ 
pearance of that work, the most notable of the translations being 
that of Bhavabbuti’s Uttara-Rajna-charitam by Chathukkutty Man- 
nadiyar. 

Kerala Varma’s Mayura-sandeiam was his second important con¬ 
tribution to Malayalam poetry. It is a SandesSakfivya (messenger 
poem) written after Kalidasa's Meghadutam. Though it cannot com¬ 
pare favourably with its model in Sanskrit in poetic excellence, and 
though written in the Mapipravdla style, it has to be admitted that 
Mayurcusandeiam is one of the most popularly acclaimed poems in 
Malayalam. This may be due to the bearing it has on the eventful 
life of its author and the sense of reality that pervades it, mingled 
with the music of its diction. 

Venmani Nampoodiris, on the other hand, were upholders of 
the pure Malayalam style, which in the course of its chequered his¬ 
tory had suffered serious set-backs at the hands of Sanskrit poets and 
scholars. The Junior Venmani’s Puraprabandham, a descriptive 
poem on the famous temple festival at Trichur, and other works, 
including a large number of individual stanzas, abound in wit and 
humour, though some of them are ultra-erotic. These were very 
much liked by readers, both common and scholarly, thanks to their 
directness of appeal, simplicity of manner and melody of diction. 
The Venmanis got a large number of followers as regards their style, 
especially from among the famous poets belonging* to the Kodun- 
galloor royal family, like Kunju Kuttan Thampuran, Kochunni 
Thampuran and a good number of their disciples. 

Closely following the above trend, came the dawn of a new 
romantic school of poetry in Malayalam sponsored by scholars who 
had come under the influence of similar trends in English poetry. 
A. R. Raja Raja Varma, the famous Professor of Malayalam in the 
Maharaja’s College, Trivandrum, gave the lead to the new move¬ 
ment. A critic and a poet himself, he emphasized the greater im¬ 
portance of sentiments in poetry compared to mere form, and he ini¬ 
tiated a controversy opposing the school of writers who advocated 
the pseudo-classical model. He attacked the tendency of the poets 
in general to give undue importance to what is called Dvi&yakshara 
Prdsa (uniformity in sound in the second syllable in all the four 
lines of a stanza). He also opposed the predominance of Sanskrit 
words in MalaySlam verse. He did not mind that he was thereby 

206 




















LITERATURE 


attacking his guru and uncle, Kerala Varma, who happened to be 
the leading upholder of the old school; Baja Baja Varma f s example 
inspired younger poets like Kumax^an Asan and Vallathol, and help¬ 
ed the speedy development of the new romantic poetry. 


But the classical tendency of the poets persisted for some time 
more, ns a result of which several poets took it as a fashion to write 
M a h akavyas after some of the famous classical works of that cate¬ 
gory in Sanskrit. Azhakathu Padmanabha Kurup paved the way 
by his. R&machandra-viltLsam and others followed suit. Some of the 
well-known M a h fi k avyas that originated at this time were Chitra - 
ydgam of Vallathol, Um&keraiam of Ulloor, Rugrnangadc^c haritam 
of Pandalam Kerala Varma and Kesaviyam of K. C. Kesava Filial. 
The last-mentioned work is of particular interest since its author, 
being a faithful follower of A. B. Baja Bfija, made some deviations in 
the manner of the work by abandoning the artificialities of sound 
and play on words indulged in by the authors of Mahakavyas in 
general, and attaching greater importance to suggestiveness of mean¬ 
ing and sincerity of sentiments, characteristic of the Bomantic school. 


6. Literary Criticism. 


Mention has to be made of the origin of literary criticism in 
M&layfilam which also was the outcome of the contact of M&layfilam 
scholars with the trends in English literary criticism. Some of the 
earliest essayists like C. P. Achutha Menon set the model by means 
of book-reviews in journals. But it was left to A. E. Bfija Bfija 
Varma to establish certain standards in the field through his S&hitya- 
w&hyam, a treatise on rhetoric, and his famous introduction to Nala- 
charitam kathakali. Subsequent critics like P. K. Nfirfiyasja PiJJai, 
who can be said to have laid the foundation of scholarly criticism 
in Malayllam, owed much to the precepts of their veteran Professor 
A. R. Bfija Bfija. The personal essay was also developing in M&la- 
yfilam, though there were only a very few essayists in the strict 
sense of the word. The most important of them was Kunju Raman 
Nayanar, popularly know by his pseudonym, ‘Kesari*. Moorkothu 
Kumaran, K. Sukumaran and a few others also wrote lighter essays 
with a certain amount of success. Among writers of serious essays 
in that period, the names of Appan Thampuran, K. B. Krishna Pillai 
and M. Bfija Bfija Varma deserve special mention. 


7. Translations. 

One of the notable features of the early decades of the 20th 
century was the great interest taken by writers to translate works 
Sanskrit and English into Malayllam. Dewan Bahadur A. 

207 


lil.H 
















THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

Govinda Pijjai translated several of Shakespeare’s dramas, using a 
sort of blank verse in Malayalam. But he had very few followers in 
the line. As regards purely poetic works, the translation of Kali¬ 
dasa’s MeghadHta and Kumdrasambhava by A. R. Raja Raja and of 
Raghuvainsa by Kundoor Narayana Menon have to be mentioned. 
Translations of prose works from English also had increased in 
number after Kerala Varma’s Akbar and other translations/ One 
of the most successful of the later translators was C. S. Subramanian 
Potti who set a good model by his translation of Durgeianandinl 

of Bankim-chandra from an English version of it. 

> 

XIH. INDIAN CONTRIBUTION TO ARABIC LITERATURE. 

Arabic, as the original language of the Qur’an and the Islamic 
sciences, continued to attract the attention of the Indian Muslims 
during the 19th century, and was widely studied throughout the 
country. The main purpose, however, of acquiring a respectable 
knowledge of this language was to get acquainted with the religious 

texts, rather than to cultivate a real taste for its literature. The 

» 

result was that several important branches of Arabic literature, es¬ 
pecially belles-lettres and poetry, were neglected, and India failed to 
produce any eminent Arabic poet or litterateur during this period, 
as indeed in the previous centuries, with the solitary exception, 
perhaps, of Ghulam Ali Azad of Bilgram (d. 1785). 18 The well- 
known D&rs^i-Nizami, to which we have referred elsewhere, for in¬ 
stance, contained very little of proper literature, while laying un¬ 
necessary emphasis on grammar and rhetoric, and whatever of such 
literature was included in the curricula of the various madrasas, 
was confined to a few standard works, such as the Mu’aXlaqq £, 10 the 

Hamdsa and the Maqdmdt 20 of Badi’uz-Zam&n and al-HaiM. Under 

♦ 

the circumstances one could hardly expect the Indian scholars of 
Arabic to have a true literary flair for Arabic or to be capable of 
writing any original work of outstanding merit. The attention, 
therefore, of these scholars was focussed on the Qur’anic exegeses 
(Tafsir), the Apostolic Traditions (Hadis), jurisprudence ( Fiqh ), 
the sources of the Islamic law (Usui fiqh), dogmatic theology 
(Kalam ), and, to a lesser degree, on the allied or subsidiary sciences 
of Sufism (tasawwuf), grammar and logic. But eyen in these bran¬ 
ches their main output was of secondary importance, consisting 
mostly of commentaries and glosses on works by Arab authors, or 
small, unpretentious tracts on particular topics of chiefly theological 
interest. 

Among the scholars who distinguished themselves in their res¬ 
pective fields of study during the period, we may specially mention 

206 






LITERATURE 

the two brothers, Sfafih ‘Abd'ul ‘Aziz (d. 1828) mad Shah Rafi’uddin 
(cL 1233 Ho ss- 1817-18 AJD.), sons of SMh Wali’ullah, the famous 
scholar and religious reformer of the preceding century. The for¬ 
mer has left a work entitled Mvq&d&ama Tafnr Fath aL'Aziz on 
Qur’Snie exegesis, another on apocryphal traditions .(aUAhSdig al 
Mauzu'a) , and several others dealing with different topics such as 
philology, Sufism and dogmatic theology. His work, the Sinful 
ShaMdatain, on the martyrdom of the Prophet’s grandsons, the 
Imams Hasan and Husain, has won wide recognition, and so has a 
collection of his letters, oJt-Makatfb. Shah Bah'uddin has written 
a masterly exposition of a Qur’anic verse, Ayat al-Ntir, brides 
several works of a literary character, such as the collection of his 
letters (Kuqqa'&t) and clever interpolations (tazrmnM) of certain 
standard Arabic poems. The family tradition of Arabic scholarship 
was likewise maintained by the two grandsons of SMh Wali’ullfih, 
namely Qizi Muhammad Ism&’il (<L 1830) and Abu Sulaiman Muham¬ 
mad Ishaq (d. 1844), both of whom wrote well-known works on 
Hadis, Kalim, etc. 

Another notable scholar of the period was Abu ’Abd’ullah Hu* 
shin bin Dildir ‘Ali (d. 1854) of Naairmbad, whose father, Dildir *Ali 
(d- 1819) 21 , had the distinction of being the first Indian-born Shi‘a 
Mujtahid, and who has written a fairly large number of well-known 
works on Qur’&nic exegeses, jurisprudence, dogmatic theology and phi¬ 
losophy, while a contemporary of his, Mohammad Ghaus Sharful 
Mulk bin Nizamuddin Ahmad (d. 1822), is remembered for his two lite¬ 
rary works of considerable merit, ie. a commentary of the famous ode 
Binat Su‘a& by Ka‘b bin Zuhair, a longish poem delineating the 
titles of the fourth Orthodox Caliph, ‘Ali ( Urjuza ft Alq&b Eazrat 
*Ali ), He, incidentally, belonged to the Nawai't (sing: Nauti) 22 com¬ 
munity, a family of Arab emigrants settled in Southern India. We 
may also mention here a Hindu scholar of Delhi, Munshi Kundan 
Dal (d. 1822), who wrote Persian poetry with the pea-name (takhol- 
lu$) AshkL He was the son of Munshi Munwan Lai, known m al- 
Falsafi (the Philosopher), and belonged to a Hindu family domiciled 
in Delhi which had maintained a tradition of Arabic and Persian 
learning from the days of Emperor Shihjahan. A copy of Mi work, 
al-Qigtas, on mathematics, is preserved in the Bankipur Library. 23 
The only Arabic poet of this period, who is said to have left behind a 
diwin (collection) of his poems, was Faiz Ahmad bin Hafiz Ghulfim 
Ahmad of Badaun who died in 1857. 

Khairabad, a town near Lakhnau and the home of several 
distinguished scholars and poets of the 18th and 19th centuries, pro¬ 
duced during this period the well-known scholar Muhammad Fazl-i- 

209 


B.1U.R—14 





THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


Haqq (d. 1861), son of Fazl-i-Imam, 24 who wrote several works, includ¬ 
ing one on tasatvtvuf, entitled AURauz al Majud fi Thaqiq al- Wujud 
(The well-watered Garden about the ascertainment of Existence), and 
a short Arabic history of the Mutiny of 1857, entitled Risala-i-Tar’ikh 
al-Ghadr. One of his Arabic poems, a panegyric on the Prophet, is 
also well-known. He was accused of treason after the Mutiny and 
was sent to the Andaman Islands, where he died. Farangi Mahal 
of Lakhnau, another important centre of learning, found an able 
representative in the person of Wali’ullah bin Habibullah (d. 1853), 
among Whose literary products is a work of history entitled al- 
Ajghsdn ad-Arba‘a (The Four Branches) comprising an account of 
the first four Orthodox Caliphs, the immediate successors of the Pro¬ 
phet. A colleague of his, Khadim Ahmad, son of Mulla Haider (d. 
1854), wrote notes ( ta‘liqat) on the well-known work on jurispru¬ 
dence, Sharah aUWaqaya. Mention should also be made of Shaikh Mu¬ 
hammad bin Ahmad Ali al-Zabldi (d. 1841); though he lived for the 
greater part of his life at Zabid in Yemen, whence his place-name 
(nisba), he was born in Sind and was of Indian origin. He was sent 
to Egypt as his ambassador by the Imam of San‘a and passed the 
last days of his life in Medina where he held the onerous post of 
chief theologian. He is the author of numerous, works, chiefly con¬ 
cerned with apostolic traditions ( hadis ), of which the most notable, 
perhaps, are a collection of “solitary” hadis entitled Hasr al-Sharid 
and a concordance of the Musnad of Abu Hanifa. 

Most of the authors to whom we have referred above belong 
to the pre-Mutiny period of the 19th century, but it must not be 
supposed that the tradition of Arabic scholarship suffered any serious 
set-back after that epoch. The fifty years that followed were, on 
the other hand, marked by literary activity on even a larger scale, 
and produced several great scholars. Their work, however, has not 
yet been properly appraised and in many cases remains unpublished. 
Yet a brief mention of some of them is necessary here. The most 
outstanding among these was undoubtedly Maulavi Abdul Hayy 
of Lakhnau (d. 1886) who wrote three important works, namely a 
tafsir of the Qur’an entitled al~Tuhfat al-Mukht&riya, a voluminous 
work based on practically all the standard commentaries compiled 
before his time; a collection of his lectures, Jami* Khutub Shuh&r aU 
Sana, delivered on Fridays during the course of a year, which are in 
a highly ornate style and have been compared to the Attvdq al - 
Zahab of al-Zamakhshari, 35 and lastly a comprehensive biography 
(tazkira) of the great poets and scholars of modern times, entitled 
Nuzhat al~Khaw&tir. This last work, which is in several volumes 
and is being published at Lakhnau, is a most valuable supplement to 

210 




LITERATURE 


the Subhat aUMarjdn and Sartc-uAz&d of Ghulam ‘AH Azad Bil- 
grami. Nawab Kazk Hasan Khan, son of the Persian poet, 
Nawab Amin Hasan Khan of Kakori (d. 1846-7), was likewise a good 
scholar of Arabic who wrote poetry in that language, with great faci¬ 
lity. He is said to have composed a long ode (316 verses) in a single 
night. This ode which he named Lamiyat al-Hind after the famous 14- 
miyat al•Arab of al Shanfara, has been highly appreciated by literary 
critics, and has enjoyed wide celebrity. Another Arabic poet who is bet¬ 
ter known for his scholarly works in several other branches of litera¬ 
ture, was Maulavi ‘Ali ‘Abbas of Chirayyakot (d. 1302 H. =1884- 
5 A.D.), who lived for a considerable time in Hyderabad and Bhopal 
and was patronized by Nawab Sikandar Jahan Begum. He counted 
among his pupils several distinguished scholars, including Maulavi 
Faiz’ul Hasan of Saharanpur (d. 1304 H. = 1886-7), who has left 
behind a whole diwan of Arabic verses. But the most notable scho¬ 
lar-poet of the post-Mutiny period was certainly Mufti Syed Muham¬ 
mad ‘Abbas of Lakhnau (d. 1306 H. = 1888-9), who composed nume¬ 
rous poems in Arabic as well as in Persian. He had served in his 
earlier career under the kings of Avadh, Muhammad ‘Ali and Amjad 
‘All, and visited Calcutta twice while Wajid ‘Ali ShSh was there. 
Among his Arabic poems, there is a satire on Calcutta, a city which 
he never liked, while one of his Persian poems, a Matnawi, entitled 
Mann toa Salw& written in a didactic strain, found recognition even 
outside India, notably in Iraq where a prominent mujtahid was so 
struck by the Mufti’s erudition that he composed an ode in his praise 
and sent it to him along with a very flattering letter. 

XIV. INDIAN CONTRIBUTION TO PERSIAN IJTERATURE. 

Unlike Arabic, Persian lost a good deal of its former popularity 
during this period. This was partly due to the fact that with the 
of the trans-border areas of Kabul and Kandahftr from the 
Mughul empire, fresh waves of immigrants, speaking Persian, had 
ceased to flow into the country, and partly to the development of 
Urdu as the common language of social intercourse and literary 
compositions. The result was that Persian had ceased to be the 
Rngua franca of the educated classes long before 1818, although it 
continued to be the official language till 1834. Unlike Arabic, again, 
Fenian had very little religious or sentimental appeal for the Indian 
Muslims, as the only interest it had aroused among them even in 
the preceding centuries was mainly literary and cultural. An ele¬ 
mentary knowledge of Persian continued, no doubt, to be a necessary 
part of their early education almost throughout the 19th century, but 
the old tradition of a real mastery of the language and a deep ac¬ 
quaintance with its classical literature had been fading away very 

211 





THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

* 

fast. It did not, moreover, find a place in the regular curricula of 
most of the educational institutions of quasi-religious character found¬ 
ed about this time, such as the Darul-'Ulum of Deoband or the Nad- 

wat al-‘Uiama of Lakhnau, so that with its gradual replacement 

< 

by Urdu in the Muslim homes as the usual medium of conversation, 
opportunities for its study became fewer and fewer. All this ex¬ 
plains why we do not find in this period any eminent poet or scholar 
of Persian who could be placed in the same rank with the stalwarts 
of the earlier periods like, for instance, Amir Khusrav, Syed Hasan 
and Faizi among the poets, or Barani, Firishta, Badauni and Abu’l- 
Fazl among the prose-writers. 

The only Persian poet of real merit in the period under review 
was Mirza Asadullah Khan Ghalib of Delhi (d. 1869). Famous now¬ 
adays chiefly on account of his remarkably original Urdu poetry, 
he has left behind a fairly large collection of his Persian poems, 
mostly in the form of odes ( Qasidas ) and lyrics ( Ghazals ), of very 
considerable literary excellence, which certainly deserve much 
more attention than they have received so far. 26 Having studied 
Persian under the supervision of a competent Iranian scholar, he 
acquired wonderful proficiency in that language and a refined taste 
for its poetry. He was a great admirer of Bedil, ‘Urfi and Naziri and 
tried to imitate their style, but several of his odes are replicas of 
those composed by the earlier masters, like Anwari and Khaqani, 
and compare very favourably with them. Some of his prose works 
have also survived him and are very well-known. One of these, 
entitled Q&ti'-i-Burhan, is a thoughtful criticism of the Persian lexi¬ 
con, BurMn-i-QO'ti , compiled by Muhammad Husain “Burhan”, 
which invited rejoinders from his opponents in the form of Sati'-i 
Burh&n etc., and excited a lot of controversy in contemporary lite¬ 
rary circles. Another work, named Panj Ahang, written in an or¬ 
nate style, illustrates five different styles of Persian composition; 
the Dastanbu contains an account of the Mutiny and the Mtkr-i - 
NimriLz is an incomplete history of the Mughul empire, while his 
Urdu letters, which have been edited by several scholars in recent 
times, are fine specimens of a simple and straightforward literary 
style, apart from their biographical and historical value as records 
of several contemporary events connected with the poet himself or 
his friends and acquaintances. 27 

Among other Persian poets of this period, mention may be made 
of Nawab Mustafa Khun Shifts, a pupil of Ghalib’s and Qatil and 
Shifa’i, his rivals. Mirza Qatil, originally a Hindu (Khatri) of Fari- 
dabad, enjoyed considerable celebrity in his time and had many 
pupils, including Mirza KMn, the Kotwfil of Delhi. Ghalib himself 

212 


LITERATURE 


had several other talented pupils, including Munshi Hargopal 
“Tufta”, 28 who had collected a diwan of his odes and lyrics, Mir 
Mahdi “Majruh”, and Nawab Ziya’uddin “Naiyar” of the Loharu fa¬ 
mily. Mufti Sadruddin of Delhi (d. 1285 H.=1868-9) was a learned 
scholar of Kashmiri origin who also distinguished himself in Persian 
poetry, while Mufti Syed Muhammad ‘Abbas of Lakhnau (d. 1308 
H.=1888-9 A.D.) has left behind numerous Persian poems, one of 
which entitled Mann-o-Salwd, has been referred to in the preceding 
section. 

The younger generation of poets who died early in the 20th 
century, but achieved considerable fame by the end of the 19th, in¬ 
cluded Shibli Nu‘m&ni, a scholar of versatile talents and the real 
founder of the Nadwat’ul ‘Ulama, who wrote with equal facility 
in Persian and Urdu, and Girami of Jullandhar in the Panjab. The 
latter, of whose poetical talents Iqbal had a very high opinion, at¬ 
tached himself to the Nizam of Hyderabad, Deccan, Mir Osman ‘Ali 
KhUn (who, incidentally, is himself a good poet), and became his 
Us tad (teacher in,the art x>f poetry). Mention may also be made of 
Nawab Amir Hasan Khan of Kakori (d. 1263 H.=1846-7 AJD.) who 
wrote elegant Persian poetry under the pen-name of “Bismil”. 

Another branch of Persian literature which attracted the at- 
tention of Indian writers was religious and Suflstie studies, and 
numerous works on this topic appeared during the period under re¬ 
view. Among the authors of such works was HIji Tmd&d ‘Ali of 
Thana Bhawan, who migrated to Mecca in the Hijaz after the Mu¬ 
tiny and died there in 1899. Included among his pupils were well- 
known scholars like Maulana Muhammad Qasim of Nanauta, Mau- 
lana Faizul Hasan of Saharanpur, and Maulavi Rashid Ahmad of 
Gangoh, and he is the author of three popular works entitled the 
Ghizd-t-Ruh, Ziy&’ul Qulub, and Tufaful ‘U$hsh&q. ZQ Mention may 
also be made of a Jaunput* scholar and reformer, Maulavi Karamat 
‘All (d. 1873), who lived for the greater part of his life in Bengal 
and was the author of several works, including Persian translations 
of the Arabic works, Sham&’l-Tirmxzi and the Mishk&t aUMamblh . 

Persian lexicography had continued to attract Indian scholars 
from the days of Sikandar Lodi onwards, and a number of lexicons, 
such as the Farhang-i-Rashidi and Farhang-i~Jah&ngiri, became 
well-known in India and Iran. The old tradition was fully main¬ 
tained during the nineteenth century and several works of conspi¬ 
cuous merit were produced. Of these the best-known is the Gha- 
yas al-Lugh&t by Muhammad Ghayasuddln of Raxnpur, compiled 
in 1242 H. (=1826-7 A.D.), but the Burhan-i-Qati f , to which we have 
referred above, the BahGr.i-‘Ajam by Munshi Tek Chand “Bahfir’, 

213 





THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

the Siraj al-Lughat by Sirajuddln ‘Ali Khan “Arzu”, the Karim al - 
Lughdt by Munshi Karimuddln, and the Lughat-i-Kishori, named 
after Munshi Newal Kishore and compiled by Maulavi Tasadduq 
Hussain, have also been quite popular. 

XV. URDU- 

• 

The origin of the literary language, now known as Urdu, in the 
eighteenth century, from the local dialect of Delhi has been des¬ 
cribed in the Eighth Volume. “Urdu poetry, up to the fourth 
quarter of the 19th century, was just a reflex of Persian poetry. 
Nothing in. it but a few common woitts, inflexions, postpositions 
and verbs were Hindi. The Urdu poets thought and wrote in terms 
of Persian poetry; the references were to things and events and 
ideas of Persia and Arabia; they use names of all Persian flowers, 
all the little streams of Persia, and its towns and provinces and its 
hills and mountains, but they never mention an Indian flower or an 
Indian river or mountain or town, much less an Indian hero or he¬ 
roine. It was an absolute and deliberate shutting of their eyes and 
ears and mind to all the great things of their own country, the soil 
of which, according to a great Urdu poet, was napak or impure.” 30 

Muhammad Nazir of Agra (1740-1830) was a remarkable Urdu 
poet, who composed his poems not on the conventional Sufi or Per¬ 
sian themes; nor on love treated in the conventional way of Persian 
poetry, but on all sorts of subjects relating to Indian life in a racy 
colloquial language, not too much Persianized, which is also the 
language of the Hindus. He treated Hindu themes, like Krishna’s 
childhood, and his Banjara-nama, a poem on the transitoriness of 
things, and his Admi-mma on ‘Man’, essentially great in his dig¬ 
nity, are great.poems. 

Among other 19th century Urdu poets may be mentioned Haidar 
‘All Atish (d. 1846), Imam Baksh Nasikh (d. 1836), Salamat ‘All 
Dablr (1803-1875), and Babar ‘All Anis (1802-1874). Many of them 
were prolific waiters, the last-named producing nearly a hundred- 
thousand lines. 

Lakhnau and Rampur became great centres of Urdu literature in 
the nineteenth century. Among the great poets of the pre-modem 
period may be mentioned Muhammad Ibrahim Zauq (1789:1894), 
Asaduilah Khan Ghalib (1806-1869), Muhammad Mu’min Khan 
Mu’min (1800-1850), Amir Ahmad Minal (1828-1900), and Nawfib 
Mirzi Khan D&gh (1831-1905). Gh5lib, the most eminent among 
tbwe. was a Sufi and a mystic who wrote in both Persian and Urdu 
atid inaugurated literary history and criticism through his letters. 
Be is generally regarded as the greatest poet of Urdu before the 
modem age because of his human sympathies and his Sufi feel for 


214 


LITERATURE 


the ultimate Reality. Zauq was famous for his Qasid&s, and he was 
only a little less eminent than Ghalib. 

^The Aligarh Movement, inaugurated by Sir Syed Ahmad, which 
will be discussed in detail in Ch. VIII gave rise to the Modern 
Urdu literature at the beginning of the fourth quarter of the 10th 
century. Sir Syed’s great contribution to this literature was his 
letters and his historical work Asaru-s-Sanadia. The Aligarh Move¬ 
ment made the Indian Muslims more and more conscious of their 
Islamic rather than Indian heritage, and instilled in them the ideal 
of pan-Islamism. All this was reflected in the modern Urdu litera¬ 
ture. A number of Muslim Urdu prose-writers of eminence—his¬ 
torians and essayists—came to the front. Among them may be men¬ 
tioned Maulavi Zakaullah, Shibli Nu‘mam (historian and essayist) 
Muhammad Husain Azad, Maulavi Nazir Ahmad (novelist), and 
above all. Altaf Hosain Panipati, known as Hali or the Modern One 
(1837-1914), the great poet of this Muslim revival and the innovator 
of the modern spirit in Urdu poetry. These writers are all marked 
by a human spirit. Nazir Ahmad’s sketches of Delhi Muslim life 
in his novels are delightful and HSli wrote with a breadth of vision 
and sympathy which did not exclude the Hindus. 

There were several eminent Hindu writers of Urdu. The most 
important among them is Ratannath Sarshar whose book, 

Fis&na-e-Azdd, gives a wonderfully vivid and realistic sketch of the 
social life of Lakhnau. 

Muslim Urdu writers wrote historical novels, in imitation of 
those of Sir Walter Scott. The best known are two novels of Mau¬ 
lavi ‘Abdul Halim Sharar v namely Azlz-o-Warjina (Virginia), which 
is a tale of the crusades, and Mansur-o-Mohand, which has, the 
conquests of Sultan Muhmud of Ghazni in Gujarat as its back¬ 
ground. 

An outstanding Hindu poet of Urdu was Brij Nar&in Chakbast 
(1882-1926), who was a Kashmiri Brahman. His poems are full 
of the spirit of nationalism, and his diction is remarkably simple and 
pure. 

The present age of Urdu is dominated by the spirit of Sir Mu¬ 
hammad Iqbal (1873-1938) whose works will be discussed in the next 
volume. 

\ 

XVI. INDO-ANGUAN LITERATURE. 

Indo-Anglian literature is a significant and fruitful by-product 
of the Western impact on Indian culture. The East inspired men 
like William Jones, Monier Williams, Max Miiller, Edwin Arnold, 


215 



TOE BRITISH PARAMOTJNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 

and Anthony Hope, and the result was a very interesting and still 
growing body of Anglo-Indian literature. Likewise, the West and 
its literature exerted no mean influence on the educated Indiftos of 
the nineteenth century, and some of them successfully braved the 
dangers of rttempting creative literature in a foreign medium; and 
there resulted the singular phenomenon of ‘Indo-Anglian literature’, 
in other words, Indians’ writing in English. 

Reference has been made above, in Chapter II, to the begin¬ 
nings of English education. Having got the “blessings” of English 
education, the educated Indians were for a time flushed with excite¬ 
ment and habitually conversed and wrote in English. While “Babu” 
and “butler” English came for ridicule, there was, on the other hand, 
the amazing phenomenon of hundreds and thousands of Indians 
wielding this most difficult of alien languages with vigour, self- 
confidence and uncanny efficiency. Indian lawyers, judges and ad¬ 
ministrators, journalists, professors and publicists, soon fouhd them¬ 
selves reasonably at home in English, and thereby created conditions 
favourable to the birth and growth of authentic Indo-Anglian lite¬ 
rature. 

Rammohan Roy was hirnself an effective writer of English prose, 
as may be seen from his pamphlets and philosophical essays, publish¬ 
ed over century ago. Kasi-prasad Ghose’s 31 The Shair and Other 
Poems was published in 1831. Henry Derozio 32 was a more genuine 
poet, and when he died at a young age in 1831, he left behind him a 
creditable body of verses in English, including the narrative poem, 
The Fakir of Jungheera. But, of course, Indo-Anglian poetry be¬ 
gins properly with Michael Madhu-sudan Dutt, Aru Dutt, Toru Dutt, 
and Romesh Chunder Dutt. Michael Madhu-sudan 33 belongs more to 
Bengali than to Indo-Anglian literature, though his Captive Ladie 
is a brisk narrative poem on Prithvlraj and Samyukta. Aru Dutt 
and Toru Dutt were a marvellous pair of sisters who died, in 1874, 
at the ages of twenty and twenty-one respectively. Both were poe¬ 
tesses of rare promise and no mean achievement, and both of them 
were among the winged fairies of song. Their English renderings 
of French lyrics of the Romantic school came out in 1876 with the 
title A Sheaf Gleaned in French Fields. The pieces were so felici¬ 
tous and moving that Edmund Gosse thought that “if modern French 
literature were entirely lost, it might not be found impossible to re¬ 
construct a great number of poems from this Indian version.” Toru 
Dutt's Ancient Ballads and Legends of Hindustan appeared posthu¬ 
mously in 1882, and more than ever proved Toru’s unique powers of 
poetic utterance in a foreign medium. More than eighty years have 


216 


LITERATURE 


passed since Tom's poems were first given to the world—since the 
agitated girl made the amazing confession: 

From my lips broke a cry. 

Such as anguish may wring; 

Sing—said God in reply, 

Chant, poor little thing. 

But the fragrance of Toru's poems is not lost yet, nor will it ever be. 
“This child of the green valley of the Granges" (in Mr. H. A. L. 
Fisher's words) is likely to retain her present place “in the great 
fellowship of English poets." Romesh Chunder Butt had a distin¬ 
guished career as a member of the Indian Civil Service, and publish¬ 
ed valuable treatises on the economic history of India. But his 
novel, The Lake of Palms, and his R&mdyana and Mahdbhdrata in 
English Verse secure him a permanent place in Indo-Anglian litera¬ 
ture. The latter work has been found rightly worthy of inclusion 
in the ‘Everyman's Library 4 of the World's Best Books. 

The brothers, Manmohan and Aurobindo Ghose, started writing 
English poetry towards the close of the nineteenth century. Man¬ 
mohan published, along with Laurence Binyon and others, a 
volume of poems entitled Primavera in 1890. After his return to 
India, he published Love Songs and Elegies and Songs of Love and 
Death. Manmohan was undoubtedly a bom poet with an utterance 
all his own. His mature poetry is full of intimate and memorable 
touches, and there is generally a colouring of pensive sadness that 
becomes more and more pronounced in his later poems. Man- 
mohan's poems sound English to the core, and it is not surprising, 
therefore, that Mr. George Sampson describes him as “the most re¬ 
markable of the Indian poets who wrote in English." Manmohan’s 
younger brother, Aurobindo Ghose, whose career will be discussed 
in the next volume, is, without question, the greatest figure in Indo- 
Anglian literature and one of the major literary figures of the 
century. 

Among other early Indo-Anglian poets, Behramji Malabari and 
Ram Sarnia were good versifiers, while Nagesh Visva-nath Pai 
was an accomplished master of blank verse. Pai's Angel of Misfor¬ 
tune is one of the best narrative romances in Indo-Anglian literature. 

In fiction and drama, too, some works of fiction appeared in the 
nineteenth century, and many of Bankim-chandra Chatterji’s 
novels were issued also in English. Raj am Iyer, author of Kama - 
lamhal in Tamil, also wrote an English novel by name Vdsudeva 
gdstri . Madhaviah’s Thillai Govindan and Ramakrishija’s Dive for 
Death were other early works of fiction. Cornelia Sorabji’s stories 
and Jogendra Singh’s novels were also striking in their presentation. 


217 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTRY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

XVII. SCRIPTS IN INDIA OF THE PRESENT DAY. 

Three distinct types of script are in use to write the various 
Indian languages. We have in the first instance the national Indian 
system of writing which is of Indian origin and which goes back to 
the Brahma script of the third and fourth centuries B.C. and earlier. 
This Brahml script was a single pan-Indian script in the centuries be¬ 
fore and immediately after Christ. Then, as the country split up 
into different States, this script began to change in the different areas. 
After about 10 centuries of such continued change in different parts 
of India, it gave rise to various present-day alphabets of Indian origin 
which are current in the country. These ranged themselves into five 
groups—three of which belonged to North India and two to South 
India. In North India we have— 

(i) The North-Western group, to which belong the Sarada script, 
of Kashmir and a number of allied systems of writing Which were 
current in the various Western Himalayan States, besides Gurmukhi 
in which Panjabi is written and printed by the Sikhs, and the Landa 
or the cursive script in which the businessmen of Sindh keep their 
accounts and write letters. 

(ii) The Nagarl script, which was originally the script of Wes¬ 
tern U. P. and Rajasthan-Gujarat, was adopted later by the 
Brahmanas of Maharashtra (who called it B&\abodha or ‘Script for the 
use of children’, as opposed to the native script called Modi , of south 
Indian affinites, in which Marathi used to be written). The modern 
NSgari or Devanagari script originated within this group. At one 
time the Nagarl was confined to Gujarat, Rajasthan and Western U.P., 
but now it has spread, with the spread of Hindi, throughout the 
greater part of Northern India. It is really the script from which 
Western Hindi as well as the Rajasth&ni and Gujarati speeches were 
bom. 

(iii) The Eastern Group of North Indian scripts within which 
come the Newari of Nepal, Maithili, Bengali-Assamese and OriyS. 
This script was current in its oldest form in Eastern U.P., Bihar, 
Nepal, Orissa, Bengal and Assam. 

In addition to the above three North-Indian groups of scripts, we 
have in South India— 

(iv) The Telugu-Kannada group, and 

0 

(v) The Grantha-Tamil-Malayalam group. 

The Sinhalese of Ceylon is an evolved form of the Grantha from 
the Tamil country. 


218 



UTERATURK 


The Mirada script was confined to Kashmir, and it has never been 
put in type. It is a script which is dying out; only a handful of Brfih- 
maijas in Kashmir cultivate it to write Sanskrit, as well as their own 
language, Kashmiri. The Nagari script is replacing it for Sanskrit, 
and the Perso-Arabic script is now used to write Kashmiri, as over 
90% of the Kashmiri people are Muslim. 

The Gurmukhi is confined to the Sikhs in the Panjab (who are 
now passionate supporters of this script, and would not think of writ¬ 
ing Panjabi in the Nagari); and in its origin, Gurmukhi belongs to 
the same group as Kashmiri. The Landa script is current among a 
bandful of business people, and it has no importance, being only a 
written script. 


The Nagari is now the most important of the Indian alphabets. 
It is the alphabet of Hindi, and it claims the homage of 140 to 150 
millions of people using Hindi, and of over 25 millions using Max$thi; 
besides, most Gujarati speakers (over 12 millions) would be able to 
read it. If took its present form near about 1000 years ago, and it is 
just a sister-script to &&rad&, Bengali and the South Indian scripts. It 
has acquired, however, a fresh prestige during British tiroes when it 
gradually came to be accepted all over India as the pan-Indian script 
in printing Sanskrit. That was a direct result of the centralizing ten¬ 
dencies of the British rule in India. Sanskrit had no single script for 
the whole of India, and it was written in the different provincial 
scripts along with the local languages. But with the establishment 
of the Indian Universities, and through a common endeavour in Sans¬ 
krit studies in which the printing press became an important ally, the 
need for a common script for Sanskrit for use in the whole of India 
was supplied by Nagari, with the full support of a number of Euro¬ 
pean Sanskritists also. The Nagari script also came to acquire a new 
sobriquet, the Deva-ndgar f or “the Divine Nlgari”, because Sanskrit 
as the language of the Gods came largely to be printed in it. 

The Bengali-Assamese script is virtually one script—only Assa¬ 
mese differs from Bengali in one letter, and has an extra letter for the 
sound of to or w. This script is very much like Mait h ili in which the 
Maithili speech is written, and in which Maithili scholars (parti¬ 
cularly of the older generation) still write Sanskrit Nftgatf is now 
replacing Maithili in the domain of Maithili printing, although a 
few Maithili books were printed with Maithili type. But there is no 
enthusiasm about the continuance of the Maithili script—the forces of 
Nfigari are too strong. The Newiri Script of Nepal in which the 
Tibeto-Burmap Newfiri language as well as Sanskrit used to be written 
in the country of Nepal is in a similar state. It was imnm put Ia 
type, and now Niger! is taking its fd&oe. 

219 





THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTC Y AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 

Oriya In its origin is related to Bengali-Assamese, Newari and 
Maithili, but it developed some peculiar shapes from the 15 th cen¬ 
tury onwards. It is used to write and print both Oriya and Sanskrit 
in Orissa, 

With regard to the South Indian scripts, Kannada and Telugu 
are almost the same script with certain minor differences in the 
.shapes of the letters; and there has been some talk about having one 
common script for the two languages. 

The Grantha script is derived from the old script of the Pallavas 
as it was current about 650 A.D., and Sanskrit is written and printed 
in the Tamil country in the Grantha script. The Malayalam is only 
a provincial form of the Grantha; and the Tamil script is only an 
abridged form of the same Grantha. 

We have thus in India the following scripts of native Indian 
origin which are living ones:—Nfigarf, Gurmukhi, Bengali-Assamese, 
OriyS, Telugu, Kannada,* Tamil, Grantha and Malayalam, besides 
Gujarati, which is but a cursive or abbreviated form of N&garL 

The Persian or rather the Perso-Arabic script came to India 
with the Persian language which was introduced by the Persian- 
using Muslim Turk! conquerors, and became established in the 
country from the 13th century. Some centuries later, the Hindi 
language in its Deccan! form began to be written in this script; and 
gradually in the 18th century when Urdu had evolved in Delhi city, 
a slightly modified and enlarged Persian script became established for 
Urdu. During the 4th quarter of the 19th century, Sindhi, in the 
hands of the Hindu administrative officers in the province also adopt¬ 
ed an elaborate form of the Persian script. Kashmiri was the third 
Indian language to adopt this Perso-Arabic script. 

There are some inherent difficulties in employing any form of 
the Perso-Arabic script for languages other than a Semitic speech 
like the Arabic, and it is not at all a suitable medium to write an 
Indian language. For instance, its vowel sounds are not properly 
indicated and they are frequently left out, and the reader will be 
able to guess the proper pronunciation of the written word only 
from his knowledge of the language and the context. A single 
letter for y, for instance, stands for the valdbs of the consonant y, 
and of the vowels long e and long i and the diphthong ai. Similarly, 
the letter for w stands for long o, long u and the diphthong au, be¬ 
sides the consonant w or v. 

Now we have the Roman script, which was brought to India by 
the Europeans: first, by the Portuguese, then by the English, the 
Dutch and the French. Some Indian languages are now written in 
the Roman script—for example, the Konkani speech of the coastal 
areas of Maharashtra with its centre at Goa, and a number of pri- 


220 



tITERATURE 


mitive languages like Santali, Khasi, the Naga dialects etc. The 
use of the Roman script for all-India languages is advocated by a 
number of linguistic and other scholars in India, and the problem of 
script has now to some extent taken the form of a selection between 
the Nagari and the Roman. 


1. The Cultural Heritage of India, Second Edition, (1958), Vol. I, pp. 53-4. 

2. Ibid, 66. 

3. Ibid, 66-7. 

4. Cf. R. C. Majumdar, History of the Freedom Movement in India , Yol. I, pp. 474- 
5; m. 52, 544-5. 

5. This section is based on an article by Dr. Raghavan in the Madras University 
Journal, Centenary Number (1957), pp. 175-204. Unless otherwise stated, the 
quotations are also from the same article. 

6. ABOR1, XXXn, 322. 

7. The account of the Bengali periodicals is based on B. N. Banerji’s B&mgVt 
S&mayik Patra. 

7a. For details, cf. Ch. VT, Section I. 

8. Quoted from an unpublished article of Dr. S.K. Chatierji. 

8a. ‘Tagore* is the anglicised form of ‘Thakur*. 

*9. See above, Vol. IX, pp. 917, 922, 933. 

9a. This is the correct form for the popular ‘Keshab* used elsewhere. 

10. Contemporary Indian Literature, published by Sahitya Akademi, New Delhi, 
Second Edition, (1959), p. 173. 

11. Ibid. 

12. Ibid. 

13. P. Sen, Modem Oriya Literature, p. 62. 

14. Ibid, p. 51. 

35. Ibid, pp. 57-8. 

15a. Cf. J.AJS., Vol. 1,1959, No. 3 p. 236. 

16. Diwan Bahadur K. S. Ramaswami Sastri, The Indian P.E.N., July, 1942. 

16a. Cf. Vol. IX, pp. 37-41, 996-8. 

17. The Malayalam is spoken today by over 14 millions of people. The figure, 
ten millions, given in this series, VoL VI, p. 529, should be corrected accord¬ 
ingly. 

18. For a brief sketch of his life, see Zubaid Ahmad, India*# Contribution to Arabic 
Literature , p. 161. 

19. The seven “Suspended Poems** of pre-Islamic Arabia. 

20. Stories of a dramatic type woven around a fictitious hero, very talented, but 
at the same time highly unscrupulous. 

21. See Td f rikh al-Nawa’it by Aziz Jang of Hyderabad. They were originally sailors. 

22. Died in 1827. He is the author of a work on Arabic Grammar (cd-Risala ft al- 
Nahw ). 

23. See Zubaid Ahmad, p. 383. 

24. He was a contemporary of another great scholar, Maulani 'Abd*ul *Ali d 
Farangi Mahal who, on account of his encyclopaedic learning, was known as 
Bahr al THum (the ocean of sciences). He died hi 1818. 

25. See Zubaid Ahmad, pp. 114, 186. 

26. That Gh&lib was proud of his Persian poetry and considered it to be of much 
more value than nis Urdu poetry, is clear from one of his verses which runs 
as follows:— 

Farsi bin ta ba-Mni naqshhd’i rang rang, 

Buqzur az majm&ai-Urdu ki birang-i-man ast 

(“See my Persian verses that thou mayst behold multi-coloured pictures, 
Pass by the collection of my Urdu poetry which is without my (true) colour"). 

27. The first collection was made by GhaUb's pupils in his lifetime under the 
title of Urdu-i~Mu‘dH&. 

28. Ghalib addresses him as “Mirza** Tufta in his letters, a tide of which, accord¬ 
ing to Muhammad Husain Azid. he was very proud. 

29. See Maui-i-Kauthar, pp. 220 ft. 

30. An unpublished article of Dr. S. K. Chatter) i, on which this section is based. 

31. Cf. Ch. XH (L). 

32. See above, pp. 38-9. 

S3. See above, p. 172. 


221 






CHAPTER VI(XLIV) 

THE PRESS 

I. GROWTH OF INDIAN PRESS UP TO 1857 

At the time when the British rule was established in India the 
Press did not occupy any important place in the development of po¬ 
litical ideas even in England Nor did journalism, associated with 
politics, attain a high standard. Even The Times, in 1795, supported 
the Government in return for a pension of £600. No wonder, then, 
that the less important journals were “worthless rags, venal, mak¬ 
ing the most of their nuisance value.” Even at the beginning of 
the nineteenth century journalism was not regarded as a very res¬ 
pectable profession in Britain. 1 

It is therefore easy to understand both the nature of early pe¬ 
riodical Press in India and the Government’s reaction to it. The 
journalism in India was started by European adventurers, who could 
not possibly be imbued with any high ideal or standard of honesty 
and efficiency. Their principal object seems to have been to amuse 
the readers, and more often than not, it was achieved by publica¬ 
tion of scandals and scurrilous personal attacks against men of high 
position, and abuses of Government, which were likely to be appre¬ 
ciated by all save the handful of officials. 

The East India Company looked upon the Indian territories as 
its personal and private property, and all Englishmen in India who 
were not its servants were regarded by it as ‘interlopers and 
trespassers’. The latter fully requited this sentiment. Unofficial Eng¬ 
lishmen in India felt no loyalty or allegiance to the Company, and 
were prone to find fault with the monopolist corporation. They 
therefore vigorously criticised the Government and the officials, and 
naturally enjoyed the abuses hurled at them in the periodical Press. 
There was thus almost a tug of war between the officials who 
not only disliked the newspaper men, but felt supreme contempt 
for them, and fhe latter who made it a point to annoy the Govern¬ 
ment and their servants, not only by fair criticism of their policy 
and action, but even occasionally descending to an attack on the 
domestic affairs and private morals of officials, both high and low. 
This is fully illustrated by the early history of periodicals in India 
which were all written in English and edited by Englishmen. In 
1767 an attempt was made by Bolts to start a newspaper, but it was 

222 





nipped in the bud as the Government deported the author of the 
enterprise. In 1780 James Augustus Hicky, with the previous ap¬ 
proval of the Government, started a weekly paper called Bengal 
Gazette or Calcutta General Advertiser, which described itself as 
“A Weekly Political and Commercial Paper Open to all Parties, but 
influenced by None”. 2 It consisted of only two sheets, about 
twelve inches by eight, of which much space was occupied by ad¬ 
vertisements. Its distinctive feature was the comments on the pri¬ 
vate affairs of individuals which caused considerable annoyance 
to many and great commotion and excitement in the small Anglo- 
Indian community. For he spared none and “missionaries, officials, 
the Chief Justice, the Governor-General and his wife were all in 
turn attacked”. The Government withdrew the right to circulate 
the paper through the channel of the General Post Office. Hicky 
denounced the Government action as the “strongest proof of arbi¬ 
trary power and influence that can be given”, and bitterly attacked 
both Warren Hastings, the Governor-General, and Sir Elijah Impey, 
the Chief Justice. It is true that Hicky’s paper published scurrilous 
attacks on individuals, mostly written by others, but he showed a 
rare courage in fighting the Government, almost single-handed, for 
defending the liberty of the Press, and in this connection wrote some 
words which deserve a place in the history of the Indian Press: 
“Mr. Hicky considers the Liberty of the Press to be essential to the 
very existence of an Englishman, and a free G—t. The subject 
should have full liberty to declare his principles, and opinions, and 
every act which tends to coerce that liberty is tyrannical and in¬ 
jurious to the COMMUNITY”. 3 More than forty years were to 
pass before India again heard a similar stentorian voice this time 
of an Indian—in defence of the liberty of the Press. In 1782 a mis¬ 
sionary and the Governor-General himself brought libel cases 
against Hicky. Hicky was convicted and sent to prison and his paper 
was discontinued. Six more papers were .started in Calcutta be¬ 
tween 1780 and 1793, and the editor of one of these was de¬ 
ported by Sir John Shore. Among them India Gazette (1780), Cal¬ 
cutta Gazette (1784), and HuYkaru (or Bircarrah) t particularly 
the last-named one, attained some distinction. 

In Madras, the weekly Madras Courier , started in 1785, enjoyed 
official favour. Two other papers followed in 1795. The editor of 
one of them, India Herald, was deported for having made libellous 
attacks on the Government and the Prince of Wales, while the edi- 
, tor. of the other, the Weekly Madras Gazette, “was prohibited from 
publishing copies of the General Orders of the Government until 
they had been submitted for the inspection of the Military Secre¬ 
tary*'. Four years later, on 29 June; 1799, a general order was 

223 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


issued by the Madras Government requiring all the newspapers to be 
submitted to the inspection of the Government before their publi¬ 
cation, 

In Bombay, the first paper, the weekly Bombay Herald, appeared 
in 1780. Then came Bombay Courier in 1790 and the Bombay 
Gazette in 1791. The last-named incurred official wrath for a criti¬ 
cism of the police administration, and the editor was ordered to sub¬ 
mit every issue for censorship before publication. He soon regained 
official favour, and in 1792 his paper was amalgamated with the 
Bombay Herald 4 

Although these papers occasionally criticised the actions of the 
Government, they were primarily intended for Englishmen in India, 
and were, generally speaking, of non-political character. They pub¬ 
lished orders of the Government and Indian news, letters to the 
Editor, personal news, notes on fashion, extracts from papers publish¬ 
ed in U. K., Parliamentary reports, news-letters, and reports from 
various parts of Europe, etc. Editorials were written mostly on 
political topics and military affairs which would interest only an 
Englishman. . 


Periodicals in vernacular did not appear before A.D. 1818. The 
first Bengali monthly, Digdariana (Indicator of Ways), star¬ 
ted under the editorship of J. C. Marshtnan in April, 1818, had a 
brief existence. But the weekly, Sarmchdra-darpa^a (Mirror of News), 
under the same editorship, the first issue of which was published on 
May 23,1818, had a very long and useful, though somewhat chequer¬ 
ed career. Although J. C. Marshman, a missionary of Serampore, 
was its nominal editor, it was really conducted by Bengali Pandits- 
From the old files of the paper, which are still available, it appears 


to have disseminated liberal views and useful information on a varie¬ 
ty of topics of local interest. 4 * Both these papers were published 
from Serampore, About the same time a weekly paper, B&hg&l Gejefi 
(Weekly Bengal Gazette) was published in Calcutta. Neither the 
name of the editor, nor the date of its first publication is definitely 
known. Most probably it was edited by Hara-chandra Ray, a mem¬ 
ber of the AtmSya SabM founded by Rammohan Roy, and was first 
issued on 15 May, 1818. If so, it was the first vernacular newspaper 
in Bengal. 4 * No file of this paper is, however, available and it did 
not continue for more than a year. On 4 December, 1821, appeared 
the weekly Samb&da-Kawnud* (Moon of Intelligence), a “newspaper 
conducted exclusively by natives in the native language”. Raja 
Rammohan Roy was the heart-and soul of the paper, though there 
was a nominal editor. As could be expected, the views of the paper 
were advanced and liberal. But Rammohan’s religious and soda! 


224 







THE PRESS 


reforms, particularly his strong advocacy of the abolition of Sati, m 
weaned away a large number of supporters, and a rival paper, Samd- 
ch&ra-Chandrika (Moonlight of News), was started on 5 March, 1822, 
as the organ of the orthodox community. It was at first a weekly, 
but became a bi-weekly in 1829. The Sambdda-kaumudi had to be 
closed down in 1822 by Rammohan, though it was subsequently re¬ 
vived by others and became a bi-weekly in 1830. 6 Rammohan also 
started the first weekly journal in Persian, Mirat-ul-Akhb&r (Mirror 
of News), in Calcutta in April, 1822. The Jam-i-Jahan Numa was 
started by an English mercantile firm in Calcutta as an Urdu weekly 
on 28 March, 1822, but it soon became bilingual (Persian and Urdu). 
The Bahga-duta (Bengal Herald), a weekly in four languages (English, 
Bengali, Persian and Hindi), was started under the auspices of Ram¬ 
mohan Roy, Dwaraka-nath Tagore and some other distinguished 
citizens of Calcutta of liberal ideas, but it was edited by R. Mont¬ 
gomery Martin. The Gujarati Bombay Samdch&r was started 
in 1822 and is still in existence. Several Urdu papers were published 
in Delhi such as Syed-ul-Akhb&r in 1837, Delhi Akhbdr in 1838, and 
a few others, shortly afterwards. An important English journal, 
the Bombay Times , which later became the Times of India , was found¬ 
ed, or rather grew out of the Bombay Courier , in 1838. 

* 

By 1839 Calcutta had 26 European newspapers, including 6 dai¬ 
lies, and 9 Indian newspapers; Bombay had 10 European and 4 Indian 
journals; Madras had 9 European journals, and Ludhiana, Delhi, 
Agra and Serampore, each had one newspaper. 6 The progress 
of Indian journalism was maintained during the forties and fifties, 
the most important addition being the Hindoo Patriot of Calcutta, 
edited, by Haris-chandra Mukherji. It was issued in 1853 under 
the editorship of three brothers of a Ghosh family in Calcutta, but 
after three or four months the entire task of editing the paper fell 
upon Haris-chandra Mukherji, one of the greatest Indian editors 
of the 19th century, of whom more will be said hereafter. 7 The ob¬ 
jects with which this paper was founded are described as follows: 

“A few disinterested—in as far as their pockets are concerned— 
individuals were some time past thinking of establishing a weekly 
newspaper in English, having for its object a fair and manly ad¬ 
vocacy of the interests of their country and an impartial exposition 
of the social and political evils with which she is now afflicted... 

“The discussions connected with the East India Company's 
Charter, which have already commenced, must command an all- 
absorbing interest in the hearts of all true friends of India. An organ 
of the people, conducted by natives, on catholic and enlightened 
principles, must then be greatly needed, and without presuming to 

225 


B.P.I.R—15 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

set up as the only organ of the hundred millions whose destinies are 
bound up with the welfare of this land, the Hindoo Patriot may be 
allowed to take its stand as a champion, however insignificant, of 
the neglected rights of the country and a zealous and unflinching 
advocate for constitutional reform.” 8 

A number of Vernacular papers was also added. Rast Goftar t 
a Gujarati fortnightly, was published in Bombay in 1851 under the 
editorship of Dadabhai Naoroji. Next year, Akhbar-o-Soudigar was 
founded as a Gujarati tri-weekly by Dadabhai Kavasji. 

Among the English papers, current in 1851, may be mentioned, 
the Friend of India, Hurkaru, Englishman, Bombay Times, Madras 
United Services Gazette , Delhi Gazette, Citizen, Ac/ra Messenger , 
Moffussilite, Lahore Chronicle, Eastern Star, Madras Spectator and 
Weekly Journal. 

From the very beginning the Vernacular Press distinguished 
itself by its high ideals of disseminating useful knowledge and infor¬ 
mation and discussing all problems of public interest with a view to 
instructing the people. The high sense of editorial duty and respon¬ 
sibility was expressed as follows, as far back as 1822, by Raja Ram- 
mohan Roy in the prospectus of the Mirdt-ul-Akhbfir: “My only 
object is that I may lay before the public such articles of intelligence 
as may increase their experience, and tend to their social improve¬ 
ment; and that to that extent of my abilities I may indicate to the 
rulers a knowledge of the real situation of their subjects and make 
the subjects acquainted with the established laws and customs of 
their rulers: that the rulers may the more readily find an opportunity 
of granting relief to the people; and the people may be put in pos¬ 
session of the means of obtaining protection and redress from their 
rulers.” 9 This ideal could not be realized by everyone, but in any 
case the Vernacular Press offered a refreshing contrast to the Eng¬ 
lish Press which catered only to a limited group—British residents 
in India—, was flippant in tone, and had amusement and entertain¬ 
ment rather than instruction as its primary object. The latter 
neither represented nor defended the interests of the Indians. 

The English Press was soon divided into two categories. In 
addition to papers owned and edited by Englishmen, there were a 
few, written in English but owned and edited by Indians. As the 
latter had more in common with the Vernacular Press than the 
former, there gradually grew a sharp distinction between what may 
be called the Indian (both English and Vernacular) and Anglo- 
Indian (English) Press. 

For obvious reasons it was the Anglo-Indian Press that exer¬ 
cised the real power. They already * exhibited the anti-Indian 


226 


THE PRESS 


spirit which was to be their hall-mark throughout the nineteenth 
century. When Bentinck employed Indians in responsible offices 
under the Company, *he was attacked by the Press of India as no 
Governor-General has since been attacked.’ 10 Yet this Anglo- 
Indian Press claimed to voice the public opinion of India. Macaulay 
truly described the state of things in the following words: “That 
public opinion means the opinion of five hundred persons who have 
no interest, feeling, or taste in common with the fifty millions among 
whom they live; that the love of liberty means the strong objection 
which the five hundred feel to every measure which can prevent 
them from acting as they choose towards the fifty millions.” 11 John 
Stuart Mill also obse* ;ed in his evidence before the Lords’ Com¬ 
mittee in 1852: . .The English newspaper Press in India is the 

organ only of the English society, and chiefly that part of it uncon¬ 
nected with the Government. It has little to do with the Natives 
and with the great interests of India.” 12 

It is difficult to estimate the influence of the Press, either for 
good or for evil, upon the Indians. According to one view it could 
not have been very great during the first half of the nineteenth 
century. For, the circulation of the papers was very small and only 
an infinitesimal proportion of Indians had ever any access to them. 
A fairly reliable estimate of the circulation of Indian newspapers 
about the middle of the nineteenth century shows “that eight Ben¬ 
gali newspapers of Calcutta between them had not 1,300 subscribers; 
that the interior of the country took less than 200 copies; that in 
January 1837 only 151 copies were sent by post out of Calcutta, and 
195 in a month in 1843; that all the English papers of Calcutta, with 
an aggregate circulation of nearly 4,000, had between them only 125 
Indian subscribers.” 13 The writer who worked out these figures 
expressed the view (in 1843) that “a newspaper was not reckoned 
among the wants of the people.” An Indian contemporary, how¬ 
ever, disagreed and said that “educated Indians were beginning to 
want a newspaper.” He pointed out that there were fifty vernacu¬ 
lar presses in*Bengal town and country, printing periodical journals 
and books. 14 

The evidence of Reverend James Long, partly quoted above, 15 
throws very interesting light on the importance of the Vernacular 
Press. He says that the number of printed Bengali books increased 
from 300,000 copies in 1853 to double that number in 1857, and that 
some Bengali newspapers were circulated widely as far as the Panjab. 
In view of Long’s intimate knowledge of the subject, his view should 
command great confidence. 


227 


THE'BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

But whatever we might think of this, the growth of Indian 
Press caused alarm in the minds of many Englishmen. Dundas, 
the President of the Board of Control, expressed the fear, as far back 
as 1811, that “the very government would be shaken to its founda¬ 
tions if unlicensed publications were allowed to circulate over the 
continent of Hindustan.” 16 Even British officials like Munro and 
Elphinstone, who were by no means lacking in sympathy for Indian 
aspirations, expressed grave apprehensions that the sovereignty of 
England over India would be jeopardized by a free and unrestricted 
Press in India. In an elaborate minute, dated 12 April, 1822, 
Munro discussed the question, and was particularly nervous that a 
free Press might provoke a spirit of independence in the army. 17 
“A free press and the dominion of strangers,” said he, “are things, 
which are incompatible and which cannot long exist together; for 
what is the first duty of a free press? It is to deliver the country 
from a foreign yoke and to sacrifice to this one great object every 
measure and consideration.” 18 Lord Elphinstone, Governor of 
Bombay, also held that unrestricted freedom of the Press was in¬ 
compatible with the form of the Government of India which must 
be despotic for a long time to come. 19 On the other hand, Leicester 
Stanhope published a small brochure in London in 1823 in which 
he entered a vigorous plea in favour of a free Press in India. 20 Cap¬ 
tain Francis Homes, in a book published in London in 1824, argued 
that a free Press was the truest friend of good government, the best 
protection against sedition and revolution, and was particularly 
necessary to India as her people had no other way of bringing their 
grievances to the notice of the Government possessing vast discre¬ 
tionary powers. 21 Even among high British officers in India there 
were advocates of free Press, and the most prominent among them 
was Sir Charles Metcalfe to whom reference will be made later. 

This tug of war between the two principles of freedom and 
control of the Press also made its influence felt in the Government 
of India’s attitude to the Press. 

II. THE GOVERNMENT AND THE PRESS 

Reference has been made above to the action taken, by the 
Government in Calcutta, Bombay, and Madras against newspapers 
and their editors. But it was not till the very end of the eighteenth 
century that any general policy was adopted towards the Indian 
Press. Some restrictive measures were thought necessary during 
the prolonged war between England and France, particularly as 
Napoleon was believed to have a plan of invading India. To prevent 
the publication of military intelligence which might help the 

228 




THE PRESS 


enemy was the principal object, but the comments of seditious 
nature published in some English newspapers furnished an addition¬ 
al ground. As an extreme instance, reference may be made to the 
observation made in an issue of the Asiatic Mirror of 1798, to the 
effect that the handful of Englishmen in India could be easily killed 
if each Indian merely threw a brickbat at them. The writings of 
this character, though few and far between, gave a handle to Well¬ 
esley who, following the prevalent attitude of his time, was intolerant 
of press criticism and angry with the whole tribe of editors. So he 
was not content merely with the suppressiqn of individual papers, and 
deportation of individual editors, which had so long been the only 
means adopted by the Government to control the Press. Wellesley 
forged a new weapon in 1799 in the shape of Regulations for the 
press which laid down that no newspaper was to be published at all 
until the manuscript or proof-sheets of the whole paper, including 
advertisements, were submitted to and approved by the Govern¬ 
ment. The penalty for violating the Regulations was the deporta¬ 
tion of the editor to Europe. The restrictions were extended by 
Minto even to religious books. 22 

~ The penalty touched only the editors bom in Europe, as they 
alone were in the field at the time. The Europeans born in India, as 
well as natives of India, who gradually took up journalism since 1818, 
were exempt from the operations of the Regulations. This anomaly 
induced the Marquess of Hastings to abolish the pre-censorship and 
draw up a new set of rules in 1818 for the guidance of news¬ 
papers, with a view to prevent the discussion of dangerous or ob¬ 
jectionable topics. These rules did not possess the force of law as 
they were not passed into Regulation in a legal manner. There was, 
therefore, no longer any legal restriction on the Indian Press. 

The action of the Marquess of Hastings was hailed with joy in 
India and the leading officials and merchants of Madras (where the 
system of censorship had been operated with considerable severity) 
decided, in a public meeting, to present an Address to Lord Hastings 
in the name of the European inhabitants of Madras. In reply to 
this Address, which was presented to him in Calcutta, Lord Hastings 
made a remarkable speech in favour of the freedom of the Press. He 
referred to his “habit of regarding the freedom of publication as a 
natural right of my fellow subjects.* 8 In support of it he observed 
that “it is salutary for Supreme Authority, even when its intentions 
are most pure, to look to the control of Public Scrutiny. While con¬ 
scious of rectitude, that authority can lose none of its strength by its 
exposure to general comment. On the contrary, it acquires incal¬ 
culable addition of force.** 23 


229 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

Lord Hastings gave a practical demonstration of his views in 
dealing with the famous James Silk Buckingham, the turbulent 
editor of the Calcutta Journal, which made its first appearance as a 
bi-weekly .paper of eight quarto pages on 2 October, 1818. Bucking¬ 
ham was a Whig and propagated most liberal views of the West 
through his paper which was described as “well conducted/’ 
“independent” and “clever.” As an editor, he said, he conceived his 
duty to be “to admonish Governors of their duties, to warn them 
furiously of their faults, and to tell disagreeable truths.” Of these 
he gave more than ample evidence, and consequently had frequent 
encounters with the authorities. He was warned and admonished, 
and expressed regret, more than once, but always took care to 
point out “that it was the general impression that the press was 
free.” It became almost a regular policy, on the part of the Govern¬ 
ment, to reprimand but not to punish, and with the editor, to regret 
but not to comply. Matters, however, soon headed for a crisis. An 
article in the Calcutta Journal criticised the Bishop for allowing 
Chaplains to leave their local duties in order to perform matrimonial 
ceremonies elsewhere, even during Christmas. The Government 
demanded the name of the author of the article. Buckingham replied 
that he did not know, as the contributor was anonymous, but he 
thought that the “publication might be productive of good.” Lord 
Hastings’ Government immediately informed Buckingham that 
should he persevere in this policy his license to reside in India would 
be annulled and he must quit the country. Buckingham sent a 
spirited reply on 27 July, 1821. The Government decision, he 
said, “would give the friends of the Freedom of the Press consid¬ 
erable pain because it really reduced the freedom of opinion to a 
more perilous and uncertain state than it was under the existence 
of the censorship.” As a matter of fact, the Chief Secretary, 
W. B. Bayley, and Adam, a member of the Council, were both opposed 
to the policy of the Marquess of Hastings, and the Council made 
several attempts to deport Buckingham. Lord Hastings, however, 
overruled his Council, and order for Buckingham’s deportation was 
negatived. 24 Other events soon occurred,—which gave Buckingham 
many opportunities to criticise the Government, ‘for the public good/ 
and Adam to repeat his view of the necessity of deporting Bucking¬ 
ham, also ‘for the public good.’ Unfortunately for Buckingham, 
Adam became the officiating Governor-General on 13 January, 1823, 
after the departure of Lord Hastings. He took a speedy vengeance 
on Buckingham as will be related later. 

Adam and the members of his Council were definitely in favour 
of muzzling the Press. The grounds for these restrictions were 


230 


THE PRESS 


recorded as follows by W. B. Bayley, a member of the Governor- 
General’s Council, in a minute dated October 10, 1822: 

“The stability of the British dominion in India mainly depends 
upon the cheerful obedience and subordination of the officers of the 
army, on the fidelity of the native troops, on the supposed character 
and power of the Government, and upon the opinion which may be 
entertained by a superstitious and unenlightened Native population 
of the motives and tendency of our actions as affecting their inter¬ 
ests. 

“The liberty of the press, however essential to the nature of a 
free state, is not, in my judgment, consistent with the character of 
our institutions in this country, or with the extraordinary nature of 
our dominion in India.” 25 

On October 17, 1822, even before the Marquess of Hastings 
left India, the Government of India wrote to the Court of Directors 
asking for power to exercise a more efficient and decided control 
over the Press. The Court hardly required any such recommenda¬ 
tion. They formulated their views in 1823 in the following words: 

“A free Press is a fit associate and necessary appendage of a 
representative constitution. Wherever a Government emanates 
* from the people, and is responsible to them, the people must neces¬ 
sarily have the privilege of discussing the measures of the Govern¬ 
ment; and whenever the people choose representatives to make laws 
affecting their persons and property, the right of animadverting on 
the mode in which this trust is discharged belongs, of course, to the 
party delegating it. But in no sense of the term can the Govern¬ 
ment of India be called a free, a representative, or a popular Go¬ 
vernment; the people had no voice in its establishment, nor have 
they any control over its acts. 

“The Governments in India exercise a delegated authority, 
derived from the Court of Directors and the Board of Control. The 
Government of India resides in this country (England), and is, of 
course, responsible to the English public, in common with the Go¬ 
vernment of England. It is in this country, therefore, and not in 
India, that its measures ought to be discussed.” 26 

The Court of Directors had already refused to approve of the 
change introduced in 1818; but as the despatch in which they re¬ 
fused to sanction this change did not receive the approval of the 
Board of Control, they could not restrict the freedom of the Press 
granted by the Governments of Bengal and Bombay, and censorship 
continued only in Madras. The Court of Directors then approached 

231 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—D 

the Ministry for passing a new Act of Parliament in order to en¬ 
large the powers of the Indian Governments for checking the abuses 
of the Press. They suggested that the “Local Governments should 
be empowered to grant and withdraw licenses to printing presses 
and to put down any press printing without a license.” But though 
the ministers refused this request, Adam, who was officiating as 
Governor-General after the Marquess of Hastings, practically en¬ 
forced the old rigorous restrictions as far as it lay in his power. He 
deported James Silk Buckingham, the editor of the Calcutta Jour- 
nal, for expressing disapproval of the acceptance by Dr. Bryce, the 
Head Minister of new Scotch Church, of the post of clerk of the 
Stationery under the East India Company. The Journal was sup¬ 
pressed and the Assistant Editor was arrested and put on board a 
ship bound for England. 27 But Adam did not stop here. On 14 March, 
1823, a rigorous Press Ordinance was issued which prescribed that 
no one should publish a newspaper or other periodical without 
having previously obtained a license from the Governor-General in 
Council by submitting an affidavit. 28 

This Press Ordinance will ever be memorable for the vigorous 
protest it drew forth from Baja Rammohan Roy and the constitu¬ 
tional agitation made against it by Indian leaders. 

Under the laws, then in force, every new legislative measure 
had to be submitted to the Supreme Court for registration. The 
new Press Ordinance was submitted on 15 March, 1823, and two 
days later five distinguished citizens of Calcutta led by Raja Ram- 
mohan Roy submitted a merporial to the Supreme Court for hearing 
objections against it. It was a remarkable document discussing in 
a logical manner and well-chosen diction the general principles on 
which the claim for freedom of the Press was based in all modem 
countries. An English lady, Miss Collet, has referred to this memo¬ 
rial as the “Areopagitica of Indian history ." 29 Macnaghten, the sole 
acting Judge of the Supreme Court, who heard the memorial, dis¬ 
missed it, but had the candour to admit that “before the Ordinance 
Was entered or its merits argued in Court, he had pledged himself 
to Government to give it his sanction.” 80 Having failed to get any 
redress, Raja Rammohan made an “Appeal to the King in Council,” 31 
but this, too, shared the fate of the memorial. Miss Collet observed 
on this Appeal: 

“In a language and style for ever associated with the glorious 
vindication of liberty, it invokes against the arbitrary exercise of 
British power the principles and traditions which are distinctive of 
British history.” 31 * 


232 



THE PRESS 


The activities of Rammohan and the five leading citizens of 
Calcutta in connection with the Press Ordinance of 1823 constitute a 
notable landmark in the history of India's struggle for freedom. An 
English writer has observed as follows on this episode: 

“Ram Mohan himself, who, though not a lawyer, had brilliant 
powers of understanding and expounding legal matters, drafted the 
petition, which the other five also signed; Chandra Kumar Tagore, 
Dwarkanath Tagore, Harchandra Ghose, Gauri Charan Banerji, 
Prasanna Kumar Tagore, all men remembered by Indians as brave 
patriots who dared to stand up to Company, government, and court, 
not on behalf of any peculiarly Indian rights, but on behalf of what 
they and their admirers regarded as a natural right of all men, the 
free access to knowledge and opinion without the intervention of 
any authority to say what was good for them, what not. The whole 
memorial shows how they had become imbued with English poli¬ 
tical principles and ways of thought. Declaring that they and their 
countrymen had been secured in the enjoyment of the same civil 
and religious privileges that every Briton was entitled to in Eng¬ 
land, they boldly asserted that the ordinance would be a sudden 
deprivation of one of the most precious Of their rights, a right, 
moreover, which they had not, and could not be charged with 
having, ever abused. It would preclude them from communicating 
to the Sovereign and his Council in England the real condition of 
his faithful subjects in India and the treatment they experienced 
from the local government. It would also endanger national 
education by putting a stop to the diffusion of knowledge either by 
translations from the learned languages of the East or by the circu¬ 
lation of literary intelligence drawn from foreign publications." 32 

The same writer further remarks: 

“Indian Calcutta, that had been little interested in the Press, 
and for many years afterwards found it no hardship to do without 
newspapers, was greatly excited by this act of daring, and thought 
of these men much as English people once thought of the seven 
Bishops. Would the bold six be put in prison for their impudence 
in challenging the wisdom of authorities who had in their hands, 
in addition to the ordinary instruments of administration, Regula¬ 
tion III of 1818, under which executive decision alone without 
cause assigned or argument heard, could put a man in Jail?” 33 

As a matter of fact the daring act of Rammohan and his five 
associates marks the beginning of a new type of political activity 
which was destined to be the special characteristic of India for 
nearly a century. As R. C. Dutt has justly observed: 

233 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-II 

“It was the start of that system of constitutional agitation for 
political rights which their countrymen have learnt to value so much 
in the present day/’ 34 

The far-reaching effects of this new type of political activity are 
justly estimated by the Englishman, referred to above, who, writing 
shortly after the Round Table Conference held in London in 1930-31, 
remarked as follows: 

“A Round Table Conference in London to discuss India’s future, 
with Indians taking a full share in the discussions, would have 
been a preposterous and incredible suggestion to Englishmen of 
the Company’s days. It might never have come about had the 
great Ram Mohan Roy not taken the lead, and three Tagores, 
a Ghose, and a Ranerji, not joined with him in starting the pro¬ 
cess that led to it.” 36 

By way of protest against the new Press Ordinance Rammohan 
stopped the publication of his paper Mirat-ul-Akhhar. 

Lord Amherst was instructed by his masters at the time of his 
nomination to the Governor-Generalship of India to proceed against 
Indian Press, and he tried his best to curtail its liberty as much as 
possible. 36 On 11 May, 1826, he issued a circular prohibiting the 
servants of the E. I. Company from having any connection with the 
public Press in any way. 37 This was revoked in 1841, but restric¬ 
tions were again imposed by Lord Lytton in 1875. 38 Lord Amherst 
also suppressed the Calcutta Chronicle in 1827. 39 The Press Ordi¬ 
nance was not removed even by the liberal Governor-General, Lord 
William Bentinck, though the matter was pressed upon his attention. 
As a matter of fact, he was definitely opposed to the idea of freedom 
of the Press when he was the Governor of Madras, and in 1807, expres¬ 
sed the view “that the Press in India should be kept under the most 
rigid control.” 40 As a Governor-General, though he did not make 
any change in the law, he never took any action under it against 
any newspaper. It is difficult to determine whether this was due 
to the absence of any legitimate occasion for interference or to any 
change of his views in later life. In any case it was left to his successor, 
Sir Charles Metcalfe, during his brief and temporary administration, 
to repeal the Ordinance and to remove all restraints upon the period¬ 
ical Press in India. 

The famous Press Law of Sir Charles Metcalfe was passed on 
3 August, 1835. It received a wide, almost frenzied, applause of all 
Indians and a section, of liberal Englishmen, but was, and has since 
then been, condemned even by distinguished and liberal-minded 
Englishmen, both in India and England. 


234 . 


THE PRESS 


The expediency of passing a measure of such importance at the 
time may justly be questioned. According to the generally accept¬ 
ed convention an acting Governor-General, holding office for a tem¬ 
porary period and daily expecting to be superseded, should have 
waited for the arrival of the permanent incumbent before deciding 
upon such a controversial issue and giving effect to it. It is difficult 
to offer any plea of urgency. As Metcalfe himself said, the press 
regulations were practically obsolete. If so, there was no particular 
reason to interfere at that very moment, particularly as it must have 
been obvious that his action might put his successor in an embarras* 
sing position. So, however opinions might differ regarding the 
merit of the measure, the manner in which it was passed could find 
little favour and can hardly be justified. 41 At the same time it 
should be remembered that Adam was guilty of the same offence 
when he passed the Press Ordinance in 1823. 

It is not possible to notice the various points of view that were 
urged in course of the controversy over the general issue of freedom 
of the Press. Raja Rammohan Roy, who advocated it as early as 
1823, anticipated some of the arguments of John Stuart Mill in advo¬ 
cating a free Press. He referred to its intrinsic merit as a means of 
diffusion of knowledge and enlightenment of mind, and great prac¬ 
tical value to the Indians as the only means of bringing to the notice 
of the Government the ills they suffered from and anything which 
might require its interference. 

Sir Charles Metcalfe himself defended his action in a memor¬ 
able speech in reply to a congratulatory address presented to him by 
the citizens of Calcutta. He held that “it is salutary for the govern¬ 
ment to have the check of a press on their conduct/* He also justi¬ 
fied his action on general principles. “Freedom of public discus¬ 
sion”, said he, “which is nothing more than the freedom of speaking 
aloud, is a right belonging to the people which no government has a 
right to withhold/* ‘Those who oppose it have to show that it njust 
necessarily cause imminent peril to the public safety which would 
not otherwise have occurred and cannot be averted by salutary 
laws.* “It also rests with them to show that the communication of 
knowledge is a curse and not a benefit**, which it is “one of the most 
imperative duties of the Government to confer on the people.** 42 

The essential arguments, advanced on the other side by con¬ 
temporary critics, have been summed up by Thornton in an exten¬ 
sive review of Metcalfe’s speech. 43 He points out that the diffusion 
of knowledge is very different from either political discussion 
or expression of opinion on political matter, and the restriction of 
the press laws applies to the latter and not to the former. He 


235 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 

expresses grave doubts about “the expediency of exposing the minds 
of the people to the influence of political agitators.” This idea was 
more fully developed even by liberal-minded statesmen like Munro 
and Elphinstone, though, incidentally, they expose the fallacy of 
Thornton’s distinction between knowledge and opinion. Elphin¬ 
stone observed in 1832 that as an inevitable effect of a free press 
“we shall have to contend at once with the most refined theories of 
Europe, and with the prejudices and fanaticism of Asia,” and 
then asks: “Is it possible that a foreign government, avowedly 
maintained by the sword, can long, keep its ground in such 
circumstances?” 44 

As a matter of fact, the real grounds of opposition to a free Press 
in India had always been the fear that it would alienate against 
the British Government not only the people but, what mattered more, 
the Indian army on which rested the main strength of the British 
in India. The Court of Directors actually expressed the fear that 
free discussions of political questions in newspapers might “goad on 
the sepoys to revolt.” 

Sir Charles Metcalfe met this argument in a few words which 
deserve to be placed by the side of the more well-known speech 
, of Macaulay in the same tenor. “If their argument be”, said he, 
f “that the spread of knowledge may eventually be fatal to our rule 
in India, I close with them on that point”. He expressed his hope 
that the increase of knowledge in India would strengthen and not 
destroy the British Empire. But he maintained that, “whatever may 
be the consequence, it is our duty to communicate the benefits of 
knowledge.” Then he observed: “Whatever, however, be the will 
of Almighty Providence respecting the future government of India, 
it is clearly our duty, as long as the charge be confided to our hands, . 
to execute the trust to the best of our ability for the good of the 
people. The promotion of knowledge—of which the liberty of the 
press is one of the most efficient instruments—is manifestly an es¬ 
sential part of that duty. It cannot be, that we are permitted by 
divine authority to be here merely to collect the revenues of the 
country, pay the establishment necessary to keep possession, and 
get into debt to supply the deficiency. We are doubtless here for 
higher purposes; one of which is to pour the enlightened knowledge 
and civilization, the arts and sciences of Europe, over the land, and 
thereby improve the condition of the people. Nothing, surely, is 
more likely to conduce to these ends than the liberty of the press.” 45 

Even the most ardent Indian supporters of British rule in India 
—a class which dominated Indian politics throughout the nineteenth 
century—could scarcely improve upon the remarkable utterance of 


236 


THE PRESS 


Sir Charles Metcalfe. Unfortunately he belonged to a microscopic 
minority in England, and did not represent in any way the real 
views of the Englishmen. The extremity to which even enlightened 
Englishmen could stoop down, when it concerned the safety of the 
British Empire in India, may be gathered from the remarks of 
Thornton on Metcalfe's address referred to above. In course of it 
Metcalfe had observed: *If India could only be preserved as a part 
of the British empire by keeping its inhabitants in a state of ignor¬ 
ance, our domination would be a curse to the country, and ought to 
cease.” Thornton challenges this statement and argues that “to 
make this apparent, it must be shown that, but for the domination 
of England, knowledge would be advanced and extended.” In other 
words, since, in his opinion, those who ruled before the English, or 
were likely to succeed them, did not, or would not, encourage know¬ 
ledge, the British could not be blamed for dong the same. “If we 
render the condition of its people no better than it would be under 
their Native rulers it cannot justly be said, (if we make it no worse) 
that our domination is a curse, and ought, therefore, to cease.” 46 It 
is a significant admission, and deserves special notice, as the general 
idea embodied in it exercised a profound—almost decisive—influ¬ 
ence upon the minds of average Englishmen and even of high states¬ 
men. While many of them honestly felt that the advantages of 
British rule should be extended to India as far as possible—and 
Thornton was one of them—they consciously or unconsciously drew 
a limit to such benevolent end at the point beyond which the safety 
and security of the British Empire in India had the remotest chance 
of being endangered, even to the smallest extent. 

The Home authorities, as could be expected from their previous 
attitude, strongly condemned the measure and penalised its author 
by passing over his claims to the first vacant Governorship. When 
Metcalfe asked for an explanation, he received, “through their 
Secretary an answer so dry and laconic, that on the very day when 
he received it he intimated his desire to retire from the service of 
the Company”. 

The dangers apprehended from the freedom of the Press proved 
illusive. The Government found no necessity during the next 
twenty years to pass any Press legislation, save during the great out¬ 
break of 1857, and even then a temporary legislation was enacted 
only for a year. 

m. THE PRESS DURING THE OUTBREAK OF 1857-8. 

Reference has been made above to the serious outbreaks that 
convulsed the whole of Northern India during 1857-8. It was 


237 


THE BRITISH PAEAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 

inevitable that a great deal of the bitterness and race hatred engender¬ 
ed by the events of these two years would be reflected in the Press. 
But what actually took place far exceeded any reasonable anticipa¬ 
tion. The fallowing description of Sir George Trevelyan ‘in no 
way exaggerated the deplorable tone of the Anglo-Indian press 7 . 47 

“The tone of the press was horrible. Never did the cry for 
blood swell so loud as among these Christians and Englishmen in the 
middle of the nineteenth century. The pages of those brutal and 
grotesque journals published by Hebert and Marat during the agony 
of the French revolution, contained nothing that was not matched 
and surpassed in the files of some Calcutta papers. Because the 
pampered Bengal sepoys had behaved like double-dyed rascals, 
therefore every Hindoo and Mussulman was a rebel, a traitor, a 
murderer; therefore, we were to pray that all the population of 
India were to have one neck, and that all the hemp in India might 
be twisted into one rope. It would be wearisome to quote speci¬ 
mens of the style of that day. Every column teemed with invectives 
which at the time seemed coarse and tedious, but which we must 
now pronounce to be wicked and blasphemous. For what could be 
more audacious than to assert that Providence had granted us a right 
to destroy a nation in our wrath?—to slay, and bum, and plunder, 
not in the cause of order and civilization,* but in the name of our 
insatiable vengeance, and our imperial displeasure? The wise ruler, 
whose comprehensive and impartial judgment preserved him from 
the contagion of that fatal frenzy, was assailed with a storm of oblo¬ 
quy for which we should in vain seek a precedent in history. To 
read the newspapers of that day, you would believe that Lord Can¬ 
ning was at the bottom of the whole mutiny; that upon his head was 
the guilt of the horrors of Cawnpore and Allahabad; that it was he 
who had passed round the chapatties and lotahs 47a and spread the 
report that the Russ was marching down from the north to drive the 
English into the sea. After all, the crime charged against him was, 
not that he had hindered the butchery, but that his heart was not 
in the work. No one had the face to say, or, at any rate, no one had 
the weakness to believe, that Lord Canning had pardoned any con¬ 
siderable number of condemned rebels. His crying sin was that he 
took little or no pleasure in the extermination of the people whom 
he had been commissioned by his Sovereign to govern and protect.” 48 

The Indian Press must have been somewhat kept in restraint by 
the fear of inevitable punishment that would follow; nevertheless 
passions rose high and papers in manuscript, openly inciting to re¬ 
bellion, were widely spread, and mischievous misrepresentation of 
the intention of Government and exaggerated reports of unfortunate 


238 


THE PRESS 

incidents were deliberately circulated with a view to creating dis¬ 
affection toward the Government. According to Lord Canning sedi¬ 
tion was poured into the hearts of the native population under the 
guise of intelligence supplied to them by the native newspapers and 
this was done ‘sedulously, cleverly and artfully*. “In addition to 
perversion of facts’*, said he, “there are cQnstant vilifications of the 
Government, false assertions of its purposes, and unceasing attempts 
to sow discontent and hatred between it and its subjects.” 49 

Lord Canning accordingly passed the Act XV of 1857 which re¬ 
quired licenses for keeping printing presses and authorized the Gov¬ 
ernment to prohibit the publication or circulation of printed books 
and papers. It was to be operative for one year only and was appli¬ 
cable to all papers, Indian or Anglo-Indian. 60 Under the Notification 
dated 18 June, 1857, licenses were to be granted to a press only on 
condition that no book, newspaper, pamphlet etc., printed at such 
press, “shall contain any observations or statements impugning 
the motives or designs of the British Government or in any way tend¬ 
ing to bring it into hatred and contempt, to excite disaffection or un¬ 
lawful resistance to its orders, or to weaken its lawful authority, or 
the lawful authority of its civil or military servants”.' 51 Under the 
terms of this Act Bengal Hurlcdru, edited by S. L. Blanchard, was 
suspended for six days till the editor resigned. The Friend of 
India published on 25 June, 1857, the notorious article “The Cen¬ 
tenary of Plassey” 62 which the Viceroy deemed “most dangerous at 
such a crisis”, 63 but the paper was let off with a warning. George 
Buist, the editor of the Bombay Times, acquired unenviable noto¬ 
riety by vilifying the Indians and urging upon the Government to 
take more and more extreme measures. Unfortunately for Buist, 
the share-holders of the paper were mostly Indians, and he was ask¬ 
ed forthwith to “entirely change the tone and tenor of his editorial 
writings”. As he declined to do so he was dismissed. 64 Several 
Indian papers of Bombay—-the Bombay SamdchSr , the Jam-e-Jam- 
shed and the Rast Go/tar—vigorously defended the character of the 
Indians against the unmerited attack of British journalists.* 66 Three 
papers— -Durbin, Sultdn-ul-Akhhar and Samachdr Sudhdvarshan — 
were prosecuted for writing seditious articles. 66 

One name stands very high among the journalists of the day, 
that of Haris-chandra Mukherji, the editor of the Hindoo Patriot. 
Unswayed by the passions of the day, he tried to paint the picture 
of the time in its true perspective, and wielded his powerful pen to 
expose the hollowness of the cry for danger raised by the English¬ 
men, and check their frenzied efforts to induce the Government to 
adopt extreme measures against the Bengalis. For, even though the 


239 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 

Bengalis took no active part in the rebellion of 1857-8, the English¬ 
men took alarm at their developed political consciousness and were 
eager to nip in the bud this potential danger to their authority. It 
is said that Lord Canning was considerably influenced by the judi¬ 
cious attitude and unbiassed tone of this Indian paper in forming his 
policy. 


IV. THE PRESS AFTER 1858 

Since the Mutiny, the papers owned and edited by the Indians 
rapidly grew in number. A few of them were written in English, 
and the large majority in vernaculars of different Provinces. They 
came to play an increasingly important role in the political educa¬ 
tion of the people and growth of patriotic and national sentiments 
among them. It would be a tedious task to prepare a list even of 
the prominent daily and weekly papers in different parts of India 
that regularly discussed political topics. Their number was large 
and many of them did their work with ability and honesty. 

On the other hand, the papers owned or edited by Englishmen 
tended to become more and more anti-Indian in their general out¬ 
look, unsympathetic to Indian political aspirations, and strong sup¬ 
porters of Government. This was due mainly to the memory of the 
Mutiny, 67 and the all-important fact that the Government of India 
now represented, not a private mercantile firm, but the Crown of 
England which claimed allegiance of every loyal Englishman. 

In Bengal the Hindoo Patriot continued to be the leading 
journal. By its vigorous denunciation of the indigo-planters and 
heroic stand on behalf of the helpless and oppressed cultivators, it 
occupied a unique position in Indian journalism about this period. 
Day after day it exposed the terrible miseries inflicted upon the in¬ 
digo-cultivators, and occasionally also encouraged their passive re¬ 
sistance from a higher national standpoint. The following extract 
from its issue of 19 May, 1860, may be quoted as an instance: 

“The revolution has caused the Ryot community a vast mass of 
suffering. They have been beaten, insulted, bound, starved, im¬ 
prisoned, ousted from home, deprived of their property, subjected to 
every form of oppression one can imagine. Villages have been 
burnt, men carried off, women violated, stores of grain destroyed, 
and every coercion has been used. Yet the Ryots have not yielded; 
they have not ceased to aspire after the freedom which they feel to 
be their birth-right and which they have been told the law assures 
them. Let them but suffer on a few weeks more, and they will gain 
their darling object. A revolution will have been effected in their 


240 


THE PRESS 

social condition, the beneficial effects of which will reach all the 
country's institutions. The defects of our laws, the vices of our 
courts, the inefficiency of our police, the oppression systematically 
practised by some classes, and the general prevalence of anarchy 
will have been exposed in a manner never hitherto made—in a man¬ 
ner which will make reform inevitable," 68 

The Hindoo Patriot also exposed the true character of the Mu¬ 
tiny of 1857 and boldly opposed the die-hard section of Englishmen, 
as already noted above. 

The death of Haris-chandra Mukherji in 1861 diminished the im¬ 
portance of the Hindoo Patriot for some time. The mantle of that 
paper fell upon the Indian Mirror which was founded in 1862 under 
the patronage of Devendra-nath Tagore. Later Keshab-chandra Sen be¬ 
came its patron, and Narendra-nath Sen, its editor. Among the other 
important English papers may be mentioned the Indian Field edited 
by Kishori-chand Mitra, Mukherji’s Magazine (1861), edited by Sam- 
bhu-chandra Mukhopadhyaya, and the Bengalee (1862), edited by 
Girish-chandra Ghosh. The National Paper, founded in 1865 by 
Naba-gopal Mitra, contributed a great deal to the development of 
nationalism in Bengal to which reference will be made later. 

The leading position in Bengali journalism was agaiii taken by 
the Hindoo Patriot under the able editorship of Krishto-das Pal. His 
was an honoured name, both in politics and journalism, and he was 
highly respected both by the people and the Government for the 
depth of his views and the sobriety of his judgment. For twenty- 
three years he was the editor of the Patriot; he made it a power 
in the country, and even the Government consulted this paper in 
order to feel the trends of public opinion. As Secretary of the Bri¬ 
tish Indian Association, he wielded immense influence in that body 
and also in politics, and so the Patriot under his editorship acquired 
power, influence, and prestige such as fell to the lot of very few 
papers in India. He was well-known for the moderation of his 
views, but his spirit of independence brought him into conflict with 
the Government more than once. 

. r 

Several factors contributed to the phenomenal growth of the 
Indian Press during the sixties and seventies. The Indian Councils 
Act of 1861 stirred the public opinion and created greater interest in 
politics and newspapers, the natural medium of discussing matters 
of political interest. As early as 1860 telegrams received by Reuter 
in London from various parts of Europe were sent to the Bombay 
Times by mail, and when direct telegraphic communication was esta¬ 
blished between India and Britain, important news was sent by 

241 

B.P.I.H—10 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

wire.= 9 So far as the Indian Press was concerned, the newly awak¬ 
ened consciousness of nationalism, to which reference will be made 
in Chapter XIII, gave a great fillip to it. 

On September 28, 1861, theJBombay Times, which had incor¬ 
porated the Bombay Standard, the Telegraph and Courier, 
changed its name to The - Times of India . Its editor, Mr. Robert 
Knight, explained the change as due to the pre-eminent position oc¬ 
cupied by the city of Bombay which, he said, “is already the capital 
city of India, although not as yet the seat of the Supreme Govern¬ 
ment.” Then he added: “While the city is Imperial, its Press hither¬ 
to has been, in title, only provincial, and in announcing ourselves 
as The Times of India we are simply endeavouring to keep up with 
the march of events.” 60 Unfortunately, on account of differences 
with his partner, Knight cut off his connection with the paper, and 
settled in Calcutta. In 1875 he bought the journal, The Friend of 
India, which was founded by Carey, Marshman, and Ward at Seram- 
pore in 1818. It was at first a monthly and later became a weekly, 
and came into prominence during the Mutiny, as mentioned above. 
In 1875 Knight also founded the Statesman, and eventually the two 
papers were merged under the title The Statesman and the Friend 
of Indian Knight was one of the few English journalists who felt 
sympathy for Indian cause and wielded great influence both with the 
people and the Government. He was a radical and held liberal 
views on matters relating to the administration of public affairs. 
When he died in 1890 the Indian Press called him “the Bayard of 
India” and paid glowing tributes to him. 62 

Among other important Anglo-Indian papers established about 
the same time as the Statesman may be mentioned the Madras Mail 
(1868), the first evening paper in India; the Pioneer of Allahabad 
(1865), the organ of British imperialism in India; and the Civil and 
Military Gazette of Lahore (1876), “a faithful and conscientious advo¬ 
cate of the true interests of the services, civil and military, in India” 
—to use its own words. 63 

To complete the account of the Anglo-Indian papers function¬ 
ing as important organs of English public opinion in India at the end 
of the period under review, reference should be made to the English¬ 
man of Calcutta, in a sense the oldest Anglo-Indian paper then in 
existence in India. For it was merely a new name for the paper 
called John Bull which was started in 1832 in order to counteract 
the influence of Buckingham’s Calcutta Journal, to which reference 
has been made above. 64 It was an 5 organ of the conservative 
section—the old Tories—and was owned by some employees of the 

242 



THE PRESS 


East India Company. To the last it maintained the same tradition 
and was ultra-conservative and reactionary in its views. 

The Urdu Press also flourished and the majority of the Urdu 
organs of North India at the beginning of 1861 were edited by the 
Hindus. 65 There were, at this time, 11 Urdu and 6 Hindi papers, 
of which 8 were published at Agra, 2 at Ajmere, and 2 at Etawah. 66 

It has been described by Surendra-nath Banerji how, in 1881, 
he persuaded Sardar Dayal Singh Majeetia to start a newspaper at 
Lahore called the Tribune . 66 « 

The Indian Press, throughout the half century that elapsed since 
the Mutiny, took a distinctly political and nationalistic turn without 
losing sight of its main object of supplying information and useful 
knowledge. Among the Bengali papers, the Somapraka&a (1858), 
edited by Dwaraka-nath Vidyabhusan, was the earliest to devote it¬ 
self prominently to political matters. 661 * The Sikshadarpana O Sam - 
badasdra (1864), a monthly edited by Bhudev Mukhopadhyay, was 
chiefly devoted to educational topics, but also discussed political 
questions. It was the first to stress the inevitable animosity be¬ 
tween the rulers and the ruled, and coined the word ‘jati-vairita,’ to 
denote this. The idea underlying this was fully developed by Ban- 
kim-chandra Chatterji in the weekly ‘Sadharayi’ (1874), edited by 
Akshay-chandra Sarkar, and in the monthly Bangadariana (1873), 
edited by himself. Both these Bengali papers rendered valu¬ 
able services to the cause of nationalism and political progress. The 
following extract (in translation) from a Bengali article of Bankim- 
chandra reflects the new spirit with which journalism was imbued 
in Bengal. “It is not in human nature for the conquered to respect 
the conquerors or regard them as selfless benefactors, and for the 
conquerors to shrink from employing physical force.This ra¬ 

cial animosity is the natural result of our present condition; there 
will be no end of it so long as the foreigners rule over us, and we, 
though inferior, remember our past glory. We whole-heartedly 
pray that this conflict may influence us so long as we do not become 
equal to the Englishmen.” Some of the Bengali papers like Art/a- 
da+iana, edited by Jogendra-nath Vidyabhushan, furthered the cause 
of nationalism by preaching revolutionary ideas through the lives 
of Mazzini, Garibaldi and other revolutionary leaders of Italy. 

We find fearless criticism of the abuses of administration and 
reactionary measures of Government, not only in the Calcutta pa¬ 
pers like Somapraka&a, Sahachar, and S&dh&ratrti, but also in papers 
published from mofussil towns, the number of which grew apace. 
Among these special mention may be made o^ the Hindu-hitaishhvi of 
Dacca and Bh&rata-mihir of Mymensingh. 


243 



THE BRITISH PARAMQUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

Most of the above journals made their appearance during the 
sixties. About the same time was published the Amrita Bazar Pat - 
rika which soon established its position as the most popular and 
powerful organ of national opinion, not only in Bengal, but pro¬ 
bably in the whole of India. It was first published on February 20, 
1868, as a Bengali weekly, from a village in Jessore (originally 
called Polomagura,. but later renamed ‘Amrita Bajar’), under the 
editorship of Sisir-kumar Ghosh. The paper, as Sisir-kumar him¬ 
self says, began by teaching that “we are we” and “they are they”— 
a very simple statement of racial animosity referred to above. From 
the very beginning it distinguished itself by a scathing exposure of 
the abuses of administration and a free and frank discussion of the 
political problems of the day. Guided by a robust spirit of nationa¬ 
lism it spared no effort to serve the true interests of the country, both 
by ruthless, destructive criticism of the reactionary policy of the 
Government as well as by constructive proposals of reforms. In 
three articles published in 1870 it stressed the eternal conflict bet¬ 
ween the interests of the rulers and the ruled, and held out Parlia¬ 
mentary Government in India as the only solution of the problem. 
It advocated the establishment of political associations, not only in 
each district headquarters, but also in populous villages, and also of 
a central association in Calcutta to co-ordinate their activities. 
One of the special features of the paper was to publish regular 
reports of misdeeds by officials in mofussil. This brought the 
wrath of the English officials upon the editor and his staff who were 
often hauled up before the court and punished. But nothing could 
daunt the indomitable spirit of its editor. From the second year of 
its issue (Feb. 25, 1869), a part of the Patrika was written in English. 
In 1871 the office of the Patrika was removed to Calcutta and the 
English portion was gradually increased. Ultimately in 1878 it turn¬ 
ed overnight into a full-fledged English paper in order to escape 
from the operations of Lord Lytton’s Vernacular Press Act. It was a 
weekly paper and, as a result of the agitation over the Age of Con¬ 
sent Bill, became a daily on 19 February, 1891. 67 

The Patrika was sometimes very outspoken in its comments. 
As a specimen, we may give here the translation of an extract from 
its issue of 31 December, 1868. “The Bengalis are determined to 
oppose the tyranny of Englishmen at every step. The conflict bet¬ 
ween the Bengalis and the English is becoming more and more seri¬ 
ous every day. The English want to keep the Bengalis down, the 
- Bengalis want to stand up. The English find that the Bengalis can 
no longer be cowed down by merely bullying or bribery; so they 
adopt sterner measures. But thousands of Bengalis are now deter-. 
mined either to achieve their ends or lay down their lives. In this 


244 


THE PRESS 


struggle we do not blame either the English or the Bengalis. Let 
the Commissioner of the Presidency Division try to curb the spirit 
of freedom of the Bengalis as his national interest demands. But if 
the Bengalis do their duty Chapman will surely fail, for God is on 
our side. He befriends the weak and the helpless slaves, and to 
Him the English, the Hindu, the White, the Black, the Christian and 
the idolators are all alike.” 

Poet Nabin-chandra Sen, who met Sisir-kumar about this time, 
has paid the highest tribute to him and to his paper by saying that 
“they were the pioneers of patriotism in this country.” He has re¬ 
lated the story that a younger brother of Sisir-kumar committed sui¬ 
cide and left a piece of paper with the words: “It is no use keeping 
this life as it can do no good to our motherland.” Nabin-chandra adds 
that the patriotic verses in his Pala&r Yuddha —which are some 
of the sublimest stanzas in Bengali literature—were inspired by 
Sisir-kumar. The Samachdra-chandrikd wrote in its issue of January 
18, 1872, “that no other journal has done as much for the freedom of 
the country as the Patrika , and it has suffered much on this account.” 

That the achievement of independence was the guiding idea of 
the paper appears clearly from a Bengali verse which regularly ap¬ 
peared as its motto for some time since May 7,1868. It may be freely 
rendered as follows:— 

“Alas! It is grievous to think how the poison of subjection has 
changed the sons of Ary as beyond recognition.” 

There can be hardly any doubt that the Amrita Bazar Patrika 
raised the tone of Indian papers and infused a new spirit of strength, 
fearlessness, and nationalism in Bengali journalism. The following 
extract from a v letter of B. G. Tilak, written in 1917, gives a fair 
idea of its appreciation outside Bengal. 

“I know with what enthusiasm and eagerness the Patrika was 
awaited in my province (Bombay) every week 40 years ago. I 
know how people were delighted to read his (Editor’s) sarcasm, his 
pithy and critical notes written in racy style, simple but at the same 
time effective. How people longed to see the paper on the day it 
was due by post, how people enjoyed it—I know it personally. You 
in Bengal cannot know what we felt and thought in Maharashtra. 
.. .They were really delighted to see his writings, but very few had 
the courage to quote these remarks before others—they enjoyed them 
in secret.” 68 

Next to the Amrita Bazar Patrika the most powerful English 
paper in Bengal was the Bengalee, whose foundation has been referred 

245 


THE BRITISH PAEAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—U 

to above. On January 1, 1879, Surendra-nath Banerji took over 
the management and editorship of this paper. In his able hands the 
Bengalee became one of the most advanced organs of national opinion. 
As a matter of fact, since the eighties the Amrita Bazar Patrilya and 
the Bengalee made the greatest contribution to the national re¬ 
awakening of Bengal, if not also of India. 

The eighties saw the publication of two hew Bengali papers, the 
Bangabasl in 1881 and the Sanjibani in 1883. The Sanjibani adopt¬ 
ed as its motto, “Liberty, Equality and Fraternity”. The Bangabasl 
was conservative and the Sanjibani was liberal in its social views. 
Both had a long and useful career in spreading political and social 
ideas among the middle class rural population of Bengal. Reference 
may also be made to the Sulabha-samachdra , the first one-pice paper 
in Bengali started by Keshab-chandra Sen. It was not a political 
paper, but its liberal views on social and educational matters, writ¬ 
ten in very simple language, contributed to the national reawaken¬ 
ing, particularly as it had a very large circulation on account of its 
cheapness. The main function of these papers was to discuss all 
public measures and criticise the views and attitude of the foreign 
Government from Indian point of view. The Government naturally 
did not like this spirit of criticism and regarded it as dangerous to 
the stability of the British Government. 

The Indian-owned papers were rapidly growing in number. 
“There were (in 1876) about sixty-two such papers in the Bombay 
Presidency,—Marathi, Gujerati, Hindustani and Persian; about sixty 
in the North-West Provinces, Oudh and the Central Provinces; some 
twenty-eight in Bengal; about nineteen in Madras, Tamil Telegu, 
Malayalam and Hindustani. Their circulations were, of a necessity, 

' restricted but they were nevertheless expanding. It was computed 
about this time that there were probably 100,000 readers of such 
papers and that the highest circulation of any one paper was in the 
neighbourhood of 3,000”. 69 In 1873 Sir George Campbell, the Lieu¬ 
tenant-Governor of Bengal, ordered an inquiry into the state of the 
Indian-owned Press in Bengal. It was found that there were alto¬ 
gether thirty-eight papers in existence. 70 Campbell expressed his 
views as follows: “My own opinion has always been that an entirely 
free press is inconsistent with a despotic form of Government even 
if it be a paternal despotism. In such circumstances press writers 
are always inclined to be ‘agin the government’ and there is no 
opposing press to answer them. No doubt criticism is useful in 
bringing abuses to light, and press fulminations may be a sort of 
safety valve; but a government, whose position largely depends on 
the sort of moral force due to a belief in its unassailable power, can 

246 


THE PRESS 


hardly afford to be constantly held up to the contempt of its sub¬ 
jects.” “At the same time, Sir George Campbell was clear that the 
cure was worse than the disease if a libel on the Government could 
not be punished without a protracted trial which gave the matter ‘all 
the notoriety that the most ambitious libeller could desire-” 71 

“For some fifteen years weekly abstracts had been prepared of 
the more important articles in the Indian Press and these were made 
available to officials in India and to the British Press. In 1875 we 
find Lord Salisbury, the Secretary of State for India, informing the 
Government of India that his attention had'been drawn by writings 
in the Pall Mall Gazette and another paper ‘to various articles in 
the Native Press which are not only calculated to bring the Govern¬ 
ment into contempt, but which palliate, if they do not absolutely 
justify as a duty, the assassination of British Officers/ Lord North¬ 
brook’s Government replied that it was not desirable in the then 
state of the law for the Government to prosecute (under the sedition • 
sections, as had been suggested somewhat tentatively by the Advo¬ 
cate-General) except in the case of systematic attempts to excite hos¬ 
tility against the Government. 

“Faced by the growing criticism of the press, Lord Lytton studied 
various methods of meeting the situation... .In the autumn of 1877 
he prepared a Minute which was circulated to the members of his 
Council and to each local Government and Chief Commissioner. All, 
with the exception of Madras (where the press in Indian languages 
was not yet strong), concurred in the principle of taking legislative 
action. Consequently, a Bill was prepared, and its substance was 
telegraphed to the Secretary of State whose permission was sought 
for its introduction”. 72 The Vernacular Press Act IX of 1878 be¬ 
came law on March 14, and it was operative in all the provinces ex¬ 
cept Madras. Under this Act “the printer and publisher of £ny 
paper in an Indian language could be called upon to enter into a 
bond not to publish anything likely to excite feelings of disaffection 
against the Government or antipathy between persons of different 
races/castes and religions among His Majesty’s subjects. If a news¬ 
paper contravened this regulation, it was first warned of the offence 
and if it re-occurred its equipment was liable to be seized. For those 
who wished to avoid such a risk, a system of censorship was framed 
by the Government and one of its officers was appointed to scrutinize 
proofs before publication”. 73 Three members of the Secretary of 
State’s Council were against the Bill and at the instance of the new 
Secretary of State, Lord Cranbrook, the clause about censorship was 
deleted by a fresh Bill in September, 1878. 


247 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

One of the results of the Act was the foundation of the Hindu 
of Madras. Six young men, who decided to establish the paper, felt 
tbs need of an Association in Madras of a type described by one of 
them as follows: 

‘‘An Association which would represent the true state of the 
condition of the masses to the Government and their several grie¬ 
vances, and to get them redressed, to suggest to our Rulers the best 
means of utilising the latent activities of the people for the service 
of their country, to get recognised the claims of the sons of the soil 
to a proper share in the administration, to suggest modes of utilising 
the knowledge and attainments of the educated classes, in fact to 
induce our Rulers to put into practice the Magna Charta of our rights 
and liberties, such an Association was still a desideratum”. 

“Though these words apply to the Madras Native Association 
which was subsequently organised, they may also be taken to express 
the task to which the Hindu set itself when it was first published on 
20 September, 1878.”™ 

It was started under the editorship of G. Subramaniya Aiyar 
and Viraraghavacharya. “They were potent wheels in the machine 
that has made Indian Journalism the hand-maiden, if not something 
more, of Indian Nationalism.” W. S. Blunt paid high tribute to 
this paper in 1884 and wrote about the editors that they “contrasted 
by no means unfavourably with men of their profession in London”. 
Later, Kasturiranga Iyengar became the editor of the Hindu while 
its founder-editor G. S. Aiyar edited the Tamil paper Swadesha - 
mitram. 75 The Hindu was started as a weekly but converted to tri¬ 
weekly from October 1883, and a daily since 1889. 

There was strong opposition to the Vernacular Press Act all over 
the country. The Somaprakdia stopped publication when a bond was 
demanded from its printer. The Amrita Bazar Patrika, the suppres¬ 
sion of which was believed at that time to have been the main object 
of the new legislative measure, escaped a similar fate by changing 
overnight into an English journal. 

While it is not difficult to understand and even appreciate the 
strong and universal resentment in India at the passing of the Act, 
it is only fair to look at the question also from the point of view of 
the Government. It is unreasonable to expect that a foreign Gov¬ 
ernment would ignore or tolerate the disloyal sentiment openly ex¬ 
pressed, and the hatred towards the Government consciously or un¬ 
consciously excited, by the vernacular Press, That the vernacular 
newspapers indulged in such expressions would be obvious from a 
perusal of the papers submitted to the Legislature in justification of 


248 


THE PRESS 


the proposed Press legislation. 76 They contained mostly transla¬ 
tions from the Bengali papers; and of these the SddMranl came in for 
the largest notice. Discussing the Russo-Turkish War, the S&dhfirant 
said that it had been deeply moved by the fall of Plevna because “we 
Hindus have bornd and still bear the hardships and misery which 
follow the downfall of the prestige of a nation. In every bone, vein 
and pore of our bodies this sense of national degradation works as a 
slow consuming fire. God forbid that even our deadliest enemies 
should suffer as we do. 5 ’ The next extract from the SddhSranl was 
from a fairly long article headed (in its English rendering) “Spuri¬ 
ous Loyalty”, and ran as follows:— 

“A history of the non-fulfilment of promises by the British Gov¬ 
ernment would be the whole history of the last hundred and fifty 
years.. 

“It is the general belief that the Viceroy's speech on the 1st of 
January, 1877, nullified to a considerable extent the Queen's Procla¬ 
mation of 1858. Babu Surendra-nath Banerji, because he gave ex¬ 
pression to this belief at a meeting of the Calcutta, Municipality, 
brought down upon himself the wrath of the Sahibs (Europeans), 
who charged him with being disloyal. 

“It was declared in 1858 that if the natives of this country prov¬ 
ed themselves equal, all appointments, so far as practicable, would 
be given to them. But now we are told that all high executive 
offices are to be given to Englishmen only. If these two declarations 
are not contradictory, then henceforth there will be no difference in 
colour between black and white. If it amounts to disloyalty to point 
out this contradiction, and if for this, the Government chooses to 
punish us, then, we with tens of millions of Her Majesty's subjects 
are prepared to be punished along with Surendra-nath.” 

The following is an extract from Samdja-darpana published in its 
last issue: 

“What heart will not be pained to see the spectacle of educated 
natives crying for want of food, while every month batches of 
Englishmen, fresh from England, are taking possession of all the 
appointments in the Public Service? Or what political economy is this 
that would sanction the retention in the service of highly paid Euro¬ 
peans, while famine and destitution raged in the land and people 
groaned under the burden of taxation? Why should Mowla Bux be 
hanged for an offence for which Heeman receives promotion? That 
you should despise me as a worthless thing not to be touched, while I 
should worship you with flowers and sandalwood, is a thing which 
nature never heard before.” 


249 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

It would be difficult to deny that these comments exceeded the 
limits of legitimate criticism, and no Government, specially a Govern¬ 
ment of foreigners, could be expected to tolerate them. The only 
question is whether the particular legislation enacted by Lytton was 
justified. The Indian view was expressed by the'Somaprakasa in its 
issue of 24 December as follows: 77 “If the Vernacular Press is sedi¬ 
tious, there is already a law to repress sedition; there are courts of 
law. Let complaints be lodged against them in the regularly consti¬ 
tuted courts of the land, and let their mouths be gagged here.” 

The passing of the Vernacular Press Act during Lord Lytton’s 
Viceroyalty seriously offended the public opinion throughout India, 
and gave a stimulus to the growth of nationalism and ideas of political 
unity to which reference will be made later. So in 1882 Lord Ripon 
repealed both the Acts of 1857 and 1878 and relied on ordinary law 
for the control of the Press. 

Shortly after the arrival of Lord Ripon, the Kesarl, a Marathi 
daily, and the Mahratta, an English weekly, were founded respec¬ 
tively on January 4 and 2, 1881. Both were the results of great ven¬ 
tures undertaken by a group of Maratha young men including Chip- 
lunkar, Agarkar, and Namjoshi, whose names have been cast into 
shade by that of Bal Gangadhar Tilak, the most brilliant among them. 
For some time the KeSan was edited by Agarkar and the Mahratta 
by Prof. Kelkar. Tilak became the sole editor of the Ke&afi in Octo¬ 
ber, 1887, and it was not till 1891 that Tilak’s old colleagues left him 
and he became the sole proprietor and the fully responsible editor 
of the two papers. 78 Tilak was the guiding spirit of the new type 
of nationalism that emerged towards the close of the nineteenth and 
the beginning of the twentieth century, and the Kesarl and Mahratta 
became the chief organs of this new movement. It would be diffi¬ 
cult to exaggerate the importance and significance of the role played 
by these two papers in the development of nationalism in India. 

The last important journal, during the period under 
review, was the Indian Review published in January, 1900, by G. A. 
Natesan in Madras. He had a fine press and was himself the printer, 
publisher, manager, and editor of the Indian Review. Its speciality 
was the publication of important extracts from contemporary perio¬ 
dicals on various aspects of Indian problems. 79 By this monthly 
journal as well as by publication of books bearing on Indian nationa¬ 
lism, Natesan made valuable contribution to India’s struggle for 
freedom in the twentieth century. 

In spite of severe handicaps the Indian Press performed its task 
fairly well. It was clearly recognized, even by enlightened 


250 


THE PRESS 


Englishmen, that the Indian Press must, necessarily, be always in 
opposition to the Government. The Indian Press, as a body, followed 
this principle, and reviewed the entire administrative policy of the 
Government. There was hardly any topic of public importance 
which did not form their subject of discussion. 

Among the important public questions they chiefly concerned 
themselves with (1) reduction of public expenditure, (2) appointment: 
of natives to high offices under the State, (3) defects in the adminis¬ 
tration of justice in the mofussil, and (4) the existence of feelings 
of distinction between the conquerors and the conquered. In 
many cases the writers displayed quite a high level of knowledge and 
strong independence of views. It is impossible to over-estimate the* 
importance of the Indian Press as a means of educating public 
opinion and inculcating patriotic and national views among the pub¬ 
lic. The introduction of cheap (pice) newspapers in Bengali was an 
important innovation for spreading political ideas among the masses. 

The foundation of the Indian National Congress considerably 
changed the tone of both the Indian and Anglo-Indian Press, and 
brought politics into the forefront of discussions in both cases. The 
more important Indian papers now sought to educate the public in 
the political ideals of the Congress, and some even overstepped the 
limit of moderation set by that institution as its standard. The 
Anglo-Indian Press, with a few exceptions, criticised the political 
ideal of the Congress as chimerical and was definitely hostile to it. 
In this they reflected the British attitude which was opposed to all 
political aspirations of India. Racial arrogance clearly manifested 
itself in their outlook on Indian questions, as was amply demonstra¬ 
ted during the bitter Ilbert Bill controversy. What was still worse, 
they cast to the winds all sense of decency, fair play and justice when 
the interest or prejudice of Englishmen was at stake. This would 
be obvious from their frantic cry of protest whenever an English¬ 
man was accused for assaulting an Indian, and the open support they 
gave to the tea- and indigo-planters, though guilty of brutal crimes 
against heloless Indians. Attention may be drawn to the comments 
of the Englishman , the Pioneer and the Morning Post on the Mani¬ 
pur outbreak in 1891, to which reference has been made above. 80 

It is interesting to refer in this connection to the following ex¬ 
tract from a letter written by Lord George Hamilton, the Secretary 
of State, to Lord Curzon on 16 February. 1900. 

“I expected you would be attacked for the strong line you have 
taken in connection with the Rangoon outrage. The official element, 
both military and civil, is so strong in India that they have a very 


251 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

dominant control over the English Press. We, from time to time, 
abuse the Native Press, and believe it to be a danger to our rule in 
India. I am not at all sure that the Anglo-Indian Press is not quite 
as mischievous, and, by its intolerance, does not greatly aggravate all 
racial difficulties and differences.” 

The tone of the Indian Press also was not always restrained, and 
grew more and more vehement with the growth of nationalism and 
political consciousness. Some extracts have already been quoted, 
and a few others may be added as specimens. 

The taxes came in for a great deal of nasty criticism. A Bengali 
paper alleged, in 186.3, that prostitutes were utilised to promote the 
sale of liquor, and condemned the Government which “for a few 
rupees gained now will have debauched, degraded and demoralised 
the mass of the people of India”. The Amrita Bazar Patrika describ¬ 
ed the Road Cess as a “shameful imposition”. While condemning the 
increase in salt tax in 1888 by Lord Dufferin, the Prajd-handhu, a 
Bengali paper, wrote: “Cursed was the hour when His Excellency set 
foot on Indian soil. His crooked policy has impoverished India”. 

t 

The drain of India’s wealth came in for caustic comments. The 
Samaya wrote in 1896: “Like locusts they came in swarms to drain 
the country of its riches which they spend not in India but in their 
own country”. Another paper observed in this connection that “the 
Muslims did not suck the peoples’ blood like India’s present rulers.” 

The top-heavy administration, due mainly to the high salaries of 
English officials, was strongly criticized, and when Sir John Strachey 
defended it on the ground that an English recruit to the I.C.S. inherit¬ 
ed qualities from his forefathers which a Bengali candidate could 
never inherit, the Bangabdst , a Bengali paper, replied: “When your 
tattooed ancestors lived in mountain caves or underground holes, 
ate raw flesh and jumped about like monkeys from tree to tree in 
search of fruits, our forefathers ruled over kingdoms. This is no 
empty boast, but historic truth.” 

This was merely an indirect, though vulgar, protest against the 
racial arrogance which often manifested itself in brutal assaults on 
innocent Indians, causing grievous hurts and sometimes even death, 
by Europeans who were let free without or with merely nominal 
punishment. It has been estimated that nearly 500 cases occurred 
every year in each of the provinces, and these supplied materials for 
bitter comments, sometimes mixed with satire. The Amrita Bazar 
Patrika thus commented on the murder of a Sadhu (mendicant) by 
three English soldiers at Wazirabad: “The Sadhu looked so much 


252 


THE PRESS 


like a pig that the tommies were tempted to shoot him. Oh! dear! 
dear! and now a hue and cry would be raised in the native news¬ 
papers. But after all no harm is done in this case; it is the ultimate 
object of a Sadhu to seek Nirvan and three sons of Mars by shooting 
him dead simply helped him to reach his goal at once.” 

The foreign policy of the Government was strongly attacked. 
Referring to the Second Afghan War a Bengali paper wrote in 1880: 
“Heaven only knows where the consequences of the dishonest ac¬ 
tions of the Hebrew Premier (Disraeli) will ultimately lead us”. 
The Sanjivani of Calcutta wrote on the occasion of the Third Bur¬ 
mese War: “When we think that our money, assuming the form of 
bullets, is falling upon the breasts of heroic Burmese patriots, is 
serving to fill with lamentation thousands of Burmese homes, and is 
helping to deprive a people of their God-given independence, we 
cannot help losing all patience.” Commenting on the Tibetan War 
of Lord Curzon the Amrita Bazar Patrika wrote in 1904 that “every 
Englishman should be ashamed” of it. 81 

The extracts from newspapers quoted in this chapter, and a few 
more scattered in other chapters of this volume, would-suffice to 
show that the Press very accurately reflected the mutual relations 
and attitudes of the rulers and the ruled, as will be described in de¬ 
tail in Chapters IX, X and XI. One can easily visualise how 
the haughty arrogance, caused by the racial superiority complex 
and leading to an undisguised contempt for the ‘natives’, on the part 
of the ruling community, generated in the hearts of the Indians a 
sullen resentment and bitter hatred towards their white masters and 
their system of Government. The Press widely disseminated these 
ideas among the people at large and intensified the estrangement 
between the Indians and the Englishmen. This served as a potent 
factor in fostering unity and nationalism in India. The Indian Press 
also made valuable contribution to the growth of political ideas and 
development of an all-India political consciousness among the general 
public. It is thus impossible to exaggerate its importance as one 
of the most powerful elements in the building up of the Indian na¬ 
tion in the nineteenth century. 

It could be hardly expected that the British Government would 
look favourably upon the Indian Press or even be indifferent to its 
tone. In his letter to Lord Cross, dated 21 March, 1886, Lord Duf- 
ferin refers to the agitation in Bengal, both in press and on plat¬ 
form, and thinks it to be due to Irish troubles. He then adds: “Day 
after day, hundreds of sharp-witted Babus pour forth their indigna¬ 
tion against their English oppressors in very pungent and effective 


253 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCB-II 


diatribes. Facts are either invented or misrepresented to suit the 
purpose of these ingenious gentlemen, and I must say that the way in 
which they serve them up is by no means discreditable to their lite¬ 
rary power.” In another letter dated 23 November, 1886, to Cross, 
Dufferin abuses the Bengali Press in stronger language but praises 
the Bombay papers: “Bengalee press seems to be worked by a very 
malicious and cowardly set of people, who do not seem to know what 
truth means. At Bombay, I am happy to say, I found among the 
corresponding class, even of the most advanced type, a totally dif¬ 
ferent tone. Their papers are moderate, sensible, and statesman¬ 
like, and excellent feeling exists between themselves and the Eng¬ 
lish community as well as the Civil Service, and I met amongst them 
men of the highest character and intelligence. It seems to me the 
sooner we change the capital of Bengal the better.” 82 

The last sentence is quite interesting,—-anticipating events by a 
quarter of a century. 

1. O’Malley, 189. —— - - 

2. Bams, 46. 

3. Ibid, 49. 

4. Ibid, 59-60. 

4a. Cf. above, p. 169. 

4b. For a discussion on this-point, cf. B. N. Banerji, Bdrhld Sdmayika Patra (in 
Bengali), pp. 16-19; Collet, pp. 204-5; Prabasx, 1347 B.S., Part II, pp. 654-59. 
According to some the editor of the paper was Ganga-kishor Bhattacharya. 
Both he and Hara-chandra were associated with the paper. 

5. For further details, cf. Chapter V. Quotations from Vernacular papers are given 
in Ch. HI. For a general account of Bengali papers, cf. B.N. Banerji, op. cit For 
the English Papers, Cf. Barns. 

6. Barns, 230. 

7. For a short account of Haris-chandra Mukherji and the origin of the Hindoo 
Patriot, Cf. Bengal Celebrities, pp. 64-86. 

8. The Hindu Intelligencer, 17 January, 1853; quoted by J.C. Bagal in the VUva- 
bhdratx (Bengali), Vol. X, part II, pp. 101-2. 

9. Quoted by /H.P. Chose, op. cit., 25-6. 

10. Dutt-H, 207. 

11. Ibid. 

12. Ibid, f. n., 2. 

13. 0‘Malley, 191. 

14. Ibid. 

15. Vol. IX, pp. 936-7. 

16. O’Malley, 196. 

17. Ibid, 195. 

18. Gleig Life of Munro. II. 106-7. 

19. O’Malley, 205. For tne reasons advanced by Elphinstone in support of his 
views, cf. Bams, 134. 

20. O’Malley, 196. 

21. -Ibid, 197. 

22. Beveridge, m. 130. 

23. Bams, 92-3. 

24. Ibid, 94-101. 

25. Bengal Public Consultations, Vol. 55, 17 October, 1822; No. 8 Minute. 

26. Quoted in Dutt-II, 206-7. 

27. Rammohun, 51. 

28. For full text, cf. Bams, 115-9. 

29. Collet, p. 177. The memorial was almost certainly drafted by Rammohan (ibid 

205-6). ’ 

254 


i 




THE PRESS 


30. Ibid, 180. 

31. For the full text of the Appeal, cf. Works , 445-467. 

31a. Collet, 180. 

32. O’Malley, 198-99. 

33. Ibid, 199. 

34. Ibid, 198. 

35. Ibid. 

36. CR, 1908, January, p. 94. 

37. Ibid, 102. 

38. Ibid, 196; Bams, 273. 

39. CR, 1908, January, 103-4. 

40. Thornton, VI. 53. 

41. Beveridge, HI. 252. 

42. Thornton, VI, 57. 

43. Ibid, 61 ff. 

44. B. Majumdar, 63. 

45. Thornton, VI. 58. 

46. Ibid, 62-3. 

47. Bams, 250. 

47a. Perhaps it is a mistake for lotus. 

48. Bams, 249-50. 

49. Ibid, 250. 

50. For the text of the Act, cf. Bams, 252. 

51. Ibid, 255. 

52. This article is quoted in O’Malley, 213 ff. 

53. Bams, 256. 

54. Ibid, 257. 

55. Ibid, 258-9. 

56. Ibid, 256. 

57. Cf. Ch. IX. 

58. Quoted by J. C. Bagal in the Peasant Revolution in Bengal, pp. 49-50. 

59. Bams, 269-70. 

60. Ibid, 270. 

61. Ibid, 274. 

62. Ibid, 296. 

63. Ibid, 277. 

64. See p. 230. 

65. Bams, 260. 

66. Ibid, 261. A detailed account of the Hindi and Urdu papers is given by Prof. 
Garcin de Tassy in La Langue et la Litterature Hindoustanies, 1861, p. 172. 

66a. A Nation in Making, pp. 46-7, 

66b. The Somaprak&sa was first projected by Pandit Ishwar-chandra Vidyasagar, 
and the first number was probably written by him. “But he fell sick and made 
over the paper to Pandit Dwarakanath, under whose able management the 
paper attained the foremost place among the Bengalee newspapers.” Dwaraka¬ 
nath “taught his native brethren of the journalism craft a new style of journal¬ 
ism” ( Hindoo Patriot, 9 January, 1865). B.N. BanerjL op. cit., p. 247. 

67. Barns, 303. For an account of the early history of the Patrika and quotations 
of extracts, cf. J. C. Bagal, Bharatvarsher Svddhxnatd (Bengali). 

68. Quoted in Bharatvarsher Svddhxnatd by J.C. Bagal (Preface pp. 18-19). 

69. Bams, 276. 

70. The list of the papers is given by Barns (p. 272). 

71. Bams, 273. 

72. Ibid, 279-80. 

73. Ibid, 281. 

74. Ibid, 294. 

75. H. P. Ghose, op. cit., 35. 

76. Some of these press comments are reproduced by B.C. Pal (Pal-1, pp. 275-9) of 
which a few are quoted below as specimens. 

77. Pal-I, 283-4. 

78. Kelkar, N.C., Life and Times of Tilak, pp. 103 ff., 115. 

79. Bams, 317. 

80. Cf. Vol. IX, p. 739. 

81. The passages from newspapers are quoted in JIH, XXXVHI, 599 ff. 

82. The two letters of Lord Dunerin to Cross are quoted from the original documents. 


255 


CHAPTER VII (XLV) 

SOCIAL REFORM 

I. PRINCIPLES OF REFORM 

The same rationalistic spirit which led to reforms in religion 
also sought to introduce reforms in social customs and nianners. 
There were, at the beginning of tire 19th century, numerous social 
evils of such a character as would rudely shock our sensibility at the 
present day. They were tolerated, partly out of veneration for old 
customs and partly out of sheer inertia. But the urge of a rational 
spirit which declared war against religious superstitions could ill 
brook the social evils which were eating into the vitals of the society. 
It was therefore in the very nature of things that the Brahma 
Samaj under the leadership of young Keshab-chandra should take 
up the social reform as an integral part of its religious movement. 
Some account of this has been given above in Ch. IV. As noted 
there, this urge for social reforms was the cause of both the schisms 
that took place in quick succession in the Brahma Samaj. These 
splits within its own rank and the consequent secession from the 
Hindu society made the Samaj a less effective instrument of reform 
among the Hindus. 

The situation was very different in Bombay, because there the 
Prarthana Samaj, the counterpart of Brahma Samaj, followed an 
entirely different principle under the able leadership of Mahadev 
Govind Ranade, the leading social reformer of the 19th century. The 
spirit with which, under his guidance, the social reform movement 
was carried in Bombay may be best understood from Ranade’s own 
words. 1 He welcomed the fact that —thanks to the wisdom of the 
Western Indian leaders of the Prarthana Samaj movement—the schi¬ 
sms of Bengal in the Brahma Samaj were not repeated in Bombay, 
and the supporters of the movement remained within the pale of 
their respective communities. Ranade said: * “We do not want to 
break with the past and cease all connection with our society. We 
do not desire to give up our hold on the old established institutions”. 
He was not, he said, “one of those who would abandon society be¬ 
cause it tolerates what seems to them to be great evils”. Ranade 
believed that “there was an ideal Hindu society in the old days but 
evils crept in during a period of depression, when in panic and weak¬ 
ness, a compromise was made with the brute forces of ignorance 
and superstition”. To Ranade, therefore, reform was merely the 

256 


SOCIAL REFORM 


work of liberating society from the restraints that were wrongfully 
imposed upon it. In support of this he pointed out that most of the 
evil customs which now prevailed in the Hindu society ran counter 
to the practices observed in the old times, and cited as instances 
the ‘dependent status of women, infant marriage, prohibition of re¬ 
marriage of widows, restriction of marriage within the narrow circle 
of the sub-caste to which one belonged, ignorance and seclusion 
(purdah) of women, prohibition of foreign travel, various kinds of 
abstentions enforced upon women, restrictions as to interdining 
among various castes, untouchability, etc.’ These, according to Hanade, 
were innovations for which no sastric (scriptural) sanction could be 
pleaded. But he took care to add in a spirit of reverence for the old: 
“It may be, they were made with the best intentions. Admittedly 
they have failed to carry out these good intentions, if any, then en¬ 
tertained, and in seeking to upset them and restore the more healthy 
ideals they superseded, the reformers of the present day are not 
certainly open to the charge, that they are handling roughly our 
time-honoured institutions”. 

This was, no doubt, an attempt to pacify the orthodox section, 
and thus smooth down the path of reforms. But it was not long 
before Ranade realized that he had over-simplified the problem. If 
the antiquity of a social institution be the only criterion for its 
goodness or validity, then the door is thrown widely open for ad¬ 
mitting many customs which are unacceptable, nay even revolting, 
to our modern taste. So when neo-Hinduism ushered in the extreme 
revivalist movement, Ranade realized the danger of the principle he 
had enunciated, and the rationalism in Ranade got the better of his 
traditionalism. The unwisdom of reviving old customs, simply be¬ 
cause they were ancient, was the main theme of one of his addresses 
at the Social Conference. He said in a pathetic tone that “while 
the new religious sects condemn us for being too orthodox, the ex¬ 
treme orthodox section denounces us for being too revolutionary 
in our methods. According to these last, our efforts should be di¬ 
rected to revive, and not to reform.their watchword is that re¬ 

vival, and not reform, should be our motto. They advocate a return 
to the old ways, and appeal to the old authorities and the old sanc¬ 
tion.” Then, forgetting that he himself had encouraged the idea, he 
raised the very pertinent issue: ‘What particular period of our his¬ 
tory is to be taken as the old?’ For, as he rightly pointed out, ‘our 
usages have been changed from time to time, during the different 
periods represented by the Vedas, Smritis and the Puranas*. He 
turned the table completely against the revivalists by enumerating 
various abominable practices and immoral usages prevalent in India 


257 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 

in the old days, and then asking them whether they were prepared 
to re-introduce them. “Shall we”, asked he, “revive the twelve 
forms of sons, or eight forms of marriage.the Niyoga sys¬ 
tem. Sati and infanticide customs.?” Ranade then went 

on to argue that “if these usages were good and beneficial, why were 
they altered by our wise ancestors? If they were bad and injurious 
how can any claim be put forward for their restoration after so 
many ages?” He had evidently to contradict or bypass his earlier 
views, as he found that the sleeping giant of revivalism which he had 
awakened thereby proved too powerful for him. As a wiser but 
sadder man he concluded that “in a living organism as a society is, 
no revival is possible and reformation is the only alternative open 
to us”. 2 He then proceeded to determine the principles on which 
this reformation must be based. The general principle enunciated 
by him was to root out those ideas and their outward forms which 
were responsible for the decline of the Hindus during the past three 
thousand years. Regarding the existing customs, the primary question 
was not whether they were sufficiently old, but whether they would 
altogether suit the changed circumstances of society. It meant, he 
proceeded to explain, that we must learn to be guided by our con¬ 
science, the wisdom of sages coming only to our aid and not to over¬ 
power us. In other words, Ranade came round to the view that the 
only basis of social reform was the real need of the country as ra¬ 
tionally conceived. But whatever might have been the theoretical 
differences, all social reformers virtually agreed on the need of re¬ 
moving the concrete abuses or evils cited by Ranade, as mentioned 
above. 

r 

To this list Ranade himself added a few others which he support¬ 
ed with his whole heart but on which there was no such unanimity 
of views. These were purity-movement comprising anti -nautch 
(dancing) and temperance agitation, admission of converts from 
other faiths, and reduction in extravagant marriage expenses. 
Throughout the nineteenth century there was an active propaganda 
for social reform on these lines almost all over India, but more 
particularly in Bengal and Bombay. When the Indian National 
Congress was formed there was a proposal to make it a forum for 
discussing not only political but also social problems. For, according 
to a school of thought political advancement was not possible with¬ 
out social progress. The Congress, however, wisely it seems, res¬ 
tricted its sphere of work to politics only, and so in 1887 Ranade 
founded the Indian National Social Conference which met every 
year at the time of the Congress session, though entirely as a sepa¬ 
rate organization. He worked steadily, and not without some 


258 





SOCIAL REFORM 


success against such glaring social evils as child-marriage, the purdah 
system, and the prohibition of widow-marriage. 

The spirit of social reform in the nineteenth century cannot be 
judged merely by the concrete results it produced. The zeal with 
which the progressive section in society took up the various pro¬ 
blems and launched series of campaigns against enormous odds is 
truly remarkable. How difficult such a task was would appear from 
the miserable plight of the pioneers of female education described in 
the last section of this chapter, and the violent opposition which was 
offered even by educated and highly placed men to the abolition of 
a cruel and inhuman rite like the Sati, mentioned in the next section. 
These two instances, among others, should make us realize the stiff¬ 
ness of opposition by the orthodox section against which the refor¬ 
mers had to carry on their struggle. And when we remember that 
the orthodox section, as is always the case, was backed up by the 
majority of the people and the best part of the material resources 
of the country, our admiration ought to increase for those small 
bands of social reformers who carried on almost a hopeless struggle 
throughout the nineteenth century at great personal sacrifice and 
not unoften at the risk of personal safety. 

But orthodoxy was not the only obstacle to reformers. There was 
division in their own ranks regarding the method and speed of re¬ 
forms. Some were so much carried away by their zeal that they would 
not brook any delay, nor refuse any means by which the object 
could be gained. Others were against sudden and violent changes 
and wanted to proceed more cautiously. This difference was clear¬ 
ly manifested on the specific issue of social legislation by the Govern¬ 
ment. It was welcomed by one party and opposed by the other. 
The nature of this difference may be illustrated by a concrete in¬ 
stance. In 1855 the Maharaja of Burdwan presented a petition to 
the Legislative Council setting forth the monstrous evils arising 
from the practice of unrestricted polygamy, specially among the 
Kulins of Bengal. The Lieutenant-Governor, Sir J. P. Grant, promised 
in 1857 to introduce a Bill on the subject; but the Mutiny stopped 
all further action, and also changed the attitude of the Government 
regarding social legislation. So when in 1863, several petitions 
were presented to the Government by nearly 21,000 Hindus in Ben¬ 
gal for the enactment of a law to restrain the abuses, the Governor- 
General in Council refused to introduce a Bill as recommended by 
the Government of Bengal, but advised it to appoint a Committee 
to review the situation. The Committee, appointed in 1866, includ¬ 
ed several eminent Indians and Europeans. They reported in 1867 
to the effect that they could not suggest the enactment of any 


259 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCB-II 

declaratory law or of any legislative measure that would suffice for 
the suppression of the abuse of polygamy. Even more important 
than this decision was the opinion expressed by two Indian members 
of the Committee, namely, Rama-nath Tagore and Digambar Mitra. 
They held that the evils had been too much exaggerated and were 
already on the decline, and that “this question may, without injury 
to public morals, be left for settlement to the good sense and judg¬ 
ment of the people.” The third Indian member, Jay-krishna Mukher- 
ji, also held that the State should not interfere in the matter. Pandit 
Ishwar-chandra Vidyasagar was the only member to submit a note 
of dissent. He maintained that the evils were not greatly exaggerat¬ 
ed and that the decrease of these evils was not sufficient to do away 
with the necessity of legislation. He was therefore in favour of 
passing a Declaratory Law. The Secretary of State decided against 
any legislation. 3 

The main issue thus raised in 1855 continued to agitate, and 
divide, Hindu society for the next fifty years. Eminent men like 
Bankim-chandra Chatterji in Bengal and B. G. Tilak in Bombay were 
definitely opposed to the idea of a foreign Government legislating 
on social matters. Ranade did not agree, and said, “that the force 
of this objection would be irresistible if the interference was of 
foreign initiation”. He also enumerated the various advantages of 
legislation. It would be a change from the law of status to the law 
of contract, from the restraints of family and caste customs to the 
self-imposed restraints of the free will of the individual. It would 
also free social restrictions from the binding character of religious 
injunctions and liberate the national mind from the thraldom of 
superstitions. 4 


II. GENERAL REVIEW 

It is somewhat singular that almost all the important social re¬ 
forms of the nineteenth century should centre round women. The 
reason is not far to seek. The most important characteristic that 
marked the decadence of Hindu society was the gradual but steady 
degradation in the position of women and the lower castes, specially 
the untouchables. Both these features were eating into the vitality 
of the society and contributed not a little to the general degradation 
of the body-politic. It was inevitable, therefore, that the attention 
of the Indians should be drawn to these evils by the impact of wes¬ 
tern civilization, which held out a much higher ideal in both these 
respects. Of the two great evils, those associated with women 
claimed greater attention in the nineteenth century, while the other 
was to figure equally prominently in the twentieth. 


260 


SOCIAL REFORM 


The reason why the attention of the English-educated Indians 
was first drawn to the urgent necessity of reform in the status of 
women seems to be that it affected their own kith and kin whose 
vivid, real, and manifold miseries profoundly stirred their emotions 
as soon as they had freed their minds from the age-long shackles 
of superstition. The degrading position of women in Hindu so¬ 
ciety at the beginning of the nineteenth century was indeed most 
deplorable. It was a long tale of suffering and humiliation almost 
from birth to death. Among several tribes the birth of a girl was 
regarded as specially unfortunate, and they did not hesitate to kill 
them deliberately soon after they were born. The marriage of girls 
at an early age, long before puberty, and even sometimes when they 
were five to ten years old, if not earlier still, was the prevalent cus¬ 
tom amongst the Hindus, with rare exceptions. This deprived the 
girls of any opportunity of receiving any education worth the name, 
and denied them altogether any say in the matter of selecting their 
partners in life. If the husband died, even when the wife was quite 
young or a baby, she was faced with the alternatives of either burning 
herself along with his dead body, or living a desolate and miserable 
life, most often as a neglected, if not hated, drudge in the family. 
For, beyond a bare maintenance, she had no right to the property 
of her dead husband, and could not marry again. But though 
the wife had no right to marry after the death of her husband, he 
could, and not unoften did, marry any number of wives, not only 
after her death but even during her lifetime. To carry on the house¬ 
hold life with a number of co-wives was bad enough, but the lot of 
girls of certain classes, called Kulins, in Bengal^—though fortunately 
limited in number—was far more pitiable, owing to strict restric¬ 
tions which confined the choice of husband to a very limited number 
of families. Sometimes a large number of girls—fifty, sixty or 
even more—were married to one person. Cases are on record where 
a large number of Kulin girls, with ages varying from ten to sixty, 
and related as sisters, cousins, and aunts of varying degrees, were 
all married together at on^ and the same time, by one common nup¬ 
tial ceremony, to an octogenarian on his death bed. Most of the 
Kulin girls, even when married, had to spend their lives in their 
fathers’ home, for the husband could maintain only a few at a time 
in his own house, and the rest had to Wait their turn as the common 
husband had to take several rounds to visit his numerous wives 
whose names and addresses he could find out only by reference to a 
written record. These tours were prompted by the regular hono¬ 
rarium paid to him by the wife he visited, or rather her relatives. 

The greatest evil, from which the women suffered, was the de¬ 
nial of education, due partly to early marriage, and partly to a 


261 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 


superstition that an educated woman was fated to become a widow. 
Still some women managed to get some education and ventilated 
their grievances through newspapers. Reference may be made in 
this connection to two remarkable letters published in the Samdchara - 
darpana , on 14 and 21 March, 1835. 3 4 5 The first was a communication 
sent in the name of a ‘woman of Santipur/ a well-known locality in 
the Nadia District, Bengal. She depicts in pathetic language the 
sad plight of the widows and Kulin girls of Bengal who are denied 
the pleasure of living with their husbands unlike women of some 
other parts of the British territory. While the men may freely en¬ 
joy the company of concubines and whores with impunity, and still 
occupy honourable position in society, a woman is condemned if she 
visits a paramour. Reference is also made to the miserable diet 
and clothings prescribed for the widows. All these, it is contended, 
are against the Hindu scriptures, and an appeal is made to the British 
Government to do justice to women according to Hindu law and to 
prescribe as illegal the practice of keeping concubines. 

The second letter, inspired by the first, was a communication in 
the name of the ‘women of Chinsurah’, about thirty miles from Cal¬ 
cutta. It is an appeal to their fathers and brothers against a number 
of specific evils or disqualifications which are put in the form of 
questions, serially numbered as follows: 

1. Why are no arrangements made for our education as is done 
for the women of civilized countries? 

2. Why are we not allowed to mix freely with other men and 
women like the women of other countries? 

3. Why are we transferred like cattle, at the tender age of 

4, 5, 10, or 12, to unknown men, who have no education, 
wealth or beauty, and denied the right of choosing our own 
husbands? To describe all the evil results of this system 
would be to create hatred against us. So we pray that we 
may be permitted to select our husbands under your gene¬ 
ral supervision. 

4. Why in the name of marriage are you selling us to the high¬ 
est bidders so that our husbands, who purchase us by 
money, regard us as mere chattels? The purchase money is 
not given to us as stfidhana but is enjoyed by you. Our 
rulers would commit crime in the eyes of God if they tole¬ 
rate such abominable practices. 

5. Why do you marry us to a person who has already many 
wives? Is it possible for a husband to do his duty to a num¬ 
ber of wives? 


262 


SOCIAL REFORM 


6. If a husband may marry after the death of his wife, why is 
a wife debarred from marrying after her husband’s death? 
Does not a woman possess the same desire for a conjugal 
life as a man? Can you prevent the evils arising from such 
unnatural laws? 

The letter concludes with another appeal to the brothers and 
fathers to consider all these points and feel pity for the life of miser¬ 
able slaves to which they have reduced the women, their own kith 
and kin. 

These two letters might have been regarded as sufficient testi¬ 
mony for the awakening of women in Bengal, if they were really 
written by women; But it is just possible that they were the com¬ 
positions of some men and sent in the name of women to evoke pity 
and sympathy. In any case, they put very pithily the many social 
evils which made the life of Bengali women wretched and miserable. 

Such appeals, however, did not go in vain. Vigorous agitation 
was carried on by the English-educated Hindus, in the teeth of fierce 
opposition by the orthodox section, to spread education among wo¬ 
men and to remove the evils, referred to above, from which they 
were suffering. The reformers were partially successful in their ef¬ 
forts. Education was promoted among women, female infanticide 
and Sati were prohibited, and widow-remarriage was legalised, as 
will be related in the following sections. Efforts to stop polygamy 
were not equally successful, though its rigours, such as are illus¬ 
trated by Kulinism , were considerably minimised by the spread of 
education and liberal ideas during the nineteenth century. It is to 
be noted that while Ishwar-chandra Vidyasagar put forth his efforts 
and energy to prohibit the evil of polygamy he was opposed by men 
like Bankim-chandra Chatterji, the great, if not the greatest, Bengali 
writer, the apostle of nationalism, and the author of the 
V ande-matcCram hymn. Certainly Bankim-chandra was not averse to 
social reforms, but it is apparent that even some of the English- 
educated and most advanced Indian thinkers of the nineteenth 
century were very much against the principle of abolishing social 
abuses like polygamy by legislation. 6 They were of opinion that 
spread of western education and the resulting social enlightenment, 
perhaps aided by economic causes, would slowly eradicate the evils. 
This has not proved to be a forlorn hope, for polygamy, declared 
illegal in independent India, certainly fell into disfavour and disuse, 
and a strong moral force was silently operating against it, even at 
the end of the period under review. The gradual abolition of child- 
marriage has followed a similar process. 


263 


vTHE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCB-II 

The same thing may be said of another evil system, viz., purdah 
or seclusion of women. This custom, more strictly observed by the 
Muslims all over India, and probably borrowed by the Hindus from 
them in Medieval age, was prevalent among the high class Hindus 
of Northern India, but unknown in the Deccan and South India 
where the Muslim influence was less enduring and smaller in its 
extent. This long-standing practice was denounced by reformist 
sects like the BrShma Samaj and practically renounced by them, 
though by degrees. Their precept and example in this respect as 
well as in promoting education among women, remarriage of widows, 
abolition of child-marriage and polygamy, and in general improve¬ 
ment of the status and position of women, contributed largely to 
similar reforms within the Hindu society. Though the Brahma Sa¬ 
maj is no longer a living force in Bengal, it has left a rich legacy of 
these and other social reforms, such as abolition of the rigours of caste 
distinctions, sanction of sea-voyage, interdining with lower castes 
and non-Hindus, removal of restrictions about forbidden food and 
drink etc. These reforms were effected gradually and almost im¬ 
perceptibly, and only their beginning could be noticed at the end of 
the period under review. But the progress of western education 
and western ideas completed or accelerated the process that was 
initiated under the influence of non-conforming religious sects like 
the Brahma Samaj, Arya Samaj and others. 

Although the social reforms in Bengal in the nineteenth century 
centred mainly round the improvement of women’s condition, the 
miserable state of the lower classes was not altogether lost sight 
of. The abolition of slavery and slave trade, to which detailed refe¬ 
rence will be made in a later section, was an important landmark in 
the history of social reforms in India. Two legislations of 1849 are 
also deserving of notice. By these the abominable practice of brand¬ 
ing convicts was abolished, and provision was made for the custody 
of lunatics. 041 

There was a strenuous campaign against drunkenness, an evil 
which assumed serious proportions both among the high and the low, 
and the rich and the poor. Temperance societies were established, 
tracts were written, and some of the best Bengali dramatists wrote 
satires to condemn the evils. 

The social reformers directed their attention to the suppression 
of many cruel rites and practices performed in the name of religion. 
The more important of these will be referred to in the subsequent 
sections. An instance of minor ones may be referred to here. In 1865-7 
newspaper articles strongly condemned the Hindu practice of taking 
sick people to the banks of the Ganges to die, and of immersing the 

264 


SOCIAL REFORM 

lower half of his body in the water of the river, which was believed 
to hasten or even to cause many deaths. The Government was 
approached to stop this evil by legislation. The Government of 
Bengal, unwilling to prohibit the practice altogether, proposed to re¬ 
gulate it by requiring that in every such case a notice should be given 
to the police in the form of a declaration signed by the nearest rela¬ 
tives of the sick man to the effect that there was no reasonable hope 
of his recovery. The Government of India, however, vetoed this 
proposal with the concurrence of the Secretary of State. 7 

In Bombay the agitation for social reform started earlier than 
in Bengal, and was not an offshoot of movement for religious reform. 
This is due to the fact that the Maratha rulers of the 18th century 
followed the old Hindu tradition of regulating social affairs, and 
showed a reforming spirit in certain directions, such as “readmission 
to Hinduism of converts, intermarriage, the enforcement of tempe¬ 
rance, the remarriage of girls who had been engaged or informally 
married by force or fraud, and the prohibition of sale of girls. 
Instances of excommunication being set aside by the State were not 
unknown.” 7 ® This tradition exercised some influence upon the 
society even after the establishment of British rule in Bombay. 
Even as far back as the 1830’s Gangadhar Shastri Jambhekar and 
Jagannath Shankershet carried on a campaign for taking back Chris¬ 
tian converts into Hindu society. Out of their efforts grew the Hindu 
Missionary Society started by Gajananrao Vaidya to re-admit con¬ 
verts into Hindu society. Organized efforts were made during the 
forties to fight social inhibitions, particularly those associated with 
the caste system. A society called Paramahamsa Sabba was 
founded in 1849 with this object in view. It was a sort of secret 
association, at whose meetings members partook of food cooked by 
persons of low caste and consumed forbidden food and drink. 

The establishment of the Prarthana Samaj on the model of the 
Brahma Samaj of Bengal gave a great impetus to social reform, as 
mentioned above. 7b Reference has already been made to the views 
and activities of Mahadev Govind Ranade who started an all-India 
movement for social reform. There were several other eminent 
social reformers in Bombay. One of them, Jotiba Phule, took up the 
cause of women and down-trodden masses. In 1851 he started a 
girls’ school in Poona with the assistance of his wife. Undaunted by 
the harassment of the society he opened a school for the children of 
the depressed classes and helped the widows to remarry. As a result 
he and His wife were driven out of the house by his father. Perhaps 
this drove him to excess. His campaign for the removal of untouchabi- 
lity and the social and economic regeneration of the depressed classes 


265 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCD-II 


soon developed into an anti-Brahmin movement. He boldly chal¬ 
lenged the age-long leadership of the Brahmins and sought to instill 
courage, enthusiasm and self-reliance among the masses. His atti¬ 
tude was one of social revolt against the domination of the Brahmin 
caste in all spheres of social and political life in Mahaiashtra. He 
championed the cause of villagers and propagated social reform 
among them. He founded the Satya-Shodak Sam&j with the object 
of extirpating the Brahmins. 70 

Reference should also be made to Karsondas Mulji, a young 
Bania student, who was driven from his home for writing a tract in 
support of widow remarriage. In addition to his efforts to popula¬ 
rise this reform he set an example by refusing to perform expiatory 
rites after his return from England. But his most vigorous and 
successful campaign was directed against the Vaishiiava-Vallabh 
community to which he himself belonged. The spiritual heads of 
the community, called Maharajas, indulged in debauchery and 
licentiousness, and took liberty with the women of the community. 
Karsondas denounced these practices and wrote: “No other sectaries 
have ever perpetrated such shamelessness, subtlety, immodesty, 
rascality and deceit as has the sect of the Maharajas”. After he 
wrote in this strain for about a month the Maharaja brought a libel 
suit against him. His plea of justification was accepted and the 
trial judge was fervent in his appreciation of Karsondas’s courage 
and public spirit. 74 

Another well-known social reformer was Paj^liia Ramabai. 
She travelled all over India, married a Bengali, and became a widow. 
‘Her denunciation of men for keeping women down, her marriage out 
of caste, and her criticism of popular Hinduism roused the orthodox 
section against her, though they admired her scholarship and elo¬ 
quence*. She started the Arya MahiM Samaj in Poona but met with 
little success. ‘Piqued at the attitude of her countrymen, she 
turned to the Christian missionaries and, after spending three years 
in England and America, returned to Poona with promise of finan¬ 
cial support for educational work. She became a Christian and 
started the Sarada Sadan in 1889. Though Ranade and R. G. Bhan- 
darkar sympathised with her, Tilak denounced her for engaging in 
conversion under the garb of imparting education. Ultimately she 
openly admitted the proselytising character of the Sarada Sadan and 
both Bhandarkar and Ranade cut off their association with her 
activities. 7 ® 

The rise of Neo-Hinduism or Hindu Revivalism 74 slowed down 
the progress of social reform to a certain extent towards the end 
of the 19th century. But the activities of the Arya Samaj kept up the 


266 


SOCIAL REFORM 


tempo in the Punjab. The clarion call of Vivekananda to remove 
the excrescences while retaining the essential spirit of Hinduism, 
particularly his passionate appeaL against untouchability and in 
favour of the uplift of women and the masses, gave a new vigour 
to the spirit of reform. 7 * 

It is worthy of note that by the end of the 19th century the 
spirit of social reform was in evidence in almost all the Provinces of 
India which had hitherto been lukewarm in this respect. 7h The 
spirit also seized some rulers of the Indian States, particularly those 
of Mysore, Baroda and Travancore. The Mysore Government 
passed a law “to put down marriages of girls under 12 and pre¬ 
vent unequal marriages between men over 45 and girls below 14,” 71 
An Act passed in Baroda fixed the minimum age of marriage at 12 
for girls and 16 for boys. 7 * Association for the promotion of social 
reform sprang up all over India. 

In conclusion it may be added that if we take a broad and gene¬ 
ral view and compare the state of Hindu society at the beginning of 
the 19th century with that at its end, the reforms, accomplished 
by legislation as well as silent process of evolution, cannot be regard¬ 
ed as either inadequate or unsatisfactory. Apart from what has 
been said above, or will be stated later in this chapter, attention may 
be drawn to the state of society in South India which Abbe Dubois 
witnessed with his own eyes towards the close of the eighteenth 
century. He refers to polyandry among the Nairs in Malabar coast 
and the custom among the Tolyas in Madura of brothers, uncles, 
and nephews having a common wife. In the Carnatic hills men and 
women did not wash their clothes till they wore away by use. Among 
a caste in Eastern Mysore the mother, giving her eldest daughter in 
marriage, had to puncture two of her fingers. The respect due from 
the Sudras to the Brahmanas, and from women to men, was shown by 
uncovering the upper part of the body of the inferior, even of a 
woman, before a man of the superior class. Reference is made to 
barren women who took vows to get children by resorting to the 
most abominable practices; and also to procession in which the 
images of gods and goddesses were made to mimic obscene gestures 
to one another. Sincere devotion in many temples took the form of 
such cruel practices as walking on burning fire, hook-swinging (to be 
described later), piercing the cheeks and the lips or the tongue with 
iron rods or silver wire. 8 

All these shocking customs 9 which prevailed at the beginning of 
the nineteenth ceutury 10 were either altogether abolished or were 
in a process of steady decline by the beginning of the twentieth. 
The notorious system of Devadasls 11 was also gradually declining. 


267 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

* 

Abbe Dubois further mentions that thousands of Hindus and Chris¬ 
tians were converted by Tipu Sultan, but whereas the Christians 
were l'econverted to Christianity, the Hindus were refused read¬ 
mission within the fold of Hinduism, even though they applied for 
it and their case was backed by the Brahmin Government of Poona. 
The $uddhi movement, supported by social reformers like Ranade 
and included as a chief item in the programme of the Arya Samaj, 
shows the advance made in respect of this glaring evil in course of 
the nineteenth century. Another evil noticed by Abbe Dubois was 
that those among the Hindus who practised such fine arts as music, 
sculpture, and painting were looked upon as even lower than Sudras. 
There has been a great change of view in this respect. On the whole, 
while the well-wishers and reformers of the Hindu society at the 
end of the 19th century were fully justified in complaining that 
much still remained to be done, every impartial critic is bound to 
admit that the advance already accomplished in a century fully en¬ 
titled it to the credit of being a progressive society. 

III. SATI 

The most important social legislation in the nineteenth century , 
was the abolition of the cruel rite of the Sati, i.e. the burning of the 
widow on the funeral pyre of her husband. 12 The nature and anti¬ 
quity of this practice have been noted above. 13 The inhuman cruelty 
involved in the practice drew the attention of Muslim rulers. 
According to Ferishta, Sikandar, a bigoted King of Kashmir at the 
beginning of the fifteenth century, prohibited the performance of 
Sati. But his liberal-minded son, Zain-ul-*Abidin restored the reli¬ 
gious rite to the Hindus. 14 In 1510 Albuquerque had prohibited 
Sati in Goa. Mughul Emperors like Akbar and Jahangir also forbade 
the practice but were unable to enforce their order beyond the neigh¬ 
bourhood of Delhi. The Peshwa Baji Rao discouraged the prac¬ 
tice. 16 The persistence of such an inhuman practice for more than, 
two thousand years only demonstrates how religious superstitions 
can deaden absolutely all rational instincts and human feelings even 
among a highly civilized people. The Spartan practice of making 
the helots shooting targets, the gladiatorial fights in Rome, and the 
burning of Christian heretics in Europe during the Medieval age, 
and even later, testify to the universality of the strange spectacle of 
inhumanity flourishing side by side with high intellectual and moral 
development in a society. 

The idea behind the practice of Sati would be clear from 
the following passage in Colebrooke’s Digest of Hindu Law , an autho¬ 
ritative manual of Hindu Law prepared by the Government with 


268 


SOCIAL REFORM 


the help of learned Brahmins. “No other effectual duty is known 
for virtuous women at any time after the deaths of their lords, except 
casting themselves into the same fire/' According to this Digest, 
failure of a widow to do this duty might lead to her rebirth as ani¬ 
mals, while its faithful observance would not only enable her to 
‘enjoy delight with her husband' for eternity but also expiate the 
sins of her husband’s maternal and paternal ancestors up to three 
generations. 

The British Government had given a clear undertaking that 
they would preserve the existing laws of both the Hindus and the 
Muslims, and would protect them in the free exercise of their re¬ 
ligion. The Government of Bengal did not, therefore, like to interfere 
even when they were strongly urged to do so by their own officials. 
The Madras Government followed suit; the Bombay Govern¬ 
ment did not, at first, tolerate this practice but, after the annexation of 
Peshwa's dominions, adopted the policy of neutrality, and even pas¬ 
sed a regulation to the effect that ‘assistance at the rite of self-im¬ 
molation known as Sati, was not murder/ 16 

But Europeans, unfettered by any obligation to maintain neu¬ 
trality in religious affairs, refused to tolerate such inhuman practice. 
The Supreme Court in Calcutta, the Danes at Serampore, the Dutch 
at Chinsura, and the French at Chandernagore prohibited the practi¬ 
ce within their jurisdiction. But this did not go very far to minimise 
the evil. For the rites were performed just outside the jurisdiction 
of the city, sometimes even in its suburbs. 

As far back as 1789 English district officers wrote to the Supreme 
Government asking for permission to disallow a practice at which 
human nature shudders. But the Government, true to the principle 
of neutrality, gave directions to their officers to confine their laudable 
efforts to dissuasion and not to adopt any coercive measures. Though 
this method proved occasionally successful, particularly when the 
party approached the authorities for permission, the evils were too 
wide-spread to be seriously affected by such measures. According 
to a census report of the Christian missionaries at Serampore, in 
1804 no less than three hundred cases occurred in six months within 
a radius of 30 miles from Calcutta. 17 

The voluntary self-immolation by a widow, though sanctioned 
by religion, was inhuman in itself, but the Sati was rendered more 
abominable by the manner in which it was often performed. There 
is no doubt that many widows, hardened by religious superstitions, 
or influenced by other considerations, voluntarily sacrificed them¬ 
selves, and their grim resolve, undeterred by horrors of physical 

169 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

\ 

pain, deaf to all entreaties of dear and near ones, and unshaken by 
earnest persuasion of all kinds, extorts a sort of admiration. But 
there is equally little doubt that many cases, perhaps a large majo¬ 
rity, did not fall under this category. In not a few instances a young 
widow was reported to have made the choice under duress, pressure 
being put upon her by her relatives, who either hoped to secure vica¬ 
rious renown for virtue and piety for the family, or, worse still, want¬ 
ed to get rid of her for serving their material interests. It became 
also almost a normal practice to take good care to see that once 
an unfortunate widow made the fatal choice, she could not escape 
the cruel fate even if she wished to do so. In not a few cases she 
was even drugged for the same purpose, and her body on the funeral 
pyre was pressed down by bamboo poles. 

It was natural that protests against such practices would be 
strong and numerous. The Government, in spite of its pledge of 
neutrality, could not remain unmoved. In a letter dated 5th Febru¬ 
ary, 1805, Wellesley referred the matter to the Nizamat Adalat. The 
judges of this Adalat consulted the Hindu Pandits and forwarded 
their views to the Government. The Pandits held that widows, ex¬ 
cepting certain categories (such as pregnant, under the age of pu¬ 
berty, or with infants without any one else to take care of them), 
would, by burning themselves along with their husbands, contribute 
to the happiness of both themselves and their husbands in the next 
world. The Pandits, however, clearly laid down that it was contrary to 
law and customs to drug or intoxicate a woman in order to induce her 
to become a Sati. In forwarding these opinions the judges of the Niza¬ 
mat Adalat advised that the Sati could be abolished in many areas 
where it was rarely practised, and regulated in others according to 
the recommendations of the Pandits. But they held that a general 
order for the wholesale abolition of the practice would offend the 
religious susceptibilities of the Hindus. 18 

Seven years passed before the Government took any action on 
the lines of the recommendation of the Pandits. Orders were issued 
in 1812 (though not circulated till 1813) prohibiting intoxication, 
drugging, or any other means to induce a widow to become a Sati 
against her will. This was supplemented by two other sets of in¬ 
structions circulated in 1815 and 1817. By these the district magis¬ 
trates were to send annual returns of the cases of Sati, and the rela¬ 
tives were required to give previous intimation of impending Sati 
to the Police; further, certain categories of widows were declared 
ineligible for becoming Sati. All these orders were issued to the 
Government officers through the Nizamat Adalat. 19 


270 


SOCIAL REFORM 


While these orders did little good, they indirectly seemed to indi¬ 
cate the approval of the Government in those cases of Sati which did 
not fall under the restrictive clauses. Protests became stronger 
every day, particularly on the ground that the statistics proved the 
Sati to be a more or less local custom rather than a part of the gene¬ 
ral Hindu Law. The figures for the years 1815-17 showed that as 
against 864 cases in five districts of Bengal alone, there were only 
663 cases in the rest of. British India. The Court of Directors also 
took a serious view of the situation and wrote on June 17, 1823, that 
they felt very doubtful whether the measures already taken “have 
not tended rather to increase than to diminish this practice”, and 
they consented, only with much reluctance, “to make the British 
Government, by specific permission of the suttee, an ostensible party 
to the sacrifice.” The Court of Directors proceeded even further and 
added: “We are averse also to the practice of making British courts 
expounders and vindicators of the Hindu religion wlien it leads to 
acts which not less as legislators than as Christians we abominate.” 

Lord Amherst stated the views of his Government in a letter he 
wrote to the Court of Directors on December 3, 1824: “Nothing but 
the apprehension of evils infinitely greater than those arising from the 
existence of the practice should induce us to tolerate it for a day.” 
It is on record that both the Marquess of Hastings and Lord Amherst 
feared that the abolition of Sati by legislation would spread disaffec¬ 
tion in the Bengal army. Subsequent events showed that such a 
fear cannot be regarded as absolutely groundless. 20 

A further reason, which induced the Government of India to *go 
slow’ in the matter, in spite of vigorous protests on all sides, was 
their belief that with the progress of knowledge and English educa¬ 
tion, the Indians themselves would condemn the practice of Sati, and 
then the abolition of this practice would be safe and expedient. 
The Marquess of Hastings, Lord Amherst and many others fondly 
believed that such a day would not be long in coming. 21 

* 

This idea was not without some justification. For a sense of 
moral indignation was being slowly roused in the minds of the 
Indians themselves against this horrible and cruel rite. In this 
matter, as in so many others,'Raja Rammohan Roy was in the fore¬ 
front of the cry for reforms. He worked with his whole heart and 
soul for the abolition of this horrid rite, and devoted his whole energy 
for the purpose. When the orthodox Hindus of Calcutta sent a peti¬ 
tion to the Government for the repeal of the orders issued in 1812, 
1815, and 1817, Rammohan and his followers submitted a counter- 

271 


THE BRITISH PARAIflQUNTCY AND. INDIAN RENAISSANCES—II 

petition in August, 1818, narrating gruesome details, connected with 
the practice, in the following words: 

“Your petitioners are fully aware, from their own knowledge 
and from the authority of credible eye-witnesses, that cases have fre¬ 
quently occurred where women have been induced by the persuasions 
of their next heirs, interested in their destruction, to burn themselves 
on the funeral piles of their husbands; that others who have been in¬ 
duced by fear to retract a resolution, rashly expressed in the first 
moments of grief, of burning with their deceased husbands, have been 
forced upon the pile, and there bound down with ropes and pressed 
with green bamboos until consumed by the flames; that some, after 
flying from the flames, have been carried back by their relations and 
burnt to death. All these instances, your petitioners humbly sub¬ 
mit, are murders according to every Shastra as well as to the com- 
monsense of all nations.” 22 

» 

Rammohan also wrote tracts in Bengali to convince the people 
that the horrid practice of Sati was not only inhuman, but also 
lacked the sanction of the Sdstras. Some of these tracts were in ex¬ 
tensive circulation and also translated into English. They were 
written in the form of disputes between an advocate and an oppo¬ 
nent of the practice in which the former’s position was shown to be 
untenable. 23 Rammohan also carried on a vigorous campaign 
against Sati through his journal SambadCL-Kaumvdt. He was vio¬ 
lently opposed by the orthodox Hindus led by Raja Radha-kanta Dev, 
and it is stated on reliable authority, that “for a time Rammohan’s 
life was in danger.” 24 But the undaunted champion of the right¬ 
eous cause pursued his course with unflagging zeal and industry, and 
succeeded in winning over a considerable section of the Hindus on 
his side. Bishop Heber refers to Dr. Marshman’s remark in 1824 
that “the Brahmins have no longer the power and popularity which 
they had when he first remembers India, and among the laity many 
powerful and wealthy persons agree, and publicly express their 
agreement, with Rammohan Roy in reprobating the custom”. 24 * 

Lord William Bentinck came out to India as Governor-General 
with instructions from the Court of Directors to “consider definite 
measures for the immediate or gradual abolition of Sati,” There is 
no doubt that the Directors were influenced by the wave of liberal¬ 
ism in England which swept away, in recent times, many abuses of 
long standing. Bentinck, “a reformer by temperament,” was also 
under this influence, and lost no time in taking up the question in, 
right earnest. He appreciated the effect that knowledge and educa¬ 
tion were slowly producing by way of diminishing the cases of Sati , 
but he thought that the influence of these factors was mostly limited 

272 


SOCIAL REFORM 


to upper classes in Calcutta and was not likely to extend to the popu¬ 
lation at large. But before taking any definite action he instituted a 
confidential inquiry to ascertain the views of civil and military offi¬ 
cers. Of the 49 military officers to whom he wrote on the subject, 
24 supported total and immediate suppression of the rite, 20 were 
in support of abolition by indirect means, and 5 were opposed to in¬ 
terference of any kind with the practice. The Superintendent of 
Police and nine-tenths of the public functionaries in the interior 
were in favour of abolition. Of the 15 civil servants consulted by 
Bentinck 8 were in favour of immediate abolition. All the five 

i 

judges of the Nizam at Adalat were also in favour of immediate 
abolition. 25 

Opposition, however, came from the most unexpected quarters. 
H. H. Wilson, a reputed oriental scholar, as well as Raja Rammohan 
Roy, advised Bentinck against any legislation to prohibit the practice 
of Sati, Raja Rammohan had a “constitutional aversion to coer¬ 
cion”, 25 and, in view of the experience he had already gained by his 
vigorous agitation against Sati, seemed to prefer steady pursuit of 
persuasive methods to any sudden innovation caused by legislation. 
He expressed the opinion that the “practice might be suppressed 
quietly and unobservedly by increasing the difficulties and by the 
indirect agency of the police”. 27 Wilson was probably also of the 
same view, and both of them feared that abolition by legislation 
would cause general distrust and dissatisfaction. 

But Bentinck had decided upon his course of action. On Novem¬ 
ber 8,1829, he laid an elaborate minute before his Council. 28 Referring 
to the apprehensions of danger from popular outbreak, he pointed 
out by quoting figures that the Sati was mostly prevalent in Ben¬ 
gal, Bihar and Orissa, the majority being in Calcutta Division. He 
then observed that among the people of these districts “so great is the 
want of courage and of vigour of character, and such the habitual sub¬ 
mission of centuries, that insurrection or hostile opposition to the will 
of the ruling power may be affirmed to be an impossible danger.” 
There would have been less assurance of safety, he said, if the practice 
were largely prevalent among the bold and manly people of Upper 
Provinces. Bentinck was satisfied from the replies he received from 
the army officers that there would be no trouble in the army if the 
Sati were prohibited. He therefore confidently hoped that the Coun¬ 
cil would share his own views about the expediency and safety of the 
abolition. 

Sir Charles Metcalfe, one of the most distinguished servants of 
the Company and the most prominent member of the Council, ex¬ 
pressed the fear that the proposed measure might possibly be “used 

273 


B.P.I.R*—18 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

by the disaffected and designing to inflame the passions of the multi¬ 
tude and produce a religious excitement.’* He, however;'jjthought of 
such a danger only in immediate future, and if there w£re no insur¬ 
rection in the early period of its operation, he did not believe that it 
would cause any danger later on. But in spite of such misgivings 
Metcalfe concurred with the proposal of the Governor-General, and 
the Council unanimously recorded: “We are decidedly in favour of 
an open, avowed and general prohibition, resting altogether upon 
the goodness of the act and our power to enforce it.” 29 

“On 4 December, 1829, Sati was declared by Regulation XVH to 
be illegal in the Bengal Presidency and punishable by the criminal 
courts. Persons assisting a voluntary sacrifice would be deemed 
guilty of culpable homicide; but those convicted of using violence or 
compulsion or assisting in burning or burying a Hindu widow in a 
state of stupefaction or in circumstances impeding the exercise of 
her free will, would be liable to sentence of death. A similar regu¬ 
lation was passed in Madras on 2 February, 1830. In Bombay Sir 
John Malcolm’s Government repealed that clause in their regulations 
which declared ‘assistance at the rites of self-immolation not to be 
murder’.” 30 

The promulgation of the Regulation was not followed by any 
popular outbreak or disaffection in the army. But the orthodox 
Hindus did not give up the battle as lost. On December 19, 1829, a 
petition for the annulment of the New Regulation was presented to 
Lord Bentinck. The signatories, consisting of 800 inhabitants of 
Calcutta, included many Zamindars and notable leaders of the Hindu 
community. Lord Bentinck met a deputation of their leaders—Raja 
Radha-kanta Dev, Maharaja Kali-krishna Bahadur and others—on 
January 14, 1830, and informed them that if they disputed his inter¬ 
pretation of Hindu Law, they might appeal to the King-in-Council. 
On the other hand, another public petition, of which Raja Rammo- 
han was “the reputed and probable author.” was sent, on January 16. 
to the Governor-General thanking him for his kind measure. It was 
signed by 300 Indians including Rammohan. 31 A meeting was held 
in the Government House, Calcutta, where a renowned Pandit spoke 
against the Sati before an audience of more than 600. 

The orthodox party sent an appeal to the King-in-Council. Ram¬ 
mohan also prepared a counter-petition 32 and carried it with him 
when he went to England. He presented it to the House of Com¬ 
mons and was himself present when the Privy Council dismissed 
the appeal of the orthodox party. Thus the curtain fell at last on a 
long-drawn tragic drama, and on an age-long superstition inflicting 


274 


SOCIAL REFORM 


the agony of death on thousands of innocent Hindu women in the 
name of religion. 

Though occasional cases of Sati were reported even after the 
passing of Regulation XVH, particularly outside British India, gra¬ 
dually the practice disappeared with the spread of knowledge and 
under the influence of the new age of reason and reforms. 

In conclusion it should be noted that sometimes the widows 
were buried alive with the dead bodies of their husbands. Accord¬ 
ing to a report of the Superintendent of Police, Lower Province, 
submitted in 1815, six widows of the Jugi community were buried 
alive with their dead husbands in the District of Tippera during 
three years- 32 * As noted above, Regulation XVII of 1829, prohibited 
the cremation as well as the burial of the widows, with their dead 
husbands. 

IV. INFANTICIDE 

Another cruel and horrible rite which Was abolished in the 
nineteenth century by the strenuous and unwearied exertions of the 
British officials was the practice of killing infant girls. Its victims 
were far larger in number than the Sati, and in cruelty and inhuma¬ 
nity the two differed only in degree, and not in kind. But infanti¬ 
cide drew less public attention because the crime was perpetrated in 
privacy, and was confined to a few tribes. 

Unlike Sati the practice of killing infant girls had no real or 
fancied religious sanction behind it. It came into vogue as a rough 
and ready solution of a social problem. Social usage among certain 
Rajput tribes prohibited intermarriage between families of the same 
clan or tribe, and social customs and conventions demanded a very 
heavy expenditure on the marriage ceremony. The problem of suit¬ 
ably marrying the daughter was therefore a difficult one. But fail¬ 
ure to marry a daughter not only involved a heavy social disgrace 
but also violated religious injunctions. In order to nip the difficulty 
in the bud, the practice gradually grew, among certain tribes, of 
killing the girl almost immediately after her birth. This was mainly 
effected in two ways. Either the mother deliberately neglected to 
suckle the child, or administered poisonous drug (mostly opium) to 
the nipple of her breast. But cases are on record where other and 
more direct methods were employed. Maharaja Dalip Singh, son 
of Ranjit Singh, said that <( he had actually seen when he was a child 
at Lahore, his sisters put into a sack and thrown into the river”. 33 
But such instances were probably very rare, and were more akin 
to the practice, prevalent in Bengal, of throwing children (both male 

275 





THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE— II 

and female) into the sacred river Ganga, in fulfilment of religious 
vows. This practice was prohibited in British India by Regulation 
VI of 1802. 

The infanticide proper, as described above, came into notice 
as far back as 1789. The practice was in vogue among two Rajput 
tribes in the province of Varanasi (Banaras), known as Rajkumar 
and Raj bans!. Although Bengal Regulation XXI of 1795 and Regu¬ 
lation in of 1804 declared such infanticide to be murder, the inhu¬ 
man practice continued almost unchecked. Ere long it was found 
that infanticide was widely prevalent among the Jharija (Jadeja) 
RSjputs in Cutch and Gujarat. It was estimated that nearly twenty 
thousand female infants were destroyed every year by the 1,25,000 
Jharija families of what now constitutes the State of Gujarat. It 
was also reported that infanticide was practised among the Rafhor 
Rajputs of Jaipur and Jodhpur as well as by the Jats and Mewatis. 34 

Several British officials—notably Duncan and Walker—distin¬ 
guished themselves by unceasing efforts to induce, by persuasion, 
the abandonment of this horrid practice. But though Rajkumars 
and Jharijas gave written undertakings to discontinue the practice, 
it continued as usual. The Government of India as well as the 
Court of Directors took up the question seriously, and Lord Hardinge 
did all in his power to put down the crime in the Native States. But 
the difficulty of detecting a crime, practised in utmost privacy, ba¬ 
ffled the varied and sustained efforts of a number of British officials. 
The British military officials who served as Political Agents in Native 
States also brought pressure upon their rulers to eradicate 
the evil. The strenuous exertions of all these, aided by various 
preventive measures and a general awakening of a rational 
spirit through the spread of Western education, ultimately bore fruit. 
The crime steadily declined in the second half of the nineteenth 
century. Still, as a measure of precaution, an Act was passed in 
1870 which enabled the authorities to enforce ‘compulsory’ regis¬ 
tration of births, and regular verification of the existence of female 
children for some years after birth, within the areas whore infanti¬ 
cide once prevailed. 36 

V. REMARRIAGE OF WIDOWS 

Another important landmark in the gradual amelioration In 
the lot\of Hindu women was the legalisation of ranarriage of widowp. 
It would appear-from what has been said abov«i® e thatli^ndu Law 
permitted a widow, under certain contingencies, to marry Again, and 
her issue by the second marriage was recognized as a legitimate heir; 
This law and practice, however, gradually came into dteM, and 

276 




SOCIAL REFORM 


the remarriage of widows, at least among higher classes, came to be 
rigidly prohibited in the Medieval age. But, as in the case of Sati, 
the iniquity of the practice drew the attention of social reformers 
during the pre-British period. 

The last notable effort to introduce remarriage of Hindu wi¬ 
dows was made by BajS Bajballabh of Dacca, a distinguished politi¬ 
cal figure at the time of Siraj-ud-daula. Anxious to remarry his 
widowed daughter he referred the matter to the learned Pandits 
all over India, and they accorded their sanction to the custom on 
the strength of the well-known verse occurring in, many Smyiti 
texts which runs as follows:—“A second husband is permitted to 
women whose (first) husband is lost (i.e., unheard of) or dead or has 
become an ascetic, or an outcaste.” 37 But in spite of religious sanc¬ 
tion, the customs and usages proved to be too strong and Rajballabh’s 
efforts proved unsuccessful. 

With the growth of Western education, and of the rational spirit 
it brought in its train, the question was seriously discussed. The 
reforming sects like Brahma Samaj introduced remarriage of wi¬ 
dows in their societies, and this had a great repercussion on the or¬ 
thodox Hindu society as well. The abolition of the Sati in 1829 
gave a fillip to this movement, and it is gratifying to note that Hindu 
women themselves wrote to the press demanding reforms of this and 
other evils from which they were suffering. 38 Some time before 
1837, a few public men of Calcutta proposed to call a meeting in 
order to encourage female education and remove the restrictions 
regarding widow-remarriage. The Calcutta Press took up the cause 
of the widow. About the same time an agitation for this reform 
was set up in Bombay. Several pamphlets on the subject were pub¬ 
lished in or about 1837 and there was an inquiry by the Bombay 
Government to elicit the views of its officers and the Pandits on the 
question. 

The agitation which was set up in the thirties continued through¬ 
out the forties, and a few Indians set the example by marrying 
widows. In 1845 the British Indian Society sounded the two religious 
associations, the Dharma Sabhd and the Tattva-bodhini Sabhd , but 
found no support or encouragement from any of them. This was a fore¬ 
taste of the great storm that burst out in Hindu society when Pandit 
Ishwar-chandra Vidyasagar, a renowned Sanskrit scholar and Princi¬ 
pal of the Sanskrit College, Calcutta, took up the question in right 
earnest. He wrote a series of articles and pamphlets in defence of 
widow-remarriage and sent a petition, signed by 987 persons, to the 
Government of India. The orthodox party sent a counter-petition 
signed by 36,763 persons. The opposition against him reached such 


277 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-II 

♦ 

an alarming stage that his life was thought to be in danger. But, 
nothing daunted, he went on educating the people and the Govern¬ 
ment, and it was mainly through his unwearied efforts that the 
Hindu Widow's Remarriage Act (Act XV of 1856) was passed on 
July 26, 1856. It legalises the marriages of widows notwithstand¬ 
ing any custom or interpretation of the Hindu Law to the contrary, 
and declares that the children of such marriages are legitimate. 

In spite of the Act, the remarriage of Hindu widows did not 
make any substantial progress. Pandit Ishwar-chandra Vidyasagar 
in Bengal and Vishnu Sastri in Western India put their heart and 
soul in propagating this reform. A Widow Remarriage Association 
was started in Bombay in 1866. But the actual number of widows 
remarried under the new Act was quite inconsiderable. 

Reference should be made in this connection to the laudable 
organized efforts made by several eminent persons to improve the 
lot of the Hindu widows. Professor D. K. Karve founded the 
Widows’ Home in Poona in 1896, and two years later Veeresalingam 
Pantulu founded a similar Home in Madras. Both of them literally 
begged from door to door to establish the Homes in their own build¬ 
ings, and spent many years of their lives in popularising the remar¬ 
riage of widows. Sasipada Bauerji also set up a Home in Calcutta, 
but it was closed down in 1901. 38 * 

VI. SLAVERY 

Slavery was a recognized institution in India since remote anti¬ 
quity. 39 But the treatment of slaves in India differed remarkably 
from that accorded to them in ancient Greece or Rome or to Negro 
slaves in more recent times. This is probably the reason why the 
Greek ambassador Megasthenes reported that slavery was unknown 
in India. That this humane spirit generally prevailed also in modem 
times may be gathered from the following observation in 1772 
by the Committee of Circuit in support of a regulation which con¬ 
demned the families of convicted d&coits (robbers and brigands) 
to be sold as slaves: 

’‘The ideas of slavery, borrowed from our American colonies, 
will make every modification of it appear in the eyes of our country¬ 
men in England a horrible evil. But it is far otherwise in this 
country; here slaves are treated as the children of the families to 
which they belong and often acquire a much happier state by their 
slavery than they could have hoped for by the enjoyment of 
liberty.” 40 


278 


SOCIAL REFORM 

This may be, generally speaking, true of slaves in Indian families, 
but contemporary references indicate that lots of many slaves must 
have been quite miserable. The branding of slaves* foreheads with 
red-hot iron rod was not unknown. The slaves were harshly treated 
by many Europeans, and, according to contemporary accounts, were 
often whipped even for minor offences. There are cases on record 
that the English ladies themselves whipped, even their men slaves, 
with their own hands. There were regular whipping houses in 
Calcutta which charged one anna for each lashing. The slaves them¬ 
selves had to carry to these houses slips from their masters indi¬ 
cating the number of lashes to be inflicted on them, together with 
the fee. The slaves were tied to the stocks and flogged fifteen to 
twenty times, and many fell down unconscious. Even more severe 
was the treatment of the run-away slaves who were caught. A 
woman slave of one Mr. Anderson was recaptured and brought be¬ 
fore a Magistrate, who ordered her to be flogged ten times before 
being returned to her master. 40 * 

In a letter dated 18 January, 1823, Leicester Stanhope made a 
passionate appeal to the Duke of Gloucester to abolish slavery in 
India. He refers to the slaves in North India as mostly domestic 
servants or kept by prostitutes for immoral profession, and those in 
South India as mostly engaged in cultivation. In Kanara alone there 
were no less than 16,000 slaves. The purchase-price of a slave is 
mentioned by him as follows: Four to fifteen rupees for a boy; 
sixteen to twenty-four rupees for a woman; twenty-four to one 
hundred and sixty rupees for an adult man. 401 * 

In general, the slaves who served as domestic servants comprised 
mostly persons who had voluntarily offered themselves or their 
children for sale in times of scarcity, as the only alternative to star¬ 
vation by death. In many cases, though not perhaps in all, such 
children were restored to their parents when better times came. It 
is on record that grown-up girls were sold by their parents as slaves, 
and the debtors and gamblers sold even their wives, sometimes for a 
paltry amount. The rich and aristocrats as well as European set¬ 
tlers in Calcutta bought the female slaves to serve as concubines. 
A large number was, however, reduced to slavery in more dubious 
ways. The Regulation about the enslavement of the wives and 
children of the dacoits (brigands), referred to above, was passed in 
the first year of Warren Hastings’s rule in Bengal. We also hear of 
children, and sometimes even adults, being stolen or forcibly seized 
by regular gangs employed by slave-traders. There was a regular 
trade in slaves, though not on a very large scale, and both Indians and 
Europeans were involved in this lucrative but nefarious business. 


279 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


Boats filled with child-slaves were brought to large towns from the 
interior and then exported to different and remote parts of India, 
as well as to the English and French colonies. 

Indian public was at one with the Government of India and 
fully supported the abolition of slavery even without any compen¬ 
sation to the owners. So the evil traffic was gradually brought 
under control by a series of Regulations during half a century. The 
organized agitation against slave-trade in Britain, commencing in 
1787, had its repercussion in India. In 1789 an official proclamation 
made it illegal to collect together persons for exporting them as 
slaves. 41 The slave trade was abolished by Britain, in 1807, in the 
British Empire. In 1811 the importation of slaves into India from 
outside was forbidden. The purchase and sale of slaves brought 
from one district to another was made a criminal offence in 1832. - 
Slavery was abolished in Britain in 1833, and twenty million pounds 
was voted by Parliament as compensation for the losses of the slave¬ 
owners. The Charter Act of 1833 required the Governor-General in 
Council to abolish slavery as soon as it could be safely and conveniently 
done. India Act V of 1843 made slavery illegal in India, but no com¬ 
pensation was paid to the owners. Lastly, keeping slaves or traffick¬ 
ing in them became an offence under the Indian Penal Code, enacted 
in I860. 42 

VII. THE EMANCIPATION ACT 

The Emancipation Act, which was always regarded by Lord 
Dalhousie as the most important of those passed by him, was con¬ 
tained in a single section, which ran as follows: 

“So much of any law or usage now in force within the terri¬ 
tories subject to the Government of the East India Company as 
inflicts upon any person forfeiture of rights or property, or may be 
held in any way to impair or affect any right of inheritance, by rea¬ 
son of his or her renouncing, or having been excluded from, the com¬ 
munion of any religion, or being deprived of caste, shall cease to be 
enforced as law in the courts of the East India Company, and in the 
courts established by Royal Charter in the said territories.” 43 

The main object as well as the effect of this Act was to remove 
a great difficulty in the way of those who wished to embrace Chris¬ 
tianity. As the converts to Christianity were mostly recruited from 
the Hindus, the new legislation created great excitement among 
them. There were special reasons for this. Under the Hindu Law 
succession to a deceased’s property involved the duty of performing 
certain religious rites for the salvation of the departed soul. As 


280 


SOCIAL REFORM 


these had to be done according to the prescription of the Hindu sas- 
tras, a Hindu convert to another religion was neither willing nor 
qualified to perform them. The Hindus, therefore, very rightly 
contended that the new Act constituted a great infringement of their 
religious principles. There were less defensible grounds of objec¬ 
tion, too. The missionary propaganda in India was not always kept 
within reasonable limits. It was openly alleged, even by men whose 
opinion carried weight, that conversion to Christianity was some¬ 
times made by force or fraud, not unoften backed by the authority 
of the ruling pdwer and the prestige attaching to a member of the 
ruling race. Whatever we may think of this, there is hardly any 
doubt that in most cases the converts were attracted more by ma¬ 
terial consideration than by the precepts of Jesus. Free maintenance, 
lure of good jobs, and many other similar considerations, not ex¬ 
cluding payment in cash or kind, accounted for the largest number of 
converts to Christianity. This naturally alarmed the Hindu com¬ 
munity. On the top of all this came the new legislation which 
threatened to take away the last obstacle in the way of such con¬ 
verts by removing the disqualification of inheriting ancestral pro¬ 
perty. This facilitated the conversion of precisely that class of 
persons which no society is prepared to lose. 

It is, therefore, no wonder, that there was a violent agitation 
against the proposed legislation. Mass meetings were held and peti¬ 
tions were sent to the authorities in large numbers The failure 
of all the attempts to stop the proposed legislation not only caused 
righteous indignation against what was almost universally believed 
to be a serious infringement of Hindu religion, but gave an edge to 
the belief, then generally held, that the British Government really 
intended to convert the Indians to Christianity. The effect of this 
belief on the great outbreak of 1857 has been referred to above. 44 
It cannot be gainsaid that of all the socio-religious measures of the 
British Government which are usually held responsible for that out¬ 
break, the Emancipation Act is the only one which can, on reason¬ 
able grounds, be put in that category. 

VIII. POST-MUTINY REFORMS 

The outbreak of the Mutiny in 1857 had an adverse effect on 
the progress of social legislation. It was held in many quarters that 
the laws prohibiting Sati and permitting remarriage of widows were 
contributory causes to that great upheaval. Some colour is lent to 
it by the fact that proclamations issued by some rebel leaders re¬ 
ferred to these as evidence of the deliberate intention of the British 
Government to convert the Hindus into Christianity. It is, however, 


281 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-II 

Permissible to doubt whether these laws had any appreciable effect 
on the minds of the people at large, or whether the propaganda, 
based on them, did influence in any way the course of events during 
the great outbreak. It is to be noted that Bengal, where alone the 
Sati was a glaring evil, took no part in the revolt. The very recent 
legislation on the remarriage of widows in 1856 could hardly affect 
the people seriously in 1857, and it was only in Bombay and Bengal, 
two provinces that remained neutral, that this reform was a living 
issue. But whatever may be the truth, the years following the 
Mutiny were marked by an extreme uhwillingness on the part of 
the British Government to interfere with socio-religious customs and 
usages of the country. 

Reference may be made to the abolition of a cruel rite, known 
as “hook-swinging”, a ceremony observed during the Charak Puj-1 
festival. On this occasion, a number of devotees “cast themselves 
on thorns and upraised knives; they pierce their arms or tongues by 
iron arrows, draw strings through the flesh of their sides, or fix 
thereto spikes that are heated by continually burning fire, while 
others swing on the Charak tree by hooks fastened through the mus¬ 
cles of their backs”. 46 Men were tied to a rope attached to a wheel 
and rapidly whirled round, while in some cases, iron pikes or ar¬ 
rows were inserted into the back, legs or other parts of their bodies. 
Sometimes the rope snapped and the body was thrown at a distance 
of 25 to 30 yards, reduced to a shapeless mass. In all cases the 
men were all but dead when brought down from the wheel. These 
cruel practices drew public attention, but the Government did not 
like to interfere. The question came into prominence in 1856-57 
when the Court of Directors took interest in the matter and the Cal¬ 
cutta Missionary Conference memorialised the Government for the 
suppression of the cruelties- After careful consideration Sir 
F. Halliday, Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal (1854-59), came to the 
conclusion that, as the case was one of pain voluntarily undergone, 
the remedy must be left to the missionary and the school-master, 
and that, as stated by the Court of Directors, all such cruel cere¬ 
monies must be discouraged by influence rather than by authority. 

Sir J. P. Grant (1859-62), the successor of Halliday, instituted 
an inquiry from which it appeared that the hook-swinging was con¬ 
fined to Bengal proper and Orissa. Where this practice existed as a 
long established custom the local authorities were directed, by using 
their personal influence, and by obtaining the co-operation of the 
Zamindars, to induce the people voluntarily to abandon the practice. 
On the other hand, where Charak swinging was not an established 
custom but a mere occasional exhibition, the Magistrates were 


282 


SOCIAL REFORM 


authorized to prohibit its celebration as a local measure of police for 
the preservation of order and decency. 46 

In 1864-65 the subject of hook-swinging at the Charak Puja 
came up again. After consulting the British Indian Association and 
obtaining from them a recommendation that all cruel practices should 
be suppressed, so long as no religious observances were interfered 
with, Sir Cecil Beadon issued a Resolution on the subject on 15 
March, 1865. It directed all Magistrates of Districts in the Lower 
Provinces to prevent any person from the act of hook-swinging or 
other self-torture in public, and from the abetment thereof. Per¬ 
sons disobeying any such injunction were to be prosecuted and 
punished according ta law. As a result of these orders the cruel 
rites in connection with the Charak Puja practically ceased, though 
the Puja continued with many popular amusements. 47 

Two important Acts were passed of which the first did not con¬ 
cern either the Hindus or the Muslims. This Act, passed in 1872, at 
the instance of the Brahma Samdj, and applicable only to those who 
were outside the pale of Hinduism, Islam or other recognized faiths, 
abolished polygamy and marriage of girls before 14, and sanctioned 
inter-caste marriages and remarriages of widows. 

It was not till more than thirty years after the Mutiny that the 
Government again undertook any important legislation affecting the 
social custom of the Hindus. Behramji Merwanji Malabari, a Parsi, 
had been agitating to secure legislation against child-marriage and 
placed his views before the public in his Note* on Infant Marriage 
and Enforced Widowhood in 1884. He was mainly instrumental in 
procuring the passing of an Act in 1891, known as the Age of Consent 
Act, forbidding the consummation of marriage before the wife had 
reached the age of twelve. It was a poor substitute for the prohibition 
of early marriage of girls, and, from the very nature of the case, its 
practical effect could not be of much consequence. Nevertheless, it 
roused a storm of protest, reminiscent of the orthodox Hindu opposi¬ 
tion to the abolition of the Sati. A special significance was added to it 
by the fact that Bal Gangadhar Tilak, a highly educated and advanced 
thinker, and destined to become one of the greatest national leaders 
of India at no distant date, took the lead in the opposition, and first 
came into prominence in public life in this connection. Tilak made 
it quite clear that he objected, not to the provisions of the Bill, but 
to the right of a foreign Government to interfere in the social reform 
of the Hindus. How far his position is tenable, even in this limited 
view of the question, is a debatable point and cannot be discussed 
here. Tilak came in for a good deal of criticism and his political op¬ 
ponents made capital out of his attitude to this question. But, as 

283 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCD-II 


already pointed out above, it was a question of fundamental policy 
which divided the social reformers in India long before Tilak. Those 
who blamed him hardly realized that he merely continued the tradi¬ 
tions of Rammohan Roy, the pioneer of social reform, followed by 
many eminent Hindu leaders throughout the 19th century. 47a 
Tilak seems to have also represented a characteristic phase of newly 
born Indian nationalism which was too proud of its past culture to 
admit the necessity of any social reform, save by the unfettered 
authority of the Indians themselves. The growing strength of this 
feeling did more to retard social legislation than even the apathy 
or reluctance of the British Government. It is not perhaps without 
significance that as nationalism advanced in India, the ardour for 
social reform visibly declined. As will be shown later, nationalism 
grew rapidly in Bengal in the last quarter of the 19th century, 
while Madras considerably lagged behind. A great social reformer 
writes: “By 1896, Madras had come to the forefront in social re¬ 
form, and Bengal was passing through a reactionary phase. The 
resolutions adopted at the annual (Social) Conference at Calcutta 

were passed after strong opposition from the Bengal delegates. 

The Bengal social reformers wanted to move in social reform along 
national and Aryan lines. ” 47b 

IX. EDUCATION OF WOMEN 

Reference has been made in the preceding volumes to the high 
educational attainment of Indian women in the Vedic age and its 
gradual decline in subsequent ages. . Things came to such a pass 
that at the beginning of the nineteenth century, a regular system 
of female education was practically unknown in most parts of India. 
The daughters of aristocratic families, particularly those who had to 
administer their estates, got a smattering of elementary education 
at home, and there were no doubt some exceptional individual cases 
here and there. 470 But as a general rule, education of females was 
positively discouraged. It was regarded as being against the in¬ 
junctions of the Hindu scriptures, and there was a wide-spread be¬ 
lief that the education of girls leads to their widowhood. 

The first efforts towards female education were made by the 
Christian missionaries, almost immediately after the restrictions 
against missionary work in this country were removed by the Char¬ 
ter Act of 1813. Inspired by the zeal of spreading gospel among the 
natives they thought that it was first of all necessary to eradicate 
the superstitions and idolatry from the minds of the Hindu women. 
They openly taught Christianity in their schools and hoped that the 
girls “now engaged in the degrading and polluting worship of idols 


284 



SOCIAL REFORM 


shall be brought to the knowledge of the true God.” Referring to 
Hindu girls bearing names of Hindu gods and goddesses (Anna¬ 
purna, Vishnupriya etc.) it was remarked: “What kind of conduct 
ought we to expect from these poor children, named by their parents 
after imaginary goddesses, whose adultery, cruelty, and gratification 
of their passions, as detailed by their own sacred writings, are so 
abominable?” 43 

But whatever the motive, these Christian missionaries were the 
first to start schools for educating the girls. As girls of respectable 
families were not allowed to join these, their first pupils were re¬ 
cruited from the lowest classes of Indians who were “bribed to give 
an irregular attendance.” 49 A correspondent in a Bengali paper, 
dated June 25, 1831, remarks that ‘for the last twenty years the 
missionary sahibs established schools at great expenses to teach the 
Bagdi, Vyddh, gipsy, vairdgi and prostitute girls. But they have 
not made any progress beyond the elementary instruction in read¬ 
ing and writing. It has not done any good, but is likely to do much 
evil’. 50 

The first missionary school in Bengal was founded by Mr. May 
at Chinsura. But the first organized effort towards female educa¬ 
tion in Bengal was made by the Calcutta Female Juvenile Society 
founded in 1819. It taught eighty students during the first year. 
At the end of six years it taught one hundred and sixty female pupils 
in six schools. We learn from the Thirteenth Report dated 1834 
that it maintained three schools in Calcutta and its immediate neigh¬ 
bourhood in which about 200 girls were taught reading, spelling and 
geography by native women. 

In 1821 the British and Foreign School Society of England, in 
consultation with the Calcutta School Society’s agent Mr. Harrington 
and Mr. Ward of the Serampore Mission, both then in England, open¬ 
ed a subscription for a qualified lady teacher to be sent to India, and 
sent out Miss Cooke from England. As she was to work under the 
Calcutta School Society, a meeting of this Society was proposed to 
be convened to discuss the subject. But the Native Secretary of the 
Society, Radha-kanta Dev, wrote to the European Secretary that no 
such meeting was necessary, as “none of the good and respectable 
Hindu families will give her (Miss Cooke) access to their women’s 
apartment, nor send their females to her school, if organised.” He 
suggested that “Miss Cooke may render her services to the schools 
lately established by the Missionaries for the tuition of the poorer 
classes of native females.” 61 

This letter, dated 10 December, 1821, confirms the poor state 
of female education as noted in Adam’s Report, referred to above. 


285 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

But it is mentioned in the letter that in some families private tutors 
teach the girls up to the age of 9 or 10 years, at the farthest. The 
reluctance of the high-class Hindus to send their girls to the mis¬ 
sionary schools was probably due as much to old prejudices as to 
the attitude and openly avowed object of the missionaries, mention¬ 
ed above. The low-class girls of the type noted above, who attend¬ 
ed these schools, sometimes even attracted by cash rewards for 
daily attendance, also stood in the way of respectable girls joining 
them. The missionaries did not at first realize this aspect of the 
question. It appears from an article in the Calcutta Review that 
the wife of a missionary, after labouring for many years in these 
schools (outside Bengal), had discovered, what she had not had the 
slightest suspicion of before, that almost everyone of many hundreds 
of girls who had attended her schools belonged to the prostitute 
class. 62 These facts explain the slow progress of female education 
in this country. Adam’s Report of 1838 also supplies statistics to 
show that the girls attending schools even in mofussil towns in 
Bengal mostly belonged to the lowest classes in society. 

Nevertheless, the efforts of the missionaries bore fruit, and a , 
great deal of credit for this belongs to Miss Cooke (later Mrs. 
Wilson). The number of schools was increased to 30 and that of the 
pupils to 600. The efficient supervision of so many schools proved 
to be a difficult task. So instead of multiplying such schools, it was 
decided to establish a Central School. Raja Baidya-nath Roy made 
a liberal donation of Rs. 20,000/- and the foundation-stone of the 
school building was laid on May 18, 1826, by Lady Amherst. On 
April 1, 1828, Mr. and Mrs. Wilson took charge of the Central School 
with 58 pupils, but the number rose to 320 in 1834. An interest¬ 
ing feature of the school was the payment of an allowance of one 
pice per student to the maid-servants called Hurkarees who collect¬ 
ed them from different houses and brought them to school. 

According to Adam’s Report there were many other missionary 
schools for girls in Bengal in 1834, the total number probably ex¬ 
ceeding 50. The girls in these schools were taught reading, spelling, 
writing, arithmetic, needle work, and, in some cases, religion. 

These missionary schools could not attain success for several 
reasons. In the first place, too much attention was devoted to pre¬ 
aching of Christianity. As Rev. K. Banerji put it, “in those schools 
little had been done in an educational, though much attempted in the 
catechising, way.” Secondly, there was lack of good teachers. 
Thirdly, as noted above, the girls attending the schools belonged to 
the lowest classes, and not unoften, even from the brothels. Even 
these were removed from schools in their ninth or tenth year. 

286 


SOCIAL REFORM 


The first thing necessary for the improvement of female educa¬ 
tion was to remove the prejudices against it from the minds of the 
upper classes. An attempt in this direction was made by Pandit 
Gaurmohan Vidyalankar, who wrote in 1822 a pamphlet entitled 
StriHksha-vicMidyakci. He quoted numerous examples and gas¬ 
tric texts to prove that female education was formerly prevalent 
among the higher classes of the Hindus, and that far from being in¬ 
jurious or disgraceful, it ought to be welcome as producing the 
most beneficial effect upon the intellectual and moral development 
of women and domestic peace and happiness. 

In the third edition of the book, published by the School Book 
Society in 1824, the author added at the beginning a dialogue bet¬ 
ween two girls which throws an interesting light on the state of 
female education in those days. A few passages are reproduced be¬ 
low in free translation. 

Q. Women have begun to read and write. How do you like this? 
A. The thing begun by the Shahibs is for our good.... 

Q. But old men say that a girl who reads and writes becomes a 
widow. 

i 

A . This is nonsense. It is not supported by scriptures, and our 
Puranas refer to many educated women. Take, for example, 
the European ladies. They are educated but not widows. 

Q. Out of the 800 girls reading in about fifty schools is there any 
one of good family? 

A. No, girls of good family do not yet go to school, but read and 
write in secret. 

Q. Let me see what you have written. I shall show it to your 
father-in-law. 

A. What a shame 1 It is an infamy to show it to male members. 

In the sequel it was arranged that the daughter-in-law would 
be taught by a woman of low class not only the three R’s but also 
needlework, which the latter had learnt in a missionary school. 

In spite of such vigorous support of female education, the spirit 
of hostility against it continued among a section of the public, 
though gradually people began to take a more reasonable view. 
This is evident from a number of correspondence on the subject 
published in Bengali newspapers between 1831 and 1838, containing 
arguments both against and in favour of it. 63 A brief reference 


287 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-II 

may be made to it as throwing interesting light on the mentality 
of the people. 

One writer argues that female education is unnecessary, for 
there are no Bengali books which can instil real knowledge. A 
course of elementary instruction is unnecessary for girls, for there 
are enough men to carry on the work of Patwari, Muhuri, Nazir etc. 
for which such instruction is a necessary qualification. To the argu¬ 
ment that to keep women uneducated is to treat them like animals, 
it is replied that such is the eternal law of the Hindus. As regards 
the actual instances of the learned ladies such as Ha$I Vidyalankar, 
Ran! BhavanI and others of modem age, it is said that they did some¬ 
thing repugnant to the Sastras. If the Hindu girls attend schools 
like English ladies, they can as well marry many husbands. In con¬ 
clusion it is said that girls who attend schools are likely to lose their 
virtuous character, and some remarks are made in this connection 
which are too vulgar to be repeated. 

In reply it is argued that the plea of eternal Hindu Law is not 
supported by gastric texts, and is not only opposed to actual exam¬ 
ples of learned ladies, but also to religious rites of old which require 
the wife to participate in it. It is pointed out that women in Mahara¬ 
shtra are highly educated and openly perform Vedic religious rites 
in public. If Ahalya Bai or Rani BhavanI did wrong by educating 
themselves, our girls who go to school would be in good company. 
That to serve the husband is the chief duty of women is admitted; 
but there is nothing to show that education would stand in the way 
of properly performing this duty. As regards the fear of losing 
morals, it is pointed out that the schools were not meant for grown¬ 
up girls. 

The most interesting part of the reply concerns the remarriage 
of English widows. It is said that for every general rule there are 
specific exceptions. For example, to drink wine or kill animals is 
forbidden to Brahmins but permissible on occasions of religious 
sacrifices. Similarly, the European law and custom sanctions the 
marriage of widows whereas Hindu scriptures forbid it. There is 
therefore no reason why Hindu girls should follow this practice. 

A Brahmin writer points out that with the spread of higher edu¬ 
cation among the boys, female education has been all the more neces¬ 
sary, as otherwise the wives would pot really be help-mates of their 
husbands and share their thoughts and feelings, and thereby the con¬ 
jugal love and domestic happiness will both suffer. He therefore 
suggested that each important locality should establish schools for 
girls. As against this, it is pointed out by another that women are 


288 


SOCIAL REFORM 

by nature deceitful, and their knowledge and learning will produce 
evil instead of good. He quoted the phrases stfibuddhih pralayan- 
kari* a nd v naiva kartavyah strishu rdjakuleshu cha. 55 The 

writer also shows the undesirability of the girls going on foot to 
schools and being taught by male teachers. 

As a matter of fact, the Purdah system was a great obstacle to . 
girls attending schools. It was therefore suggested that at first only 
low class women, who were used to move out freely in public, should 
attend schools, and after they were sufficiently educated, they would 
be engaged to teach the female members of respectable families. 
Even if one lady in every respectable family got education, she 
would be able to instruct the other members of that family. Rev. 
K. M. Banerji was of opinion, in 1840, that a good number of Hindus 
would gladly accept the services of well-qualified European ladies, 
if they could get them free of charge within their doors. He, there¬ 
fore, suggested that an attempt should be made to procure a number 
of such ladies for the purpose of instructing the Hindu women in 
their own houses. The only difficulty he apprehended was on the 
score of expense. “But”, he added, “considering how much the Euro¬ 
pean community is indebted to this country, whence they are draw¬ 
ing so much of gold and silver, I have no hesitation in saying that 
they owe it to the natives, even upon moral considerations, to in¬ 
struct and enlighten their sons and daughters.” 

It is doubtful, however, if such an experiment, even if it were 
really tried, would have been successful to any large extent. For 
many Hindus were averse to the idea of European tutoress as the 
pupils were likely to imbibe Christian principles. 

In addition to the general prejudice, based on customs, Rev. 
Banerji adduced two other grounds to explain the slow progress of 
female education among the Hindus. The first was the absence of any 
pecuniary advantage resulting therefrom. “Their desire to teach 
male children is the consequence of the prospect which knowledge 
opens of wealth and honour, and since their girls cannot enter into 
any sphere of active labour in the world, they do not feel any in¬ 
centive towards their education.” The second reason advanced by 
him was that “as the female members of the family who received 
education would dislike the drudgery of household work, it would 
materially increase the expenses of the household.” He thought 
that “the poor salaries of many Hindus teach them the policy of 
keeping their women down for fear of swelling their expense.” 

It is difficult to form an accurate idea of the extent to which 
these economic causes operated against female education. But so 

289 

H.P.I.R—lw 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

far as the upper classes were concerned, the two social causes, viz., 
fear of widowhood of an educated girl, and the strict observance of 
Purdah, stood mainly in the way of the growth of girls’ schools. 

An obvious way to avoid the difficulty of sending girls to public 
schools was for the educated male members of the family to undertake 
the duty of teaching the females. Indeed it may appear somewhat 
strange that young men educated in English schools and imbued 
with liberal ideas should not have themselves taught their young 
wives at home. But the real difficulty in the way of instruction 
at home, in most cases, was the inveterate prejudices of the 
elder ladies of the family against female education in any form. 
These mothers, grandmothers, aunts etc., who exercised unlimited 
sway over the internal management of the household, were seized 
with a superstitious terror of early widowhood of the educated girl, 
or some great calamity to the family into which female education 
was introduced. As a writer remarked in 1855, ‘the Macedonian 
Phalanx did not stand more firmly man to man, than do they unite 
to frustrate any efforts that a young educated husband may make 
to instruct his wife.’ 

Prejudices die hard not only among women but also among men. 
For, in spite of liberal ideas of a section of the public, and arguments 
in favour of female education published in books, pamphlets, and 
newspapers, the majority of the Hindus in Bengal, particularly in 
Mofussil areas, were for a long time bitterly opposed to the idea 
not only of sending girls to schools but even of starting such institu¬ 
tions. The following account of a girls’ school at Baraset, about 14 
miles from Calcutta, throws into relief the great difficulties that 
pioneers of female education had to encounter even in the middle 
of the nineteenth century. 

A female school was opened at Baraset in 1849 by three public- 
spirited gentlemen, two of whom were Government officials. “These, 
with some other liberal-minded and active young men belonging to 
the station, induced several of the more respectable residents in the 
town and neighbouring villages to send their girls to the new school. 
Shortly after its opening, the school was visited by Mr. Bethune, 
who presented it with maps, pictures, books, &c. At first it was held 
in a temporary building, but subsequently in a pukka house, built 
expressly for the purpose. The most violent animosity was exhibit¬ 
ed on the part of the more bigoted portion of the community towards 
the school and every one connected with it. The law was, as usual, 
enlisted in the cause of oppression and persecution. Charges of 
assault, suit for arrears of rent, and complaints of all kinds and 
characters, were brought against the parents of those who sent their 


290 



SOCIAL REFORM 


daughters to the school. Fortunately this bright idea of legal per¬ 
secution occurred during the temporary magistracy of Mr. Hodgson 
Pratt, who was not satisfied with the mere reports of darogas and 
nazirs, but enquired himself into each charge, as it came before him. 
Otherwise, the result might have been most disastrous. The mem¬ 
bers of the female school committee were abused in the streets with 
the foulest language, and every kind of annoyance that vindictive¬ 
ness could suggest, was brought to bear against them. One morn¬ 
ing it was found that a broad and deep ditch had been dug in the 
night in front of the house of one of these gentlemen l Not¬ 
withstanding all this, and a great deal more than this, they perseve¬ 
red, and the poorest people persevered in sending their children to 
school, though they were excommunicated, and in every possible 
way annoyed and persecuted for doing so. At last they tired out the 
perseverance and ingenuity of their persecutors. All opposition has 
died away; but, as is too often the case, the excitement and the in¬ 
terest have died away with it; and although the school still exists, 
the numbers who attend it are smaller than in the days of its early 
struggles. Still the number is almost twenty, one or two of whom 
learn a little English; but they leave at a very early age. The fall¬ 
ing off is mainly the result of the inevitable tendency of all good 
undertaken in this country to languish for want of support, when 
the excitement of novelty is worn off. Verily, this is the land where 
‘all good dies, death lives.” 66 . 

The most important landmark in the history of women’s higher 
education in Bengal was the foundation in May, 1849, of a school 
in Calcutta by J. E. D. Bethune, whose name will be for ever 
remembered as a great patron of female education. He was the 
President of the Council of Education and rightly concluded that 
female education could not flourish unless people of higher classes 
could be induced to send their girls to schools. He made stringent 
regulations to ensure this. No pupil was to be admitted without 
carefully examining ‘the respectability of her family. The convey¬ 
ance. of the girls, to and from the institution, was arranged in a 
manner to which no exception could be taken. No male person was 
to be admitted within the walls of the institution while the girls 
were within it. Mr. Bethune voluntarily made a pledge, which 
no one ever suspected him of any intention to violate, that Christiani¬ 
ty should be entirely excluded from the course of the institution. 
It was a great experiment, but was not a great success at the be¬ 
ginning. The number of pupils did not at first exceed sixty. The 
untimely death of Mr. Bethune (1851) was a great blow to its pro¬ 
gress, particularly as he could not leave an endowment sufficient to 

291 


THE BRITISH PARA'MOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

meet its expense. Fortunately, Lady Dalhousie immediately under¬ 
took to defray the charges, and on her death the Governor-General 
agreed to continue the subscription (about Rs. 600 a month) as long as 
he would remain in India; and, on his recommendation, the Court 
of Directors engaged that, on his retirement, they would take the 
charge upon themselves. 

Reference should be made in this connection to Pandit Ishwar- 
chandra Vidyasagar who rendered yeoman’s service to the cause of 
women’s education in Bengal. He acted as the Honorary Secretary 
of the Bethune School, and when, after the retirement of Dalhousie, 
it became a Government institution, he was appointed, first, the 
Secretary, and then a member of the School Committee. But Vidya- 
sagar’s activity for the promotion of women’s education was not 
confined to the Bethune School. He was instrumental in opening 
no less than thirty-five girls’ schools in Bengal between November, 
1657 and May, 1858. 

In Bombay the women led a comparatively freer life as there 
was no purdah among the Marathas. Both in Bombay and Poona 
English-educated young men spread education through girls’ schools 
since 1851. The students of the Elphinstone Institution in Bombay, 
encouraged by their English professors, established the Students 
Literary and Scientific Society which espoused the cause of women’s 
education. The Farsi community of Bombay also felt the need of 
such education, and when F. C. Banajee showed the way by giving 
his daughter English education, others followed in his footsteps. As 
a result of his pioneer effort the Students’ Literary and Scientific 
Society started morning classes for girls by their free voluntary 
service. This led to the establishment of seven more schools. A 
journal for women, Stn-bodh, was started in 1857. 

Sir Charles Wood’s Despatch of 1854 laid great stress on the 
importance of female education in India, and the subsequent progress 
of female education has been noted above. 67 

1. The views of Ranade that follow, including quotations, are taken f»*om the 
R eligiou8 and Social Reform—A Collection of Essays and Speeches hy M. G. 
Ranade, compiled by A. B. Kolaskar (Bombay, 1902), Introduction, and pp. 
156 - 178 , 

2. C.Y. Chintamani, Indian Social Reform , II. 85 95. Many persons quote only this 
speech, but ignore the earlier views of Ranade, mentioned above. 

3. Buckland, I. 324-5. 

4. Kolaskar, op. cit, xxvi, xxviii, 92-114. 

5. Banerji, B. N., II. 186-88. The letters are in Bengali. 

6. Bankim-chandra argued at length, in several essays, against the total prohibi¬ 
tion of polygamy, as it was likely to produce some evils. 

6a. Warner, I. 296. 

7. Buckland, I. 323. 

7a. Natarajan, 50. 

7b. Cf. p. 107. 


292 




SOCIAL REFORM 


7c. Natarajan, 61-2. 

7d. Ibid, 56-7. » 

7e. Ibid, 84-5. 

7f. Cf.'p. 115. 

7g. Cf. pp. 107 ff. 

7h. For details, cf. Natarajan, Ch. VIII. 

7i. Ibid, 102. 

7j. Ibid, 107. 

8. Dubois, Jean Antoine, Hindu Manners, Customs and Ceremonies, written early 
in the nineteenth century. Dubois spent about 30 years in India (1792-1823). 
He abjured European society, put on Indian dress, and lived amongst the 
Indians. He noted the customs from his own careful observation. Of course, 
we should make due allowance for natural errors of a foreigner and pre¬ 
judices of a Christian missionary. For a list of abuses noted by Dubois, Cf. 
Kolaskar, Ranade, 179-97. 

9. To which others may be added. Cf. Miles, Laud of the Ling am, where re¬ 
ference is made to chidi-mari or hook-swinging in South India (p. 33) taipu- 
san, or a pilgrimage under torture (p. 34), dancing girls in temples (p. 181), etc. 

10. They must have been prevalent for years, probably for centuries. 

11. Dancing girls in temples who were supposed to have dedicated their lives to 
gods; but in practice, many of them were no better than common whores. 

12. Though the word ‘sati’ is used to denote the ceremony, it literally means a 
good or chaste woman, i.e., the widow, who, by burning herself along with 
her dead husband’s body, is supposed to prove her goodness or chastity. 

13. See Vol. II (1960), 567; III (1962), 571-2. 

14. See Vol. VI, p. 379, f. n., 30. 

15. Griffiths, 222. 

16. The facts mentioned in this section are stated with full references in the 
Calcutta Review, 1867, pp. 221-261, and K. Datta-I, Ch. III. 

17. K. Datta-I, 75,77; statistical figures are given on pp. 79-82. 

18. CHI, VI. 135-6. 

39. Ibid. 

20. It is difficult to form an accurate estimate of public opinion on the abolition 
of the 'sati'. As against the prevalent view, stated in this para, one might cite 
the incident mentioned by Bishop Heber (I. 93), namely, that in a public 
meeting the proposal to thank Lord Hastings for supporting 'sati* was de¬ 
feated by a majority of votes. 

21. K. Datta-II, 97-8. 

22. Rammohun, p. 20. 

23. Works, 323-72; K. Datta-. 100-107. 

24. K. Datta-I, 107. 

24a. Collet (1962), p. 199. 

25. K. Datta-I, 108; Boulger, Bentinck (RI), p. 87. Bentinck also gathered the infor¬ 
mation that the abolition of the Sati would not affect the native army. 

26. Collet, p. 258. 

27. Cf. Bentinck’s Minute of 8 November, 1829. 

28. For the text of the Minute, cf. Keith, I. 208 ff. Boulger, Bentinck, 96 ff. 

29. K. Datta-I, 112-3. 

30. CHI, VI. 142. 

31. For the text of die petition, written both in Bengali and English, cf. Collet, 461. 
For the text of both the petitions and the one by the Christian inhabitants of 
Calcutta, and Bentinck’s reply to these, cL Selections from Calcutta Gazette 
(1824 to 1832), ed. by A. C. Das Gupta, pp. 466-478. For other petitions, papers, 
meetings, etc., cf. ibid, pp. 308-10, 389, 427-9, 540-1, 563-7 , 647-8. Also, B. N. 
Banerji, I. 280-94. 

32. Works, 479-80. 

32a. Judicial Criminal Proceedings, 29 November, 1816, No. 51. I am indebted for 
this information to Dr.. R. M. Lahiri. 

33. Sketches, III. 207. 

34. CHI, VI. 129-30. 

35. Ibid, 130-1; Sketches, III. 207. 

36. See Vol. II, p. 565. 

37. Ibid. 

38. Cf. the two letters mentioned above, on p. 

38a. Natarajan, 97. 

39. See Vol. II, p. 576. 


293 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

• 

40. CHI, VL 127-8. 

40a. For these and other allegations cf. Amal Kumar CShattopadhyaya, Slavery in 
India, Chapter IV. But no authentic evidence is cited. 

40b. B. N. Banerji, I, 185. 

41. The Bengal Journal of 29 May, 1789, ‘‘refers to a mariner who took on board at 
Tullah one hundred and fifty unhappy children whom, previous to his de¬ 
parture, he had purchased in Bengal. The children were transported under 
British colours to Colombo where they were sold as slaves.” Barns, 62. 

42. CHI, VI 128. 

43. Warner, I. 297. 

44. See above, DC. 629. 

45. Buckland, I. 32. 

46. Ibid, 177. 

47. Ibid, 312-4. 

. 47a. See pp. 259-60, 273. 

47b. Natarajan, 92. 

47c. Some women like Hatl Vidyalahkar in Bengal were renowned Sanskrit scholars. 

48. The Calcutta Journal, 11 March, 1822. 

49. The Calcutta Review, 1855, No. 25, p. 67. 

50. B. N. Banerji, H. 68. 

51. Cf. Introduction to StriHksha-vidhayaka by Gaurmohan Vidyalahkar, p. 9 

of the edition of 1344 B. S. ' 

52. The Calcutta Review, 1855, p. 68. 

53. B. N. Banerji, H. 67. ' 

54. “Intelligence of women creates utmost disorder”, 

55. “One should not place any trust in women and kings.” 

56. The Calcutta Review, 1855, p. 79. 

57. Cf. pp. 65-6. 


294 



CHAPTER VIII (XLVI). 

MUSLIM COMMUNITY 

1. MUSLIM POLITICS BEFORE THE ALIGARH MOVEMENT. 

The reaction of the British conquest on the minds of the Mus¬ 
lims and the Hindus was bound to be very different. The Muslims 
naturally regarded the English as their bitterest foe who had usurped 
the political authority and the attendant privileges which they had 
so long enjoyed. Even as late as 1824-5, * Bishop Heber ob¬ 
served that “the Muhammadans are hostile to the English as those 
who have supplanted them/’ The Hindus, on the other hand, not 
only welcomed the English rule, but even regarded it as a deliver¬ 
ance from the tyrannies and miseries of the Muslim rule, as men¬ 
tioned above. 1 It is immaterial to discuss how far this Hindu atti¬ 
tude was justified by historical facts, but, right or wrong, its one 
inevitable result was to alienate the Hindus from the Muslims. But 
there were other causes at work widening the gulf which already 
existed between the two communities. 1 ® The hostile attitude of 
the Muslims towards the English, and their strong aversion to merely 
secular education kept them severely aloof from English education 
imparted in schools and colleges. As noted above, the founda¬ 
tion of the Hindu College in 1817 gave a great impetus to the Eng¬ 
lish education among the Hindus, but the Muslims made very little 
progress in it during the next fifty years. The comparative posi¬ 
tion of the Hindus and Muslims in English education will be evident 
from the following figures: In 1865, 9 Hindus and not a single 
Muhammadan passed the M.A. Examination; 41 Hindus and 1 
Muhammadan passed the B.A.; and 17 students, all Hindus, passed 
the Law Examination. All the Medical graduates were also Hindus. 
In 1867, 88 Hindus and not a single Muhammadan passed the M.A. 
and B.A. Examinations. 2 During the period between 1858 and 1878 
only 57 Muslims received Degrees (graduate and post-graduate) 
as against 3,155 Hindus. 3 

A very frank and lucid exposition of the relation between the 
Hindus and Musalmans, as conceived by the latter, was given by a 
liberal Muslim leader, R. M. Sayani, in his Presidential Address 
at the twelfth Indian National Congress, held in Calcutta in 1896. 
The following extract is a very candid expression of the sentiments 


295 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

which powerfully influenced the Muslim community as a whole 
throughout the nineteenth century: 

“Before the advent of the British in India, the Musalmans were 
the rulers of the country. The Musalmans had, therefore, all the 
advantages appertaining to the ruling class. The sovereigns and 
the chiefs were their co-religionists, and so were the great land¬ 
lords and the great officials. The court language was their own. 
Every place of trust and responsibility, or carrying influence and 
high emoluments, was by birthright, theirs. The Hindus did occupy 
some position but the Hindu holder? of position were but the 
tenants-at-will of the Musalmans. The Musalmans had complete 
access to the sovereigns and to the chiefs. They could, and did, often 
eat at the same table with them. They could also, and often did, 
intermarry. The Hindus stood in awe of them. Enjoyment and in¬ 
fluence and all the good things of the world were theirs....By a stroke 
of misfortune, the Musalmans had to abdicate their position and 
descend to the level of their Hindu fellow-countrymen. The Hindus 
who had before stood in awe of their Musalman masters were thus 
railed a step by the fall of their said masters, and with their former 
awe dropped their courtesy also. The Musalmans, who are a very 
sensitive race, naturally resented the treatment and would have no¬ 
thing to do either with their rulers or with their fellow-subjects. 
Meanwhile the noble policy of the new rulers of the country intro¬ 
duced English education into the country. The learning of an en¬ 
tirely unknown and foreign language, of course, required hard appli¬ 
cation and industry. The Hindus were accustomed to this, as even 
under the Musalman rule, they had practically to master a foreign 
tongue, and so easily took to the new education. But the Musal¬ 
mans had not yet become accustomed to this sort of thing, and were, 
moreover, not then in a mood to learn, much less to learn anything 
that required hard work and application, especially as they had to 
work harder than their former subjects, the Hindus. Moreover, 
they resented competing with the Hindus, whom they had till re¬ 
cently regarded as their inferiors. The result was that so far as 
education was concerned, the Musalmans who were once superior 
to the Hindus now actually became their inferiors. Of course, they 
grumbled and groaned, but the irony of fate was inexorable. The 
stern realities of life were stranger than fiction The Musalmans 
were gradually ousted from their lands, their offices; in fact every¬ 
thing was lost save their honour. The Hindus, from a subservient 
state, came into the lands, offices and other worldly advantages of 
their former masters. Their exultation knew no bounds, and they 
trod upon the heels of their former masters. The Musalmans 
would have nothing to do with anything in which they might have 


296 


MUSLIM COMMUNITY 


to come into contact with the Hindus. They were soon reduced to 
a state of utter poverty. Ignorance and apathy seized hold of them 
while the fall of their former greatness rankled in their hearts.” 

Though, as noted above, the social relations betv een the Hindus 
and the Muslims underwent no radical change at the beginning of 
the nineteenth century, the political outlook of the two communities 
was very different from the beginning. English education was the 
mainspring of all political evolutions of the Hindus; it is therefore 
hardly a matter of surprise that the Muslims, who lagged so far be¬ 
hind the Hindus in this respect, would fail to keep pace with them. 
The other circumstances mentioned above also powerfully operated 
in the same direction, with the result that the two great communi¬ 
ties, though subject to the same foreign rule, suffering from the same 
disabilities, and seeking the same remedies or reforms, could not 
present a united front in politics and meet on a common political 
platform. 

This difference of approach in politics was clearly manifested, 
for the first time, in the Wahabi movement, an account of which has 
been given in Vol. IX (883-901). Although the later phase of the 
movement, namely, a violent hatred against the English and an or¬ 
ganized attempt to drive them out, should have evoked sympathy 
at least among a section of the Hindus, there is no evidence that such 
was the case. The reason is that it was a purely Muslim movement 
and was directed theoretically against all non-Muslims—its aim 
being to establish in India a dar-ul-Islam, “Muslim sovereignty pure 
and simple”. Actually the Wahabis first declared war against the 
Sikhs, and later merely transferred their hostility to the English 
when they conquered the Panjab. It is true that, generally speak¬ 
ing, no definitely anti-Hindu spirit marked the movement as a 
whole. 4 But still the fact remains that all their proclamations were 
issued in the name and interest of Islam, and their appeals were 
only to the Muslims. The sympathy and support of the Hindus were 
never asked for; and it could hardly be done without violating the 
basic doctrine of the movement which sought to eradicate from 
India all power and influence other than Islam. 

The political exclusiveness of the two communities was more 
convincingly demonstrated by the fact that the Muslims did not take 
any active part in the different political organizations to be referred 
to in Chapter XII. There was hardly any Muslim on the Committees 
of Landholders’ Society, Bengal British India Society, and the British 
Indian Association. On the other hand, as soon as the Muslims became 
politically conscious, they started separate organizations of their 
own. A Muhammadan Association was started in Calcutta before 


297 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

31st January, 1856. It is noteworthy that the Hindus regarded this se¬ 
paratist tendency as quite natural in view of the position of the 
Muslim community as a separate unit, and the Committee of the 
British Indian Association expressed rejoicings at the formation of 
this communal organization. 6 In 1863 Abdul Latif founded the Mo¬ 
hammedan Literary Society in Calcutta, its object being to interest 
its members in present day politics and modem thought and learn¬ 
ing. 6 When the Hindu Mela and the National Society were started 
by the Hindus on communal basis, the Muslim leader, Nawab Amir 
Ali Khan, organized the National Mohammadan Association in Cal¬ 
cutta in 1877 with the object of ‘promoting the well-being’ and bring¬ 
ing about ‘the political regeneration of the Indian Muslims’. 7 

Gradually the Muslim leaders appreciated the value of English 
education. In a public meeting held on January 10, 1868, Abdul 
Latif m&de a vigorous plea for the English education of Muhamma¬ 
dan boys and suggested the transformation of the Anglo-Persian 
Department of the Calcutta Madrasa to the status of a College. 9 
The Muslim leaders in Bengal thus took a lead in this matter even 
before Sir Syed Ahmad thought of the Aligarh College. Although 
the proposal of Abdul Latif was not carried into effect, Muslim 
education in Bengal got a great impetus from the munificent charity 
of Haji Muhammad Mohsin in 1873. He left a large legacy, and it 
was resolved by the Government that out of the Mohsin Trust Fund, 
two-thirds of the fees would be paid to every Muhammadan student 
in any English school or college in Bengal. This partly accounts for 
the greater progress of Muslim students of Bengal in English educa¬ 
tion as compared with other provinces. This is indicated by the 
following figures: 

> 

- “In 1881-82 the number of Musalman students pursuing their 
studies in colleges in the Bengal Presidency was 106 as against 
30 in Madras, 7 in Bombay, 29 in the N. W. Provinces, 7 in Oudh 
and 13 in the Punjab. In the High Schools of Bengal there were 
3,831 Mussalman students, as against 177 in Madras, 118 in Bombay, 
697 (including students in Middle Schools) in the N.W. Provinces, 
and 91 in the Punjab. Between 1858 and 1893 the Calcutta Uni¬ 
versity produced 290 Mohammedan graduates, as against 29 of the 
Madras, 30 of the Bombay, 102 of the Punjab and 102 of the Allaha¬ 
bad University.” 9 

Although the progress in English education advanced the poli¬ 
tical ideas of Muslims in Bengal, there was still a wide gap between 
the progressive elements of the two communities. The Muslim 
leaders lagged far behind the advanced political thinkers among 


298 


MUSLIM COMMUNITY 


the Hindus, and the Muslim politics always resembled more or less 
that of the Hindus nearly half a century before. 

A very good glimpse of the Muslims and their politics in the 
eighties may be obtained from the writings of W. S. Blunt. He was 
a liberal-minded Englishman who openly protested against the Bri¬ 
tish policy in Egypt and made a common cause with the Egyptian 
Mahdi in his fight against the English. His two books, Secret His¬ 
tory of the English and The Future of Islam endeared him to the 
whole Muslim world, and he found a warm welcome awaiting him 
in India, when he visited this country in 1883. He mixed 
freely and intimately with the Muslim leaders of all shades of opi¬ 
nion, and his observations on Muslim politics should, therefore, 
-command both respect and confidence. 

From the very moment of his landing on Indian soil, Blunt 
received complaints about Hindus from the Muslims. As soon as 
he got down at Tuticorin, the local Muslims, who went to the pier 
to receive him, “complained of being subject to annoyance from the 
Hindus, who came with drums outside their mosque, and that the 
magistrate, being a Hindu, would not prevent it.” 10 

In Calcutta Maulvi Sayid Amir Hussain, Deputy Magistrate 
and a friend of Amir Ali, told him that “the Bengali Mohammedans... 
were an oppressed community, the Hindus having it all their own 
way, and there was very little courage among them, though 
the antiquated Mohammedans and Hindus lived on excellent terms. 
They dared not take any prominent part against the Government.” 11 
The position is further elucidated by the following extract: 

“Delawar Huseyn, a deputy-magistrate and a sensible man, gave 
the same melancholy account of the poverty of the Mohammedans 
in Bengal. I fear their case is nearly hopeless. In spite of their 
large population, they are without influence. The mass of them are 
extremely poor, mere peasants, or, in the town, day labourers. They 
have no commercial connection, and the sons of the few rich men 
are obliged to look to Government employment for a living, whereas 
the Hindus are rich and pushing. It is a struggle for existence, in 
which the Mohammedans are the weakest, and so are going to the 
wall. In the north-west, he tells me, it is not so.” 12 

At that time the great agitation over the Ilbert Bill was going 
on, and Lord Hipon’s Government practically conceded the Anglo- 
Indian demands by offering a compromise or “concordat” which was 
strongly opposed by the Hindus. Maulvi Samiulla of Aligarh told 
Blunt “that the proper conduct for the Mohammedans here was being 
debated, some being for expressing themselves satisfied, others for 
making common cause with the Hindus... .He had seen Amir Ali 

299 


i 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

\ 

yesterday, who had changed his mind and was now on the Govern¬ 
ment side. He wants, the Maulvi 12 * explained naively, to get promo¬ 
tion, and that is why he supports the compromise. He himself was 
for a moderate attitude.” 13 Blunt’s reply to this Muslim gentleman 
and his companions is characteristic of him and may be quoted in 
full. 

“I spoke my mind very plainly, and told them that, if they 
deserted the Hindus in this instance, they would never have any re¬ 
form given or justice done them for another twenty years. They 
must sink their differences and their little private interests if they 
wanted to force the Government’s hand. The Bill was the battle¬ 
ground on which the whole principle of legislation for India was 
being fought; and the Mohammedans could turn the scale by their 
attitude one way or the other. The young men warmly applauded 
this, and I think, too, the Maulvi was partly convinced. I told them, 
if the Mohammedans only knew their power they would not be 
neglected and ill-treated by the Government as they now were. In 
England we were perpetually scared at the idea of a Mohammedan 
rising in India, and any word uttered by a Mohammedan was paid 
more attention to than that of twenty Hindus. But, if they sat still, 
thanking Providence for the favours which were denied them, the 
English public would be only too happy to leave them as they were. 
The Maulvi promised to make my opinion known at a Conference 
which had been summoned for this evening to consider the action 
of the Mohammedans, and so I trust I may have done some good, at 
least with the liberal party. Of Abd-el-Latif I feel more doubtful, 
for there is great ill-feeling in Calcutta between the old-fashioned 
Mohammedans and the Hindus.” 14 

Two days later, Blunt had a talk with Maulvi A.M. “He said 
that none of the Mohammedans wished to do away altogether with 
English Government, as it would only lead to fighting, as there was 
no chance of Mohammedans and Hindus agreeing for a century to 
come, but of course they did not like English administration. It 
favoured the Hindus unduly. But, left to themselves, they should 
be able to hold their own in all Northen India. The English policy, 
however, had been to suppress them, and throw obstacles in the way 
of their educating themselves and learning their own power. The 
Maulvis of Calcutta were terribly ignorant of politics, and of all that 
was going on in the world. At the time of the Egyptian War they 
had not known whether Egypt lay North or South or East or West. 

. . .Then Abd-el-Latifs son. in European clothes, joined us, and we 
got on the Ilbert Bill, as to which I exhorted them all strongly to 
make a concordat with the Hindus, helping them this time on a pro¬ 
mise of help from them when their own interests were at stake... 


300 


MUSLIM COMMUNITY 

I had it out, however, with Abd-el-Rahman, and hope he will influ¬ 
ence his lather. Unless the Mohammedans show their teeth on an 
occasion of this sort, they will never get attention paid to their 
wrongs.” 15 

Blunt’s diary continues:— 

“Next came Surendranath Bannerji- He is very angry at 
the Ilbert Bill compromise, and let slip the gros mot of ‘revolution’ 
in regard to it. He was very urgent with me to get the Mohammedans 
to join them in protesting, and I promised to do my best this evening 
at Amir Ali’s dinner. It is high time certainly they should sink 
differences, but the Mohammedans are hard to move. Their position 
was well explained a little later by our last visitor this morning, 
Maulvi Ahmed, Municipal Councillor, and an independent man. 
He explained that there was hardly a leading man among the Calcutta 
Mohammedans who had any means apart from his Government pay. 
Neither Amir Ali nor Abd-el-Latif could afford to come forward as 
a champion, as all their prospects depended on the Government. 
Maulvi Ahmed drew a most gloomy picture of Mohammedan pros¬ 
pects. They were all, he said, in despair here in Bengal. It was 
impossible for them to do anything, impossible to combine with the 
Hindus who were so selfish, they wanted every post for them¬ 
selves. Out of forty-eight Municipal Councillors there were only 
five Mohammedans, and as more power was given to the natives the 
Mohammedan position would get worse and worse. It was their 
poverty which stood in their way. They could not pay for the 
education necessary to pass the competitive examinations, so they 
were left behind. I tried to convert him to my view of energetic 
action, but in vain. There was no one to take the lead, and it would 
result in no good. 16 

“I had an opportunity of saying a few words to Abd-el-Latif 
about the attitude Mohammedans should take in this Ilbert quarrel, 
and he agreed with me that it might be well if they showed their 
teeth a little. But he is a cautious man and would promise nothing. 
With Amir Ali and Amir Huseyn I was able to do more, and I shall 
be surprised if, at the meeting of the National Mohammedan Society 
tomorrow, they do not take my view. I proposed that they should 
address a dignified and moderate protest to the Viceroy, admitting 
that the Ilbert Bill did not immediately affect the Mohammedan 
community, but taking their stand on the principle that the proposed 
compromise affected the rule of equality before the law. At the 
same time I advised Amir Ali to come to a regular concordat with 
the Hindus for their mutual benefit.” 17 


301 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 


Nevertheless, Amir Ali supported the Government view in the 
meeting of the Muslims (probably held under the auspices of the 
National Mohammadan Association). Blunt mournfully remarks: 
“His attitude with regard to the Ilbert compromise is not that of 
a leader.” 18 

The difference between the two communities became accen- 
tuated in connection with the legislation for local self-government 
on elective basis. It is on this occasion that for the first time a 
demand was made for separate representation of the Muhammadans. 
It seems, however, that, as in later days, the ball was set rolling by 
the English officials. The Commissioner of the Presidency Division 
observed in his Report “that the agitators in this matter are Hindus, 
and that Local Boards, instituted as proposed, will be comprised 
almost entirely of Hindus to the exclusion of Mohammedans.” 
Quoting this with approval, Muhammad Yusuf spoke as follows in 
the Legislative Council on May 3, 1883: 

“The Council will be pleased to remember that though in most 
places the Mohammedan population forms a minority as compared 
with the larger bodies of the Hindus, still in many places they form 
a large proportion of the population. Or it may be that in some 
places, though fewer, the case is the reverse, and the Hindus form 
a minority. In such cases when there is party spirit and angry feel¬ 
ing between the two classes of people, it is necessary to reserve power 
for the representation of the minority. The Bill proposes to provide 
for this by nomination, but it would be an advantage and more fit 
recognition of the claims of the Mohammedan population if provision 
could be made in the Bill for the election of Mohammedans by re¬ 
serving a certain number of membership for that community.” 19 

The keynote of this speech is a firm conviction that even in 
political matters there is no common bond between the two com¬ 
munities and each must be ready to safeguard its own interests. 
Even more than thirty years before this, some English officials 
emphasised the communal difference in political matters in connect¬ 
ion with the creation of Legislative Councils. Representative assem¬ 
bly in India was regarded as difficult in view of the difference 
between the Hindus and the Muslims, and in 1852 Lord Ellenborough 
even suggested the creation of two separate legislatures for the two 
communities. In those early days a vigorous protest against this 
was made by a Hindu politician, and no Muslims are known to have 
come forward to support the British or official view. 20 But Yusuf's 
speech shows the change that had come over the Muslim community. 

This change was not confined to Bengal. It appears from Blunt's 
diary that the attitude of the Bengali Musalmans was shared by 

302 


MUSLIM COMMUNITY 


those in other parts of India. Four Muslim gentlemen, whom Blunt 
met at Delhi, agreed ‘ that there should be more common action 
with the Hindus. But one of them was of opinion that the Hindus 
were impracticable, because they would not permit the killing of 
cows. ' 21 Nawab Alauddin Ahmad Khan, Chief of Loharo, told 
Blunt that '‘what he did not like about the mutineers was that most 
of them were Hindus.” 22 

Reference should also be made in this connection to the Indian 
visit of Jamal-ud-din Al-afghani (1839-97), a notable figure in the 
Muslim world in the nineteenth century. He agitated for the libe¬ 
ration of Muslims from European influence and exploitation, for the 
union of all Islamic States under a single Caliphate, and the creation 
of a powerful Muslim Empire capable of resisting European inter¬ 
vention. There was a general impression at the time, particularly 
among the Hindu political leaders, that he was largely responsible 
for creating a split between the Hindus and the Muslims. Thus B. C. 
Pal observes: “It was about 1880 or 1881 that Djemal ed Din, the 
founder of the Pan-Islamic movement, came from Afghanistan to 
India, and had confidential conversations with the leaders of the 
Mahomedan community in this country. He came to Calcutta and 
met the late Nawab Abdul Latif and the small group of educated 
Mahomedans associated with him, including the late Justice Ameer 
Ali, and inoculated them with the virus of his Pan-Islamism. Before 
Djemal ed Din’s advent the educated Indian Mohamedans, parti¬ 
cularly in Bengal, had been loyally co-operating with their Hindu 
fellow-subjects for the common advancement of national political 
interests. But after his visit they commenced to draw themselves 
away from the political activities of their Hindu fellow-subjects 
until gradually a wide gulf was created between the Hindu and the 
Moslem intellectuals in the country in regard to our national en¬ 
deavours.” 23 

It is difficult to accept fully the above views. There is no 
doubt that Jamal-ud-din had come into contact with the Muslim 
leaders and that his views had great influence upon them. , For this 
appears quite clearly from the writings of Blunt. Unfortunately, 
Blunt nowhere clearly says what those views were. But it appears 
from his book that they were widely different from those of Syed 
Ahmad, and were not incompatible with co-operation between the two 
communities. As will be clear from the extracts quoted above. 
Blunt never ceased to impress upon the Muslim leaders the value 
and necessity of such co-operation. His repeated insistence shows 
that such co-operation was lacking, and Blunt could not possibly 
have referred to Jamal-ud-din’s views with respect and approval if he 


303 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


had reasons to believe that this Muslim leader was really instrumen¬ 
tal in creating communal difference. It is, of course, quite possible 
that Blunt did not fully grasp the significance of Jamal-ud-din’s 
teachings, specially their effect upon Indian Muslims. 

But whether it was due to the teachings of Jamal-ud-din or not, 
indications are not wanting that the pan-Islamic sentiment had al¬ 
ready been exerting influence upon Muslim minds. Some Muslim 
leaders told Blunt: “During the Egyptian War (1881-82) we all look¬ 
ed to Arabi (Pasha) to restore our fortunes, for we are in a desperate 
state and need a deliverer.” 24 These, words are significant. The 
Indian Muslims had already begun, or never ceased, to feel that the 
Muslims outside India were more closely allied to them than their 
neighbours, the Hindus. Such a feeling cut at the very root of the 
idea of Indian nationality. For howsoever people might differ in their 
views regarding the essentials of nationality, one thing is certain: 
No people can form a nation unless they are united by common 
sympathies such as do not exist between any constituent part of 
them and an outside element, and which make them co-operate with 
each other more willingly than with other people. 

The influence of pan-Islamic feeling may also be traced in the 
evidence given by the Muslim leaders before the Hunter Commiss¬ 
ion, demanding entirely separate arrangements for the primary edu¬ 
cation of the Hindu and Muslim and insisting upon Urdu as a 
medium of instruction even in a province like Bengal where 99 per 
cent of the Muslims were ignorant of that language, 26 and their 
spoken language, Bengali, had always been the medium of 
instruction. 26 

According to Aga Khan, the average Indian Muslim looked upon 
himself as a member of a universal religious brotherhood, sojourning 
in a land in which a neutral government, with a neutral outlook, 
kept law and order and justice. 26n 

The British Government seem to have been fully aware of the 
influence of Pan-Islamism on Indian Muslims. Lord Hamilton, the 
Secretary of State, wrote to the Viceroy, Lord Elgin, on 30 July, 
1897: “... .We have, however, a new element of intrigue and com¬ 
motion introduced into India by the Pan-Islamic Council in Constan¬ 
tinople and the close connection which is being established between 
the Sultan and Indian Mahomedans.” 26b 

It is, however, difficult to agree with B. C. Pal that Jamal-ud- 
din was mainly responsible for the Muslim aloofness from the Hindus. 
For there is no evidence to show that before Jamal-ud-din’s visit to 
India the educated Muslims of Bengal loyally co-operated with the 
Hindus in political matters. What has been stated above rather 


304 


MUSLIM COMMUNITY 


points out the other way. B. C. Pal’s statement about the aloofness ot 
the Muslims, based on his own experience, may be accepted as cor¬ 
rect. But his view about the state of things before his time, and 
his diagnosis of the causes for the cleavage between the two, cannot 
command the same respect and confidence. 

So far as evidence goes, Muslim politics, throughout the 
nineteenth century, has followed a course different from that of the 
Hindus. While the Hindus were developing their political ideas 
and political organizations on modern lines under the influence of 
English education, the Muslims launched the Wahabi movement, 
which was most violent and anti-British, and extremely communal 
in character. How far the outbreak of 1857 was the result of a co¬ 
operative movement between the two communities has been discuss¬ 
ed above. Then came the Aligarh movement, also conceived in a 
communal spirit. It brought about the political and social regene¬ 
ration of the Muslims, but at the same time widened the political 
cleavage between the Hindus and Muslims, and created a distinct 
Muslim unit in Indian politics. 

II. THE ALIGARH MOVEMENT 

Sir Syed Ahmad, whose views and activities gave rise to the 
Aligarh Movement, was born in A.D. 1817, and began his career as an 
official of the British Government at the age of about twenty. He held 
the office of the Sadar Amin at Bijnor when the Mutiny broke out, 
and remained loyal to the British throughout the great crisis. He 
saved the local Europeans by successful diplomacy, first with the mu¬ 
tineers, and then with Nawab Mahmud Khan, as mentioned above- 27 
His loyal services were recognized by the grateful British Govern¬ 
ment and Syed Ahmad occupied a distinguished position after the 
Mutiny was over. But he utilised the opportunity, thus offered, not 
for advancing his own material interests, but for the uplift of his co¬ 
religionists. He pondered deeply over the deplorable situation of 
the Muslim community and made a noble resolve to take up its cause. 
He traced the sad plight of the Muslims to their innate conservatism 
which made them averse to English education and Western culture. 
Their position, bad in itself, was rendered worse by the Mutiny. 
There was a general impression among the British that the Muslims 
were the chief instigators and ringleaders of that great outbreak. 
The consequence was that the hands of repression fell more heavily 
upon the Muslims than upon the Hindus, and the Government came 
to entertain a permanent distrust of Muslim loyalty and allegiance to 
the British. The Muslims lost whatever little political influence they 
possessed, and their future prospect was indeed very gloomy. 

305 


B.P.I.R.—-0 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

Syed Ahmad set before himself the twofold task of bringing 
about a rapprochement between the British Government and the 
Muslims, and introducing the modem type of education among the 
latter. For the first object he exerted his utmost to wean away the 
Muslims from the fruitless, vindictive and sentimental opposition to 
the British. He gradually convinced them that their future interests 
from all points of view depended entirely on the favours of the Gov¬ 
ernment, and these can be secured in full measure by loyal co-opera¬ 
tion with the British. On the other hand, he persuaded the English¬ 
men to believe that the Muslims were pot at heart disloyal to the 
British Crown, that there was nothing in the religious tenets of Islam 
which, as the Wahabis thought, rendered it obligatory upon the Mus¬ 
lims to take to jihad , i.e. declare a war of independence against the 
British; and lastly, that though the Muslims might have been carried 
away by emotion and erred in 1857 by leading the war against the 
British, it was merely a passing phase, and a little tact and generous 
forgiveness on the part of the Government could easily change the 
Muslims into a body of staunch supporters of the Government. 

The appeal of Syed Ahmad to the British Government to take 
kindly to his community came at a very opportune moment. The 
British, like all imperial powers, instinctively followed the policy of 
divide and rule in governing India. They could not be possibly un¬ 
aware of the fact that while the Muslims resented the establishment 
of British political authority, the Hindus welcomed it, and so at the 
beginning they unduly favoured the Hindus. But after two genera¬ 
tions of the Hindus had imbibed Western ideas through English 
education, they showed signs of political development which was 
regarded by the Government as anti-British and almost revolutionary. 
So they eagerly seized the opportunity, offered by Syed Ahmad, of en¬ 
listing the support of the great but politically undeveloped Muslim 
community, and holding it as a counterpoise to the progressive Hindu 
community. Henceforth the British Government steadily followed 
the policy of clogging or putting a brake on one wheel of the car of 
India’s political evolution, so that its progress may be slowed down, 
even if not altogether stopped. 

A fair idea of the nature and extent of the distinct change that 
came over the British attitude towards the Muslims is given by Hun¬ 
ter’s book, The Indian Musalmans , published in 1871. Hun¬ 
ter held that for many years the entire Muslim community had been 
disloyal and “a source of chronic danger to the British power in 
India”. 28 But his whole book is a vigorous plea for ‘rallying the 
Muslims’ round the British Government by removing their genuine 
grievances. 


306 


MUSLIM COMMUNITY 


Syed Ahmad did not confine his attention to the improvement 
of the relations between the Government and his co-religionists, but 
also devoted his heart and soul to a regeneration of his community. 
He raised his voice against Muslim orthodoxy in order to prove that 
there is nothing in the Qur’an which stands in the way of the Mus¬ 
lims taking to English education and imbibing rational and advanced 
ideas as well as scientific knowledge of the West. In short, he urged 
the Muslims to follow the same line of development which was chalk¬ 
ed out by Raja Rammohan Roy almost exactly half a century be¬ 
fore. Both shared the same fate. Like, Rammohan, Syed Ahmad 
met with violent opposition from the orthodox section; he was ex¬ 
communicated and even threatened with assassination. But truth 
and courage triumphed in both cases. Syed Ahmad had the great 
gratification to see his endeavour crowned with success, probably 
beyond his wildest imagination. It may be said without exaggera¬ 
tion that no single man did so much for his community during the 
nineteenth century, as Rammohan and Syed Ahmad did, respective¬ 
ly, for the Hindus and the Muslims. But the effective good which 
India could derive from the progress of the two communities suffer¬ 
ed a great deal by the time-lag of half a century between the two. 

Syed Ahmad rightly regarded the Western knowledge through 
English education as the foundation of all real progress. The idea 
was not an original one, as noted above, but his credit lies in the 
practical steps he took to give effect to it. As early as 1864 he esta¬ 
blished an English school at Ghazipur. Next year he founded the 
“Scientific Society” for translating useful English books on various 
subjects into Urdu and circulating them, among the Muslims. The 
Society also published a bilingual journal for spreading liberal ideas 
on social reform. In 1869 Syed Ahmad visited England and received 
a cordial welcome, being even received in audience by Queen Victo¬ 
ria. He had ample opportunity of studying at first hand the social 
and educational institutions of the English people, and felt more and 
more convinced that it is only by the assimilation of Western thought 
and culture that the Muslims could hope to recover anything like 
their former position in India. After his return in 1870, he made a 
more vigorous propaganda for the spread of English education and 
Western culture among his people. It is possible that the Young 
Turk Movement also inspired him and facilitated his work. 

While Syed Ahmad is entitled to great credit for his laudable en¬ 
deavour to uplift his community, it is somewhat painful to note that 
it had as its background a supreme contempt for the Indians. In a 
letter from London, dated 15th October, 1869, he writes: “Without 
flattering the English, I can truly say that the natives of India, high 


307 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—IJ 

and low, merchants and petty shop-keepers, educated and illiterate, 
when contrasted with the English in education, manners, and upright¬ 
ness, are as like them as a dirty animal is to an able and handsome 
man. Do you look upon an animal as a thing to be honoured? Do 
you think it necessary to treat an animal courteously, or the reverse? 
You do not 1 We have no right to courteous treatment. The English 
have reason for believing us in India to be imbecile brutes.” 29 

Syed Ahmad was intoxicated with the wine of Western culture 
very much in the same way as the first generation of English-educated 
Hindus. But he went beyond all proportions and even exceeded 
the limits of decency. It is to be further remembered that at the 
time he wrote the letter he was not a young man fresh from an Eng¬ 
lish institution, but a man of 52, with varied experiences in life. It 
is possible that his views underwent some change in course of time, 
but in any case the letter is a revealing one, and shows the wide gulf 
that separated the Hindus and Muslims at every stage of their 
national development. No Hindu, expressing such views in 1869, 
would have the least chance of being acclaimed as the leader of a 
movement for national regeneration. 

While in England, Syed Ahmad conceived the idea of establishing 
an educational institution for Muslims in India on the lines of Oxford 
and Cambridge. The result was the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental 
College at Aligarh, the foundation stone of which was laid by Lord 
Lytton on January 8, 1877. The Muslim community derived from it 
as much, if not more, impetus to progress on modern lines, as the 
Hindu community did from the Hindu College founded sixty years be¬ 
fore. The College provided for liberal education in arts and sciences 
through the medium of English language, under a succession of able 
principals, recruited from England. It was a residential institution 
and helped a great deal in developing the mental outlook and per¬ 
sonality of the young Muslim students on progressive lines. Syed 
Ahmad also started the Muhammadan Educational Conference as a 
general forum for spreading liberal ideas among the members of his 
community. He gathered round him a band of faithful followers who 
spread his ideas with conspicuous success. He thus inaugurated a 
new era in the life of Indian Muslims and infused fresh blood into 
the Muslim community at one of its greatest crises in life. 

The Aligarh Movement, thus inaugurated by Syed Ahmad, is no 
less remarkable for the political evolution of the Muslims. In the 
ultimate form which it took, it grew definitely anti-Congress and 
anti-Hindu, but this characteristic was not distinctly perceptible at 
its inception. 


308 



MUSLIM COMMUNITY 


It is not easy to form a clear idea of Syed Ahmad’s attitude to¬ 
wards the Hindus and their advanced political ideals. Some of his 
early utterances are completely free from any communal bias. In a 
speech delivered in 1884 he said: “Do you not inhabit the same land? 
.... Remember that the words Hindu and Mahomedan are only meant 
for religious distinction—otherwise all persons, whether Hindu or Ma¬ 
homedan, even the Christians who reside in this country, are all in 
this particular respect belonging to one and the same nation.” 30 
These words were received with loud cheers. In several other spee¬ 
ches also he referred to the Hindus and Muslims as forming one 
nation. To a Panjabi Hindu audience he said that every inhabitant 
of Hindusthan is a Hindu, and added, “I am therefore sorry that you 
do not regard me as a Hindu”. 31 He bestowed high praise on the 
Bengalis. “They are”, he said, ‘“the only people in our country 
whom we can properly be proud of, and it is only due to them that 
knowledge, liberty and patriotism have progressed in our country. 
I can truly say that really they are the head and crown of all the 
different communities of Hindusthan.” 32 He also organized and pre¬ 
sided over a meeting in 1877 in which Surendra-nath Banerji deli¬ 
vered a speech in favour of the simultaneous examinations for civil 
service in England and India, and a resolution in favour of it was 
unanimously passed. 33 

But some of Syed Ahmad’s utterances, even of an earlier period, 
betray a mentality of just the reverse type. As far back as 1858 he 
deplored the fact (and regarded it as a cause of the Mutiny) that the 
two antagonistic races, Hindus and Muslims, were put into the same 
regiment of the British army, and thus a feeling of friendship and 
brotherhood sprang up between them. He significantly added: *Tf 
separate regiments of Hindus and separate regiments of Muhamma¬ 
dans had been raised, this feeling of brotherhood could not have 
arisen”. 34 As will be noted later, the British took the lesson to heart 
and carried into practice the suggestion hinted by Syed Ahmad. 

Again, in a speech at Mirat on 16 March, 1888, he refers to the 
Hindus and Muslims not only as two nations, but as two warring 
nations who could not lead a common political life if ever the British 
left India. Here are the exact words, conveying an idea so diame¬ 
trically opposed to that to which he gave expression in other speeches 
four years earlier, as noted above: “Now suppose that all the English 
were to leave India, then who would be rulers of India? Is it possible 
that under these circumstances two nations, the Muhammadan 
and the Hindu, could sit on the same throne and remain equal in 
power? Most certainly not. It is necessary that one of them should 
conquer the other and thrust it down. To hope that both could re¬ 
main equal is to desire the impossible and the inconceivable.” 36 


309 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-11 


Further, as early as 18S3, he delivered a long speech deprecating 
the system of representative institutions, even for local self-govern¬ 
ment, and particularly the principle of election, pure and simple, in 
constituting Local Boards and District Boards, for fear that “the larger 
community would totally override the interest of the smaller com- 
munity.” 36 In this speech Syed Ahmad harped upon the elements 
of discord and disunion that divided India. “In one and the same 
district”, said he, “the population may consist of various creeds and 
various nationalities”. The whole speech is an eloquent plea against 
the conception of Indian nationality, and indicates the wide chasm 
that divided the Hindu and Muslim leaders in their political thoughts 
and ideas. For, it should be remembered that the speech was deli¬ 
vered in the same year when the Indian Association of Calcutta had 
summoned the National Conference, the first All-India political orga¬ 
nization, and only two years before the Indian National Congress 
held its first session. This speech, however, did not stand alone. As 
a matter of fact, Syed Ahmad and his followers, in their speeches 
and writings, were never tired of emphasising that India was inhabit¬ 
ed by different nations with different social, political, religious and 
historical traditions. All these ideas were brought to a head in a 
violent opposition to the Indian National Congress since its very in¬ 
ception. Sved Ahmad looked upon the system of representative 
government demanded by the Congress as dangerous to the interests 
of Muslims. He even broadly hinted that if the demand were con¬ 
ceded the Muslim minority might be forced to take up sword to pre¬ 
vent the tyranny of the majority. The following lines clearly indi¬ 
cate his trend of thought which also permeates his other speeches 
and writings: 

“In a country like India where homogeneity does not exist in 
any one of these fields (nationality, religion, ways of living, customs, 
mores, culture, and historical traditions), the introduction of repre¬ 
sentative government cannot produce any beneficial results; it can 
only result in interfering with the peace and prosperity of the land. 
.... The aims and objects of the Indian National Congress are based 
upon an ignorance of history and present-day realities; they do not 
take into consideration that India is inhabited by different nationa¬ 
lities; ..I consider the experiment which the Indian National 

Congress wants to make fraught with dangers and suffering for all 
the nationalities of India, specially for the Muslims. The Muslims 
are in a minority, but they are a highly united, minority. At least 
traditionally they are prone to take the sword in hand when the ma¬ 
jority oppresses them. If this happens, it will bring about disasters 
greater than the ones which came in the wake of the happenings of 

310 



MUSLIM COMMUNITY 


1857.The Congress cannot rationally prove its claim to repre¬ 

sent the opinions, ideals, and aspirations of the Muslims.” 36a 

As an indication of the change that came over Syed Ahmad it 
may be mentioned that though in 1877 he supported the simultaneous 
examinations for civil service, as mentioned above, he opposed it as a 
member of the Public Service Commission in 1887. 

Whatever one might think of the early isolated utterances of 
Syed Ahmad in favour of the peoples of India forming but one nation, 
the two-nation theory formed the solid basis of the Aligarh Move¬ 
ment. Its political views and ideals, as they took definite shape, may 
be formulated in the following four fundamental principles: 

(a) The Hindus and Muslims form two separate political entities 
v/ith separate outlook and conflicting interests. 

(b) The grant of representative institutions based on democra¬ 
tic principles, and appointment to high offices by open competitive 
examination in India would be detrimental to the interests of the 
Muslims, as they would be subject to Hindu domination which is far 
worse than British rule. 

(c) Consequently, the Muslims should regard the paramountcy 
of the British as the chief safeguard of their interests, and keep 
themselves aloof from political agitation against the Government. 

(d) As the Muslim interests are quite safe in the hands of the 
British, the Muslims should confine their attention to cultural deve¬ 
lopment, and avoid politics except in so far as it is necessary to coun¬ 
terbalance the mischief of Hindu political agitators. 37 

In support of the last two points it may be pointed out that 
he declined to support the “National Mohammadan Association” 
founded in Calcutta in 1877 by Amir Ali Khan and a young group 
of Muhammadans, as mentioned above. 

The Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College at Aligarh became 
the chief centre for disseminating these political principles. The 
Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College Fund Committee, of which 
Syed Ahmad was Honorary Secretary for life, laid down, as a definite 
rule, that subscriptions should be asked from Muslims and Chris¬ 
tians, the people of the Book, but from no others. 

The Principals of the Aligarh College proved to be active agents 
for propagating the political ideas mentioned above. The first Prin¬ 
cipal, Theodore Beck, “gave up a life and career in England, and de¬ 
voted himself to the service of the Muhammadans of India” and was 
their “faithful friend”. He took charge of the Institute Gazette, the 
literary organ of the Aligarh College, and edited it on behalf of Syed 
Ahmad. He poured forth venoms on the Bengalis for their advanced 


311 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-11 

political and social ideas. In issue after issue he published political 
articles, whose central idea was that India contained two or more 
nations, that Parliamentary government was unsuited to India, and in 
the event of its being granted, the Hindus, who formed the majority, 
‘‘would be absolute masters as no Muhammadan Emperor ever was. 5 ’ 38 

When, in 1889, Charles Bradlaugh introduced a Bill in the British 
House of Commons for setting up democratic form of Government 
in India, Beck prepared a memorial on behalf of the Muslims and 
proceeded to Delhi with a batch of his Aligarh students. These 
were posted at the gate of Jumiria Masjid and, after a Friday Prayer, 
induced more than twenty thousand Muslims to sign the memorial, 
falsely representing it to be a petition against the attempt of the 
Hindus to put a stop to cow-slaughter. 39 

It was mainly through Beck’s efforts that “in August, 1888, was 
established the United Indian Patriotic Association at Aligarh in 
which both Hindus and Musalmans joined. The objects of the As¬ 
sociation were: (1) to inform the members of Parliament and the 
people of England through newspapers and tracts that all the com¬ 
munities of India, the aristocracy and the Princes were not with the 
Congress and to contradict its statements; (2) to keep the Parlia¬ 
ment and the people of England informed about the opinions of 
Hindu and Muslim organizations which were opposed to the Con¬ 
gress; and (3) to help in the maintenance of law and order and the 
strengthening of the British rule in India and to wean away people 
from the Congress. This whole scheme was the result of Mr. Beck’s 
efforts and he and Sir Syed were put in charge of it. A branch of 
the Association was opened in England at the house of Mr. Morrison 
who subsequently became the Principal of Aligarh College after 
Mr. Beck’s death.” 40 

The United Indian Patriotic Association continued to oppose 
the Congress in the name of Musalmans for some years, but a joint 
organization of Hindus and Muslims was not to the liking of Beck. 
So under his inspiration a new organization under the name of 
‘Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental Defence Association of Upper India’ 
was founded at a meeting of some influential Muslims held on Decem¬ 
ber 30,1893, at the house of Syed Ahmad. In his opening address Beck 
said that “he was not in favour of political agitation, as it would 
lead the Musalmans away from their tried and beneficial course of 
loyalty to the British Government. But, all the same, he felt the 
need of an organisation to give political lead to the young Muslims. 
He explained, ‘with the press pouring out a stream of political arti¬ 
cles, our young educated Mahomedans will be drawn into the cur¬ 
rent to support or oppose the measures proposed.I think it would 


312 



MUSLIM COMMUNITY 


be a mistake to leave them without guidance.’ It was in conse¬ 
quence of this advice that the Defence Association was set up through 
a resolution passed to that effect in the same gathering.” 41 

The main objects of the Association were: (a) to place the 
opinions of Musalmans before Englishmen and the Government of 
India and to protect their political rights; (b) to prevent political agi¬ 
tation from spreading among the Musalmans; and (c) to strengthen 
British rule in India. In this new organization, of which Beck be¬ 
came the Secretary, Musalmans were separated from all other Indian 
communities except the Englishmen. The name ‘Defence Associa¬ 
tion’ was borrowed from the Anglo-Indian Defence Association which 
had been established in 1883 at the time of the Ilbert Bill agitation, 
but had ceased to exist after completing its work. 42 

Beck made a systematic effort to divide the Hindus and 
Muslims. As an illustration we may quote the following extract: 
“The objective of the Congress is to transfer the political control 
of the country from the British to the Hindus. It demands the re¬ 
peal of the Arms Act, reduction of military expenditure, and the 
consequential weakening of the frontier defences. Musalmans can 

have no sympathy with these demands.It is imperative for the 

Muslims and the British to unite with a view to fighting these agita¬ 
tors and prevent the introduction of democratic form of government, 
unsuited as it is to the needs and genius of the country. We 
therefore, advocate loyalty to the Government and Anglo-Muslim 
collaboration. ” 4 3 

“In 1895, Beck proceeded to England where he addressed the 
annual meeting of the London Branch of the Association. A sum¬ 
mary of his speech was published in the Aligarh College Magazine 
of March, April and June, 1895. According to it, Beck said that 
(1) a friendship between the British people and the Muslims was 
possible, but not between Muslims and followers of other religions; 
for example, the followers of Shivaji and those of Guru Govind Singh 
would never agree with the Muslims in accepting Aurangzeb as their 
hero; (2) Muslims would nevet* accept a system of government in 
which the Hindu majority would rule over them; the Muslims of 
Kashmir who were living under the yoke of Brahmin officers envied 
the good fortune of the Muslims who were living happily under the 
British rule; (3) Indians themselves did not like a democratic sys¬ 
tem; they preferred monarchy; (4) Muslim behaviour during and * 
after the Revolt (of 1857) had warned the community against agita¬ 
tional politics of Hindus, and they were now wisely acting on the 
advice of Sir Syed—-it was the advice of loyalty to the British; (5) 
Muslims were opposed to the holding of the competitive examina- 

313 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

tions in India, for they knew that this step would mean the replace¬ 
ment of many impartial British officers by anti-Muslim Hindus.” 43 * 

Beck’s contribution to the anti-Hindu bias in Aligarh Movement 
was very considerable. The personal influence exerted by Beck 
upon Syed Ahmad was believed to be so great that one Muslim 
writer humorously remarked that “the College is of Syed Ahmad 
and the order is of Beck”. 

A notorious instance of such influence is afforded by the abuses 
of the Bengalis in which Beck indulged in his articles in the Aligarh 
Institute Gazette. His anonymous articles were attributed to Syed 
Ahmad who was the editor of the Gazette. Reference has been 
made above to the high tributes paid by Syed Ahmad to the Benga¬ 
lis, and the very fact that he allowed the publication of Beck’s arti¬ 
cles is a measure of the latter’s influence upon him. The latitude 
he allowed to Beck was probably also partly due to the fact that he 
himself was gradually alienated from the Bengalis on account of 
their advanced political views. But there seems to be little doubt 
that Beck’s influence was also at work. 

Beck died in 1899, and his services, not merely as a friend and 
benefactor of the Muhammadans, but also as a builder of the British 
empire (on the solid basis of Hindu-Muslim split) were appreciated 
in high quarters. Sir Arthur Strachey, I.C.S., paid the following 
obituary tribute to Beck: “An Englishman who was engaged in the 
consolidation of the empire has disappeared from the scene.” 43b Beck 
was succeeded as Principal by Morrison, who was in charge of the 
London office of the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental Defence Associa¬ 
tion. Morrison, who continued in this post till 1905, was an apt pupil 
of Beck, but he was alarmed at the growing political solidarity among 
the Muslims. So he tried to wean away the Muslims from political 
agitation and divert their energies to the educational and economic 
uplift of their community. 

Thanks to the efforts of the founder and the first two Principals 
of the Aligarh College, an open manifestation of hostility against 
the Indian National Congress formed the basic creed of the Aligarh 
Movement. 

Syed Ahmad regarded the Congress as inimical to the true inte¬ 
rests of the Muslims. He even went further and wrote in the Pio¬ 
neer, on 2-3 November, 1887, that the Parliamentary form of govern¬ 
ment was “unsuited to a country containing two or more nations 
tending to oppress the numerically weaker.” 430 During 1888, Tyabji 
and Hume constantly endeavoured to secure his conciliation with the 
Congress. Sir Syed gave Tyabji a stunning reply. He said: “I do 
not understand what the words ‘National Congress* mean. Is it 


314 


MUSLIM COMMUNITY 


supposed that the different castes and creeds living in India belong 
to one nation, or can become a nation, and their aims and aspirations 
be one and the same? I think it is quite impossible, and when it is 
impossible there can be no such thing as a National Congress, nor 
can it be of equal benefit to all peoples. You regard the doings of 
the misnamed National Congress beneficial to India, but I am sorry 
to say that I regard them as not only injurious to our own community 
but also to India at large. I object to every Congress in any shape 
or form whatever which regards India as one nation.” Tyabji again 
wrote a persuasive letter, and again failed. 43 * 

According to Syed Ahmad, ‘the Congress was in reality a civil 
war without arms’. “The ultimate object of the Congress was to 
rule the country; and although they wished to do it in the name of all 
people of India, the Muslims would be helpless as they would be in a 
minority.” Again he observed, “that a ‘national’ Congress could not., 
be composed of two nations who had such different opinions and only 
happened to agree on some small points.” 43 ® In short, Syed Ahmad 
looked upon the Congress as a machinery devised by the Hindus to 
further their own interests at the cost of the Muslims. Hence we 
find an insistent opposition to the Congress from Syed Ahmad and 
his school. There were Muslim leaders like Badruddin Tyabji and 
Rahimatullah Sayani in Bombay, Nawab Syed Mahomed Bahadur 
in Madras, A. Rasul in Bengal, Maulvi Mazar-ul-Haq in Bihar, and 
others who regarded themselves as Indians first and Muslims after¬ 
wards. They wholeheartedly supported the Congress, but their 
number was few, and their followers, fewer still. In general, it may 
be said that the Muslims of Northern India, at any rate, were firmly 
attached to the policy of Syed Ahmad. 

Many leaders of the Congress were, however, loath to admit this 
patent truth. The official history of the Congress denies that the 
Muslims were opposed to the Congress. It makes much of the fact 
that “Sheik Raza Hussein Khan produced at the fourth session (1888, 
Allahabad) a fatwa supporting the Congress from the Shams-ul- 
ulma, the leader of the Sunni community of Lucknow”, and declared 
that “it is not the Muslims but their official masters who are opposed 
to the Congress.” 44 A reference to the number of Muslim delegates 
present at the different sessions of the Congress, and the part which 
they took in its deliberations, would give us a true idea of the real 
interest taken by the Muslims as a class in the progress of Indian 
National Congress. These statistics, which will be found in Ch. XV, 
undoubtedly go against the position maintained in the official his¬ 
tory of the' Congress. Even some of the stalwarts of the Congress 
in those days regretfully admitted the hostile attitude of the 


315 


/ 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


Muslims towards the Congress. Thus Surendra-nath Banerji writes: 
“The Muhammadan community, under the leadership of Sir Syed 
Ahmad, had held aloof from the Congress. They were working 
under the auspices of the Patriotic Association in direct opposition 
to the national movement. Our critics regarded the National Con¬ 
gress as a Hindu Congress, and the opposition papers described it as 
such. We were straining every nerve to secure the co-operation of 
our Muhammadan fellow-countrymen in this great national work. 
We sometimes paid the fares of Muhammadan delegates and offered 
them other facilities.” 45 Even Gokhale remarked in one of his 
letters that “seventy millions of Muhammadans were more or less 
hostile to national aspirations”. 46 

The anti-Congress policy was clearly laid down by Syed Ahmad 
in his public speeches, the most notable of them being one at Lakh- 
nau on December 28, 1887, and another at Mirat on March 16, 1888. 
An extract from the latter has been quoted above. 46 * At Lakhnau 
he told the assembled Muslims, on the eve of the Congress session 
at Madras: “If you accept that the country should groan under the 
yoke of Bengali rule and its people lick the Bengali shoes, then, in 
the name of God! jump into the train, sit down, and be off to Madras, 
be off to Madras.” 465 Referring to these speeches M. Noman re¬ 
marks that “No Mussalman of India since then joined the Congress 
except one or two. Even Syed Ahmad Khan’s co-religionists who 
differed from his views on religious, educational and social mat¬ 
ters and opposed him violently, followed him in politics and preserved 
their isolation from the Congress.” 47 

There is no doubt that Syed Ahmad succeeded in keeping back 
the bulk of Muslims from the Congress. They made no secret of the 
reasons for their action. In 1896, Rahimatullah Sayani, a distin¬ 
guished Muslim, presided over the Congress session. Haji Muham¬ 
mad Ismail Khan, a friend of Syed Ahmad, suggested to the Congress 
President that the Congress should pass a resolution to the effect 
that the Hindus and Muslims should have equal number of' seats in 
the legislative councils, district-boards, and municipalities. This 
showed where the shoe pinched. Sayani could not accept Ismail 
Khan’s proposal. Syed Ahmad, however, endorsed it, and wrote in 
an article that the Muslims could join the Congress only if the Con¬ 
gress agreed to the proposal of Ismail Khan. 47 * 

As a matter of fact, it is quite evident from a perusal of the con¬ 
temporary records that almost “all the leading Muslim institutions 
and personalities joined hands in their indignation against the Indian 
National Congress. Resolutions condemning the Congress were pas¬ 
sed by the Musalmans of Allahabad, Lucknow, Meerut, Lahore, Madras 


316 



MUSLIM COMMUNITY 


and other places. The Mahomedan Observer, The Victoria Paper , 
The Muslim Herald, The Raftq-i-Hind and the Imperial Paper 
—ail spoke with one voice against the Indian National Congress. The 
Aligarh Institute Gazette, a powerful Muslim organ of Northern 
India, never missed the opportunity of reprinting all sorts of views 
opposed to the Congress ideology from other newspapers and maga¬ 
zines. The Central National Muhammadan Association of Bengal, the 
Muhammadan Literary Society of Calcutta, the Anjuman-i-Isiamia 
of Madras, the Dindigal Anjuman and the Muhammadan Central 
Association, Punjab, denounced, in the strongest possible terms. 
Congress aims and activities”. 48 Important Muslim organizations 
in India refused to send delegates ta the Congress when invited to 
do so. 

Syed Ahmad’s opposition to the Congress was not confined to 
verbal protests. He also took practical steps to check its rising po¬ 
pularity by the foundation of the United Indian Patriotic Associa¬ 
tion, and the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental Defence Association to 
which reference has been made above. 

It is also not without significance that Syed Ahmad laid the foun¬ 
dation of the Annual Muslim Educational Conference, in 1886, only 
a year after the establishment of the National Congress. This con¬ 
ference was held each year at different places in India exactly at 
the time when the Congress held its sessions. Although its main object 
was the discussion of the general and educational condition of the 
Indian Musalmans, it became also a forum for the dissemination of 
Muslim political opinions. By the gradual progress of this annual 
conference, the Muslims hoped to overspread “the whole of upper 
India with a network of societies, committees and individuals, all 
working harmoniously in the great cause, so that a big evil may be 
dealt with by a strong remedy and by the vigorous work of one 
generation the tide of misfortune may be turned and the Mohamedan 
Nation may be set moving on the tide of progress abreast of all the 
other Nations of India.” 49 

Abbas S. Tyabji, Bar-at-Law,. pointed out the real cause 
of Muhammadan aloofness and correctly exposed the unreasoning 
fear of the Muslims when he wrote: “The real reason is that the 
Mahomedan minority has a fear that it will not be dealt with fairly 
by the Hindu majority. Now I ask this question: has the Congress 
pressed for any rights during the last 25 years which would have 
specially benefited the Hindus at the expense of the Mahomedans? 
If it had, my Mahomedan brothren may rest assured that men like 
the late Mr. Justice Tyabji, Nawab Syed Mahomed and others, would 
not have kept up their connections with the Congress movement.” 60 


317 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

K. M. Sayani, President of the Congress in 1896, made an elaborate 
analysis of the probable causes of Muslim discontent against the Con¬ 
gress, as noted above, 61 and proceeded to reply to each of them. The 
Congress also lost no opportunity to placate the Muslims as far as 
possible without surrendering its basic principles. An instance is 
afforded by the third session of the Congress held in Madras in 1887, 
At this session of the Congress a member gave notice of a Resolu¬ 
tion urging the prohibition of cow-slaughter. The Congress was in 
great difficulty, as the feeling of the Muhammadans on this question 
was only too well-known, and it was fully realized that the Resolu¬ 
tion would raise a question of great difficulty and delicacy. The 
Congress found a solution that was fair to all interests, and was ac¬ 
cepted by all parties, and which has since been the recognized con¬ 
vention of the Congress. It was decided that if any Resolution affect¬ 
ing a particular class or community was objected to by the delegates 
representing that community, even though they were in a minority, 
it should not be considered by the Congress. 62 

But all this was in vain. Nothing could bring round Syed Ahmad 
to support the Congress. After his death in 1898 his mantle fell 
upon Nawab Mohsin-ul-Mulk who, too, followed the same policy. 
This spirit of animosity against the Congress gradually brought in 
its train a general spirit of opposition to the Hindus. 

This spirit was further embittered by other measures, such as 
the propaganda initiated in Maharashtra against the killing of cows. 
Far more serious was the unfortunate and protracted controversy 
over Urdu vs. Hindi, originating from a movement begun by the 
Hindus in Varanasi as early as 1867 to replace Urdu by Hindi and 
the Arabic script by Nagarl. This movement convinced Syed Ahmad 
that the Hindus and Muslims could never “join whole-heartedly to¬ 
gether and the differences between them would immensely increase 
in future.” Nawab Mohsin-ul-Mulk even adopted a militant at¬ 
titude. “Although”, he said, “we have not the might of pen, our 
hands are still strong enough to wield the might of the sword.” 63 

Both the Aligarh Movement and its founder have been severely 
criticised and condemned by a class of writers, mostly Hindu. They 
rightly point out that this Movement was responsible for bringing 
about that conflict between the Hindus and Muslims which culminated 
in the foundation of Pakistan. But it is necessary to look at the Move¬ 
ment, fairly and squarely, from the point of view of the Muslims 
for whom it was primarily intended. There can be no gainsaying 
the fact that the Aligarh Movement was to the Muslims what the 
Renaissance and Nationalist Movement of the 19th century was to 
the Hindus. It raised the Muslim community from the slough of 


318 


MUSLIM COMMUNITY 


despondency in which it had sunk after the Mutiny, and transformed 
it from the Medieval to the Modern Age. Syed Ahmad, who ushered 
in this Movement, deserves the highest praise for his love of the 
community and the far-sighted vision which he displayed regarding 
the problem of the Muslims. He did for his community something 
like what Baja Rammohan Roy did for the Hindus. He tried to 
introduce English education among the Muslims as he held, like 
the Raja, that that was the only way of removing the prejudices and 
superstitions which had accumulated in course of ages and retarded 
the healthy growth of the Muslims on modern lines. He had also 
introduced reforms in social customs and religious ideas. For all 
this he had to engage in a hard fight with the orthodox Muslims, 
specially the Maulavis, and it must be said to his credit that he 
fought, sometimes almost single-handed, against enormous odds that 
at one time almost threatened to ruin him. It is a great tribute 
to his personality that, although not quite well versed in English, he 
appreciated its importance for his community, and very rightly held 
that no true progress is possible for the Muslims until and unless 
they made up for their slackness in the past and imbibed English 
education and Western rationalism in very much the same way as 
the Hindus did. We can, therefore, understand why he laid so much 
stress on the educational propaganda, and deliberately avoided poli¬ 
tics so far as the Muslims were concerned. When he started his 
crusade for Western education, the total number of Muslim graduates 
was only 26 against 1,652 in Hindu community. He was of the opi¬ 
nion that Muslims could advance in education only with the help 
of the Government, and so long as they did not make sufficient pro¬ 
gress, it would be unnecessarily diverting their energy to join in the 
political movement, with the additional risk of incurring the dis¬ 
pleasure of the Government. This, to a certain extent, explains 
also his opposition to the Indian National Congress. There were 
other grounds for his anti-Congress policy. In the first place, he 
had an innate sense of loyalty to the British, and the terrible con¬ 
sequences of the Mutiny, of which he was an eye-witness, probably 
warned him that the time was not ripe for any sort of opposition 
against the British Government. He also knew the temper of the 
Muslims and was justly afraid that their opposition to the Govern¬ 
ment might not be confined to passing Resolutions, as in the Con¬ 
gress, but might stir up the latent spirit of revolution and end in 
overt acts of rebellion which would again expose the Muslims to the 
same severe repression which followed the Wahabi Movement and 
the Sepoy Mutiny of 1857. Above all, he held that the Muslims 
must be mature by their education before they could fruitfully join 
politics. The trend and net result of his policy was undoubtedly to 

319 


THE BRITISH PaRAMQUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

widen the cleavage between the two great communities, but perhaps 
it would be more correct to say that he was not so much anti-Hindu 
as pro-Muslim. He might well say, like the great Roman, Brutus, 
that it was not that he loved the Hindus less, but that he loved the 
Muslims more. The one and only aim of his life was to promote the 
Muslim interests, come what may. 

Some apologists of Syed Ahmad have been at pains to prove that 
his anti-national, anti-Hindu and anti-Congress policy was entirely 
due to the advice of Beck. 54 This view is no doubt based on, and seeks 
to explain, the striking contrasts between Syed Ahmad’s liberal views 
of earlier period and communal policy of a later date. It should be re¬ 
membered, however, that Beck came to Aligarh in 1883, but, as has 
been noted above, the reactionary views of Syed Ahmad may be traced 
to an earlier period, and liberal views even after 1883. Besides, it 
is permissible to doubt whether such a strong personality as Syed 
Ahmad possessed could be entirely dominated and led to a radically 
different policy by another individual. Beck undoubtedly exercised 
strong influence upon Syed Ahmad, as noted above, but it was pos¬ 
sible for him to do so only because the fundamental ideas of both 
followed the same direction. 

Whatever we might think of Beck’s influence, there is no doubt 
that from 1880 right up to 1898 when Sir Syed Ahmad died, he was 
the pivot round whom the Muslim politics moved. It is also a point 
worth remembering that his view, including the policy towards the 
Hindus and the Congress, was fully approved by almost all the Mus¬ 
lim leaders, including some of those who later strutted on the stage 
of Indian politics as the great champions of Hindu-Muslim unity 
and Indian nationhood. Even so late as 1923, Muhammad Ali, then 
reputed to be the greatest nationalist of India among the Muslims, 
observed in his Presidential Address at the Congress: “Reviewing 
the actions of a bygone generation to-day when it is easier to be 
wise after the event, I must confess I still think the attitude of Syed 
Ahmad Khan was eminently wise, and much as I wish that some 
things which he had said should have been left unsaid, I am con¬ 
strained to admit that no well-wisher of Mussalmans, nor of India 
as a whole, could have followed a very different course in leading 
the Mussalmans.” 


III. DIVIDE AND RULE. 

The activities of Beck and his successors should not be treated 
as mere personal or isolated incidents. They coincide with a 
deliberate change of policy on the part of the Government of India 
in favour of the Muslims. The policy of Devide and Rule is as old 


320 


MUSLIM COMMUNITY 


in human history as imperialism itself, and it would have been 
strange indeed if the British empire-builders in India were im¬ 
mune from it. Actually it can be traced as far back as 1821, when 
a British officer, signing himself Carnations , wrote in the Asiatic 
Journal: “Divide et Impera should be the motto of our Indian ad¬ 
ministration, whether political, civil or military”. Lt. John Coke, 
Commandant at Moradabad, wrote at the time of the Sepoy Mutiny: 
“Our endeavours should be to uphold in full force the (for us for¬ 
tunate) separation which exists between the different religions and 
races, not to endeavour to amalgamate them. Divide et Impera 
should be the principle of Indian Government.” Lord Elphinstone, 
Governor of Bombay, wrote in a minute dated May 14, 1859: “Divide 
et Impera was the old Roman motto and it should be ours.” Sir 
John Strachey, another eminent British Civilian, observed: "The 
existence, side by side, of hostile creeds among the Indian people 
is one of the strong points in our political position in India.” 65 

The policy of Divide and Rule was also pursued during the 
Mutiny, when the Sikhs and the Gurkhas were pitted against the 
other Indians. The success of the policy and its future possibilities 
did not escape the vigilant eyes of the English statesmen. Sir John 
Seeley wrote: “You see the mutiny was in a great measure put down 
by turning the races of India against each other. So long as this 
can be done, the government of India from England is possible, and 

there is nothing miraculous about it. But.if the state of 

things should alter, if by any chance the population should be weld¬ 
ed into a single nationality, then I do not say we ought to begin to 
fear for our dominion; I say we ought to cease at once to hope it.” 66 
Sir John Lawrence echoed the sentiment of Sir Syed noted above, 67 
when he said: “Among the defects of the pre-Mutiny army, un¬ 
questionably the worst, and the one that operated most fatally against 
us, was the brotherhood and homogeneity of the Bengal army, and 
for this purpose the remedy is counterpoise; firstly the great counter¬ 
poise of the Europeans, and secondly of the native races.” 58 

Actually, as noted above, the Indian army was reorganized after 
the Mutiny according to this principle. “In the old army, men stood 
by chance in the ranks, Hindu and Musalman, Poorbeah and Punjabi, 
cheek by jowl. The object aimed at in the new constructions was, 
to some extent, to put the races into watertight compartments.” 
Accordingly, the majority of the new regiments became class-com¬ 
pany ones (where different races should be kept in different com¬ 
panies in the same regiments), but a few Sikh and Gurkha corps re¬ 
mained entirely homogeneous (class regiments). 09 

321 

B.p.i.n.—si 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCB-II 

At first the policy of Divide and Rule worked in favour of the 
Hindus. For, as the British dispossessed the Muslim rulers they na¬ 
turally looked upon the Muslims as their enemies and favoured the 
Hindus as a counterpoise to them. A clear enunciation of this policy 
was made by Lord Ellenborough. Writing to the Duke of Wellington 
from Simla on October 4, 1842, after the fall of Kabul and Ghazni, 
he remarked that while the Muslims, as a class, desired the failure 
of the English in Afghanistan, the Hindus were delighted, and then 
observed: “It seems to me most unwise, when we are sure of the 
hostility of one-tenth, not to secure the enthusiastic support of the 
nine-tenths which are faithful.” Again, writing to Wellington on 
January 18, 1843, Ellenborough said: “I cannot close my eyes to 
the belief that that race (Mussalman) is fundamentally hostile to us, 
and therefore our true policy is to conciliate the Hindus.” 60 

This anti-Muslim and pro-Hindu feeling was further developed 
after the Sepoy Mutiny of 1857, as the British regarded the Muslims 
as its chief instigators. Thus H. H. Thomas (retired I.C. S.) observed 
that “the Hindus were not the contrivers or the primary movers of 
the (1857) rebelion;.. .it was the result of a Muhammadan conspi¬ 
racy. ,,C1 Reference has been made above 62 to similar views expres¬ 
sed by Charles Raikes and others. 

But with the development of political ideas and national 
consciousness among the Hindus, they came to be regarded 
as a serious menace to the stability of the British rule and the Go¬ 
vernment realized the necessity of putting a check to this danger. 
The Muslims had given up their truculent attitude against the British 
and had not yet developed the national spirit with which half a 
century of Western education had imbued the Hindus. It was obvious 
that the Muslims could now he safely played against the Hindus. 
Hunter’s famous book, The Indian Musalmans, published in 1871, is 
an eloquent advocacy of this new policy. It was at this juncture 
that the Muslims also were ready, under Syed Ahmad’s leadership, 
to place implicit faith upon the benevolence of the Government. 
Syed Ahmad’s appeal to the British Government to take the Muslims 
under their aegis, therefore, found ready response and it was suc¬ 
cessful to a far greater degree than he ever could possibly hope. 

This policy of favouring the Muslims as a counterpoise against 
the Hindus was gradually adopted by the British during the eighties 
and nineties. On 14 January, 1887, Lord Cross, the Secretary of 
State, wrote to the Viceroy, Lord Dufferin, in connection with the 
abstention of the Muhammadans from the Indian National Congress 
that “this division of religious feeling is to our advantage.” It was 
also clearly indicated by Lord Dufferin in some of his speeches. In 

322 


MUSLIM COMMUNITY 


these he elaborated for the first time the theory of the special im¬ 
portance of the Muslims in Indian politics, which was to play such 
an important role in future. He reminded them ‘that their fore¬ 
fathers had entered India through the north-western passes, and they 
should therefore realise, more than anybody else, the importance 
and duty of guarding that route against future invaders*. He did 
not stop with this astute diplomatic way of rousing their national 
feeling against the Hindus. Proceeding further, he told them 
that “fifty millions of men are themselves a nation,—and a very po¬ 
werful nation.” 63 Lord Salisbury said in a public speech that it 
would be impossible for England to hand over the Indian Muslims to 
the tender mercies of a hostile numerical majority. 63 * 4 

It is not strange, therefore, that the principle of separate repre¬ 
sentation for the Muslims should be adopted in the Indian Councils 
Act of 1892. Dr. Ambedkar observes: 

“The introduction of this principle is shrouded in mystery. It 
is mystery because it was introduced so silently and so stealthily. 
The principle of separate representation does not find a place in the 
Act. The Act says nothing about it. It was in the directions—but 
not in the Act—issued to those charged with the duty of framing 
regulations as to the classes and interests to whom representation 
was to be given that the Muslims were named as a class to be pro¬ 
vided for. 

“It is a mystery as to who was responsible for its introduction. 
This scheme of separate representation was not the result of any 
demand put forth by any organized Muslim association. In whom 
did it then originate? It is suggested that it originated with the 
Viceroy, Lord Dufferin, who, as far back as the year 1888, when 
dealing with the question of representation in the Legislative Coun¬ 
cils, emphasized the necessity that in India representation will have 
to be, not in the way representation is secured in England, but re¬ 
presentation by interests. Curiosity leads to a further question, 
namely, what could have led Lord Dufferin to propose such a plan? 
It is suggested that the idea was to wean away the Musalmans from 
the Congress which had already been started three years before. 
Be that as it may, it is certain that it is by this Act that separate re¬ 
presentation for Muslims became, for the first time, a feature of the 
Indian Constitution. It should, however, be noted that neither the 
Act nor the Regulations conferred any right of selection upon the 
Muslim community, nor did the Act give the Muslim community a 


323 


THE BRITISH PARAMQUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

right to claim a fixed number of seats. All that it did was to give 
the-Muslims the right to separate representation.” 63 b 

Since the days of Dufferin and Salisbury the policy of favour¬ 
ing the Muslims grew apace and Sir Bamfylde Fuller merely gave 
formal and official expression to a bare truth when he represented 
the Hindus and the Muslims as his two wives, the latter being the 
favourite one. Those who are familiar with the stories of Suo-rani 
and Duo-rani (favoured and discarded queens) in Indian folk-tales 
will easily understand the full implication of this. The ‘Divide and 
Rule jackboot’ was still thei^e-—only it was on the other leg. 

The Indian politicians could not be unaware of the new policy 
of the Government of India. When the Congress met in Calcutta 
in 1890, the Chairman of the Reception Committee remarked in his 
address that the British policy of Divide and Rule was unworthy of 
the great English people and was fraught with grave danger to the 
safety of the British Empire. 

This aspect of the problem also struck some British statesmen. 
Shortly after the Congress session in Calcutta in December, 1886, 
the Muslim Observer stated that only seven Muslims joined it and 
that the statement of the Congress leaders that a large number of 
Muslims joined it was a lie. Lord Dufferin had already begun to 
dislike the Congress and his views were shared by Lord Cross, the 
Secretary of State. So Dufferin sent a cutting from the above 
paper to Lord Cross with a covering letter dated 4 January, 1887, 
in which he wrote: ^You will have observed that the Mahomedans 
have abstained from taking any part in the Indian National Con¬ 
gress. They have done this, I understand, entirely in accordance 
with their own views of what is politic, and not at all under any 
pressure from the officials.* Indeed I do not think we could make a 
greater mistake than to sow the seeds of dissension, suspicion or 
jealousy between any classes of Her Majesty’s subjects. Such a 
policy would in the long run recoil upon our own heads. What the 
Mahomedans feel is that under a Bengalee Constitution they would 
be more completely left out in the cold than they are at present.” 636 

Lord Dufferin’s disclaimer does not carry immediate conviction. 
We have seen how the anti-Hindu and anti-Congress spirit of the 
Muslims was encouraged—not to put it more bluntly—by Mr. Beck, 
the Principal of the Aligarh College, and others of his ilk; and from 
what we know of the mentality of the British officials, it is difficult 
to believe that they were absolutely neutral in the matter. The very 
fact that Dufferin went out of his way to declare that there was no 
official pressure shows that there were genuine suspicions about it. 


324 



MUSLIM COMMUNITY 


His own speeches, reminding the importance of the Muslims as a 
separate nation, was also certainly calculated to alienate them from 
the Hindus. In any case, Lord Cross was u very glad that the Maho- 
medans have so distinctly kept aloof from the Congress.” 

The warning of Dufferin was not, however, heeded by the Home 
Government. How their mind worked is best seen in the following 
extract from a letter which Lord Hamilton, the Secretary of State, 
wrote to Lord Elgin, the Viceroy, on May 7, 1897: “I am sorry 
to hear of the increasing friction between Hindus and Mahomedans 
in the N.W. and the Punjab. One hardly Jmows what to wish for— 
unity of ideas and action would be very dangerous politically, diver¬ 
gence of ideas and collision are administratively troublesome. Of 
the two the latter is the least risky, though it throws anxiety and 
responsibility upon those on the spot where the friction exists.” 

In an earlier letter, dated 3 October, 1895, Hamilton wrote to 
Elgin: “Sandhurst (Governor of Bombay) sent me some details 
about the riot at Dhulia. The Mahomedans were clearly in the 
wrong. These outbreaks are, from administrative point of view, re¬ 
grettable, but they do seem to me to strengthen our position gene¬ 
rally as reminders of what was the condition of India before our 
authority was there established and what it would be if abolished.” 

These two letters show how in a cold, calculating spirit the 
British Government welcomed the tension between the Hindus and 
Musalmans as a safeguard of the British empire even at the risk of 
administrative difficulties and inconvenience. Of course, the moral 
side of the question does not seem to have ever troubled them. In 
the course of a decade. Divide and Rule was adopted as the official 
policy of the British Government during the Viceroyalty of Lord 
Minto, as will be shown in the next volume. 

IV. HINDU-MUSLIM RELATIONS 

The contribution of the British rule to the cleavage between the 
Hindus and Muslims should be considered in its proper perspective. 
It must be frankly admitted that the roots of the cleavage lay deep 
in the soil, and it was already manifest even early in the nineteenth 
century. The British did not create it, but merely exploited the 
patent fact to serve their own interests. Reference has been made 
above to the growing difference between the elites of the two com¬ 
munities, even before a fillip was given to it either by the Aligarh 
Movement or the definite policy of Divide and Rule adopted by the 
British Government. The relations among the masses, though nor¬ 
mally cordial, occasionally took a very ugly turn in the shape of 
communal riots, showing that the volcanic mountains, calm on the 


325 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

surface, had not altogether lost their eruptive tendency and power. 
Early in the nineteenth century there was such a violent outbreak 
in Varanasi (Banaras). In October, 1809, the Hindu mob of the 
city stormed the great mosque of Aurangzeb. Though well-authen¬ 
ticated details are lacking, it is reported that about fifty mosques 
were destroyed, the city was given up to pillage and slaughter, and 
a large number of Muslims were put to death. 64 In 1820 the Muslims 
assaulted a Durga Puja procession in Calcutta. 

Communal riots and tensions during the great outbreak of 1857 
have been noted above. 65 Hindu-Muslim riots with heavy casualties 
occurred at Bareilly and other localities in U.P. during 1871-2. 66 
Two such riots took place in Bombay. 

An article in a magazine, edited by a Parsi youth, gave an ac¬ 
count of the Prophet of Arabia which lacked ‘‘that sentiment of res¬ 
pect and tolerance which is due to a sister community”. The litho¬ 
graphed portrait of the Prophet, which was given with the article, 
also gave umbrage, and “an undiscovered villain added fuel to the 
fire by posting a copy of the picture, with ribald and obscene remarks 
underneath, on the main entrance of the principal mosque.” Large 
crowds of Muhammadans assembled in the mosques of the town with 
the Qur’an in one hand and a knife in the other. At a meeting held 
on October 7, 1851, they proclaimed a Jih&d (holy war) against the 
Parsis. They overwhelmed the small police force on duty and mar¬ 
ched triumphantly to the Parsi quarters of the Bombay town. The 
Parsis were “belaboured mercilessly by the rioters”. “For weeks 
together, that part of Bombay was a scene of pillage and destruction, 
and the Parsis had to put up with shocking atrocities such as defile¬ 
ment of corpses”. “Only after the editor had been compelled to 
tender a written apology a truce was declared”. “In connection 
with this disturbance the Parsi community looked in vain to the 
police for protection. If not altogether hostile, they were indiffe¬ 
rent. Dddabhai Naoroji, who witnessed the tragedy, hastened the 
publication of the e Rast Goftar’ and wrote strong articles against the 
Government for indifference and failure of duty. He also rebuked 
the cowardly Parsi leaders for having tamely submitted to such 
outrages.” 67 

Another riot took place in 1874 of which there is an eye-witness* 
account by the great Indian leader Pherozeshah Mehta. 67 *. In a 
book written by a Parsi vaccinator there was a reference to the 
Prophet which was regarded as objectionable by the Muslims. The 
publication was accordingly suppressed by the Government and the 
author was made to apologize for any affront he might have inad¬ 
vertently offered. Nevertheless, there was “a brutal and unwar¬ 
ranted attack on Parsis by a mob of Mohamedans”, on 13 February, 


326 


MUSLIM COMMUNITY 


1874. They “invaded Parsi places of worship, tore up the prayer- 
books, extinguished the sacred fires and subjected the fire-temples 
to various indignities. Parsis were attacked in the streets and in 
their houses and free fights took place all over the city. Thanks to 
the weakness and supineness of the police and the Government, hooli¬ 
ganism had full play and considerable loss of life and damage to 
property were caused”. The riot continued for several days till the 
military was called out. 

Pherozeshah Mehta, like Dadabhai Naoroji, none of whom one 
would accuse of having any special animosity against the Muslims or 
the British Government, has laid emphasis on the callousness of the 
police and the indifference of the Government. “The attitude of the 
Commissioner of Police was particularly hostile and objectionable. 
The Governor told a Parsi deputation that waited on him that the 
conduct of the community had been injudicious and unconciliatory 
and advised it to make its peace with the Muhammadans and to learn 
the lesson of defending itself without dependence on the authorities.” 

Communal disturbances grew in volume and frequency, particu¬ 
larly between the years 1885 and 1893. Serious communal riots broke 
out at Lahore and Kamal (1885), Delhi (1886) where military had 
to be requisitioned, Hoshiarpur, Ludhiana, Ambala, Dera Ghazi Khan 
(1889), and Palakod in the Salem District of Madras (1891). The 
year 1893 was one of the worst and there were grave outbreaks 
over a large area in Azamgarh District (U.P.), Bombay town (lasted 
for 6 days) and interior, and Isa Khel (Mianwalli District, Punjab). 
Muharram and Dusserah processions, and cow-killing at Baqr’id 
were the causes, and murders, demolition of mosques and temples, 
and looting of shops, the chief characteristics of these riots. 6 ® De¬ 
tailed accounts of a few riots are given in the Appendix. It is not 
perhaps unreasonable to assume that this increased tension between 
the masses of the two communities was the direct consequence of 
the growing cleavage between their leaders. 

Thus towards the end of the period under review the Hindus 
and Muslims represented almost two opposite camps in politics, and 
the ground was prepared for this, throughout the nineteenth cen¬ 
tury, by the frankly communal outlook of the Muslims, both in their 
general political evolution as well as in the Wahabi and Aligarh 
movements. The Muslim political ideas were generally inspired 
by the consideration of purely Muslim interests. But in forming a 
proper estimate of the Muslim politics in the nineteenth century 
it would be unfair to look at it only from the standpoint of modem 
nationalist outlook, and several important factors, which dre gene¬ 
rally overlooked, should be taken into consideration. 

327 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

In the first place, it should be remembered that neither the 
Wahabi nor the Aligarh Movement represented the Muslim com- 
munity as a whole. Large elements stood outside both, and even 
in the heyday of Aligrah Movement, the masses were mostly indiffe¬ 
rent, and a number of distinguished Muslims co-operated in poli¬ 
tical matters with the Hindus. 

Secondly, if the Muslims were communal and lacking in an all- 
India outlook, the Hindus were partly responsible for this. The 
Hindu intelligentsia cherished a definitely anti-Muslim bias froiy 
the very beginning of the nineteenth«century, as has been noted 
above, 60 though some of them, like Peary-chand Mitra, realized the 
need of a united front and publicly expressed this view. It is not 
without significance that the formation of a Muhammadan Associa¬ 
tion in 1856 (or 1855) was welcomed by the British Indian Associa¬ 
tion. The Hindus regarded it as quite natural, and evidently looked 
upon the Muslims as a separate political unit. Far more significant 
is the justification offered by the authorities of the Hindu Mela for 
forming a National Society. To the objection that a Society with 
membership confined to Hindus could hardly be called national, the 
Nat ; oTUil Paper answered as follows on December 4,1872: “We do not 
understand why our correspondent takes exception to the Hindus 
who certainly form a nation by themselves, and as such a society esta¬ 
blished by them can very properly be called a National Society ” 69a 
No wonder that soon after the foundation of the Hindu Mela and 
National Society, the National Muhammadan Association was found¬ 
ed in Calcutta. It would be obvious from the above that while 
genuinely all-India national outlook was not altogether absent, there 
was a general feeling among large sections of both Hindus and Mu¬ 
hammadans that they formed two separate political units or nations. 

Thirdly, it is to be considered very carefully why the Hindus 
gradually outgrew this narrow separatist -tendency and imbibed a 
truly national spirit, while the Muslims failed to do so during the 
period under review. The Hindus had a start of at least half a cen¬ 
tury over the Muslims in their political evolution, and this margin 
of time should be normally allowed for similar development. But 
there were special difficulties in the adoption of a national outlook by 
the Muslims. They were in a hopeless minority as compared with 
the Hindus, and in any democratic form of government, they were 
sure to occupy only a position of secondary importance. As noted 
above, this view was publicly expressed at the time of the legislation 
for local self-government. This apprehension of the Hindus obtain- 
x ing superior authority would naturally increase with every advance 
of self-government on democratic lines. The same fear worked 


328 


MUSLIM COMMUNITY 


upon the minds of the Muslims even in comparatively minor matters 
like recruitment to higher posts by open competitive examination, 
which was strongly advocated by the Hindus. Nobody could deny 
that it was the best mode of recruitment that could be conceived, 
but the Muslims opposed it on the ground that these were sure to be 
filled up mostly by the Hindus, not only because they were more 
numerous, but also because they were more advanced in education. 

This feeling was brought to a head at the evidence given before 
the Public Service Commission in 1886. In his evidence Dadabhai 
Naoroji urged the necessity of holding simultaneous examinations 
in England and India. This was, however, strongly opposed by the 
Muslims “who feared that an examination held in India would lead 
to a preponderance of Hindus in the Civil Service to the detriment 
of the interests of their own community.” 70 

With the greatest chagrin Dadabhai learnt, after he returned to 
London, that his friend Kazi Shahabuddin had also joined in the op¬ 
position. On July 15, 1887, he wrote to Kazi in anguish: 

“How your action has paralysed not only our own efforts, but 
the hands of our English friends and how keenly I feel this, more 
so because you have based your action on selfish interests, that be¬ 
cause the Muhammadans are backward, therefore, you would not 

allow the Hindus and all India to go forward.In the House 

of Commons I think Mr. Bright has stoutly urged the necessity of an 
examination in India to put us on an equality with English candi¬ 
dates. To-day when he would and could have urged the same thing 
with ten times the force, he feels himself staggered, and owing to 
your opposition he feels puzzled and cannot help us. What a blight 
you have thrown upon our future and how you have retarded our 
progress for a long time to come. This discussion will hurt us in a 
variety of ways. I do not know w T hether I can hope that before the 
Commission’s work has ended, you will still undo the mischief in 
some way.” 71 

But the sentiment against which Dadabhai thundered was not 
confined to a few individuals; it was shared by the Muslims in general 
all over India. The Central Muhammadan Association, Madras, 
sent a memorial requesting the Government that the recommenda¬ 
tions of the Public Service Commission for the abolition of the 
Statutory Civil Service and for the introduction of a system of com¬ 
petitive examination should not be accepted, for in that case the 
Hindus would get the full advantage and the “result would be disas¬ 
trous to the Muslim Community.” 71a 

There can be no gainsaying the fact that the Muslim apprehen¬ 
sions were well-founded, that in all human probability every ad- 


329 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


vance in democracy in India would increase the dominance of the 
Hindus, and an open competitive examination would give prepon¬ 
derance to the Hindus over Muslims in all higher posts under the 
Government. There is, however, nothing to show that this 
patent fact was recognized by the Hindus who were too much im¬ 
bued with nationalistic ideas to take a realistic view of things. 

Dadabhai, however, touched the crux of the whole problem 
when he observed that the attitude of the Muslims was “based on 
selfish interests, that because the Muhammadans are backward, there¬ 
fore, they would not allow the Hindus and all India to go forward”. 
In all human probability there would never be a time, at least 
within measurable distance, when the Muslims would be equally 
advanced with the Hindus in point of education. If, therefore, the 
Muslims persisted in their present attitude, nobody could forsee a pe¬ 
riod, even in distant future, when they would readily join the Hindus 
in political fight for democracy or nationalism. The Hindu political 
leaders hoped that a consideration of this dismal prospect would in¬ 
duce the Muslims to give up communal for national interest in the 
hope that ultimately even the communal interest would be better 
served by following this course. But it is easy to explain why the 
Muslims as a body could not or would not follow this advice. 

As always happens, a community, as a whole, is guided by the 
considerations of immediate interest involved rather than those of a 
remote ideal of which very few have any clear conception. Parti¬ 
cularly, as in this case, the idea of an Indian nationality was gene¬ 
rally lacking both among Hindus and Muslims.The Muslims could not 
forget that they were masters of the Hindus not long ago. To be sub¬ 
ject to the British was bad enough, but subjection to Hindu domina¬ 
tion would be far worse. This mentality may be regarded as ignoble 
from the higher standpoint of Indian nationality, but it is difficult to 
say that it is unnatural. 

It would have been an act of great sacrifice on the part of the 
Muslims to join the Hindus in their political demands. But what 
were the inducements to such a sacrifice? In social and religious 
matters a deep gulf separated the two. Historical traditions and 
memories created a wide barrier between them. The name of Shi- 
vaji was an inspiration to the Hindus who held Aurangzeb in open 
contempt. The reverse was the case with the Muslims. The Raj¬ 
put heroes like Rana Pratap were the idols of the Hindus and enemies 
of the Muslims. The Third Battle of Panipat was the occasion of 
national mourning for the Hindus but of a great deliverance for the 
Muslims. Such instances can be easily multiplied. 

330 


MUSLIM COMMUNITY 


It may be argued with a great deal of plausibility, that in spite 
of all this a fusion of Hindus and Muslims into one nation was not 
an impossible ideal. Even if this be admitted, it must not be for¬ 
gotten that what was at best merely a possible ideal should not have 
been mistaken for an actual fact, either already accomplished, or neap¬ 
ing completion. But the most eminent Hindu political leaders com¬ 
mitted this fatal mistake. They took for granted what was at best 
a remote contingency, not to be achieved without great difficulty. 
They never understood, nor even cared to understand, the real feelings 
and impulses of the Muslim community. They never appreciated 
the motives which guided their policy and actions. The result was 
that they could not realize the patent fact that the Hindus and Mus¬ 
lims were, as yet, two different political units. In their new-born 
zeal for democracy and nationalism the Hindus forgot that a large 
section of the people, for very good reasons, refused to accept these 
ideals. They, therefore, could not conceive any possible opposition to 
them from any quarter, far less brook it when it occurred. In the volu¬ 
minous political literature of the period one looks in vain for a just 
assessment of the Muslim point of view on the part of the Hindus. 
The Hindu leaders made the great mistake of taking Badruddin 
Tyabji and a few men of his views as the only real representatives 
of the Muslims. They failed to read the sign of the times and had 
no patience to listen sympathetically to the grievances of the Mus¬ 
lims, which might not excuse, but could at least satisfactorily explain, 
their attitude towards the Hindus. 

The indifference or apathy of the Muslim masses to all political 
questions probably contributed largely to the mistaken notion of 
the Hindus about the Muslim attitude. Confronted by the opposi¬ 
tion of educated Muslims, they consoled themselves with the idea 
that the Muslim masses were not with the latter, and the opposition 
was after all confined to the educated few. In arguing thus they 
committed the same mistake as the British rulers did when they 
ignored the demands of Indian politicians because they represented, 
in their eyes, a “microscopic minority”. But as a prominent Hindu 
pointed out in reply, “the educated community represented the brain 
and conscience of the country, and .were the legitimate spokesmen 
of the illiterate masses, the natural custodians of their interests”. 

The Hindus, however, forgot that what they urged on behalf of 
the country at large applied equally well to a distinct and strong 
minority community. They should have foreseen that ultimately 
the Muslim masses were bound to fall in line with the views of 
their leaders. 


331 


APPENDIX 


HINDU-MUSLIM RIOTS 

1. Thana (Bombay) Riots (1837) 

The Official account runs as follows:— 

“There has long been ill-feeling between the Musalmans and the 
Hindus of Bhiwindi (in Thana District). In April, 1837, the Muhar - 
ram chanced to fall at the same time as the Hindu festival of Ram- 
navami, or Rama's birth day. The Musalmans were determined not 
to allow the idol of Vithoba, the local representative of Rama, to be 
carried about the streets during the ten days of M uharram. On the 
14th April, Vithoba’s birthday, when his image ought to have been 
carried through the town, the Musalmans gathered in front of his 
temple. The Hindus, fearing violence, gave up their procession and 
went to their homes. To be revenged on the Musalmans the Banias 
closed their shops, and the low class Hindus promised to take no 
part in the Muharram. Next day (15th April) the want of supplies 
irritated the Musalmans, and in the evening they were further en¬ 
raged by finding that of their seven or eight Muharram biers or 
tabuts, only two could be moved because the usual Hindu bearers 
refused to touch them and the Mahars would neither play music nor 
carry torches. According to the Musalman account, as the proces¬ 
sion passed an empty house, the tabuts were battered with stones. On 
this the Musalmans broke into open riot, entered Vithoba’s temple, 
stripped the idol of its jewels, broke some trellis work and images, 
and handled an old sickly Mahar so roughly that he soon after died. 
Forty-eight Musalmans were arrested, and twenty-one convicted and 
sentenced to long terms of imprisonment.” 72 

i 

2. Broach Riot (1857) 

This had no connection with the Mutiny. In the beginning 
of May, 1857, the Muhammadans of Broach became angry with one 
Bezanji Seriadji, a Parsi, notorious for his bad character and suppos¬ 
ed to have insulted Islam. On a charge of assault he was convicted. 
But the Muslims were not satisfied with his lenient sentence. On 15th 
May, in spite of some police precaution they managed to attack the 
Parsi quarters, and killed Bezanji and the Parsi high priest. The situa¬ 
tion was quickly brought under control and several rioters arrested. 
Of them two were later hanged and several imprisoned. This was 


332 


MUSLIM COMMUNITY 


the work of the Bohra community. Before attacking the Parsis 
a rumour was circulated that a mosque had been defiled. 73 

3. Janjira Riots (1877) 

The Official account runs as follows: 

“In September, 1877, a series of riots took place between the 
Hindu and the Musalman subjects of the Nawab of Janjira. Accord¬ 
ing to the rules of the State, Hindu procession and music were for¬ 
bidden during Ramzan, from the 1st to the, 12th of Muha^am, and 
during two other months. Music was not allowed on Sunday or 
Thursday nights and during the whole of Fridays. If weddings or 
great Hindu festivals. fell during the forbidden periods, the Hindus 
were allowed to play music within their houses, unless the house 
was near a mosque or a Muhammadan’s house, in which case music 
was forbidden. 

“In September 1877, as Ganapati holidays fell in the Muham¬ 
madan month of Ramzan , under previous rules the Hindus were for¬ 
bidden the use of music. On the 26th of August, just before the 
beginning of Ramzan, under the influence of his Hindu advisers, the 
Nawab issued an order which, though skilfully worded, in effect 
withdrew all restrictions on Hindu processions and music, except 
that music was not to be played in front of mosques. This order 
was communicated to Mr. Larcom, the Assistant Agent, and as he 
heard no objections, he supposed that the order had been issued to 
meet the difficulty of the Ganapati processions happening during the 
Ramzan . He therefore ordered the Magistrates to enforce the new 
rules. When they came to understand them the Muhammadans took 
bitter offence at the new rules, and getting no redress from the Na¬ 
wab, determined to prevent the Hindus from playing music in public. 
Between the tenth and the sixteenth of September seven disturban¬ 
ces took place. In some cases the Musalmans took the offensive, en¬ 
tering Hindu houses and breaking idols; in other cases the fault lay 
with the Hindus, who were foolhardy enough to play in front of 
mosques. The offenders were in most cases fined and forced to 
apologise. The obnoxious order was withdrawn, and another order, 
fair to both sides, was prepared by a committee of leading Musalmans 
and Hindus” 74 


4. Anti-kine-killing Riots in Bihar (1893-4) 

During the early part of 1893-4 considerable activity was shown 
by different associations formed for the protection of kine, known 
as Gorakshini sabhci , in collecting subscriptions and in promoting 


333 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

the anti-kine-killing movement. During April and May 1893, there 
were several riots occasioned by the forcible rescuing of cattle from 
Muhammadan butchers, and additional police had to be appointed in 
seven places in the Gaya District. On the 27th August a very seri¬ 
ous riot broke out at Koath in Sahabad District. It began with an 
attack on the Muhammadan butchers by the Hindus, and ended in a 
general riot, involving some casualties. In the Saran District a 
drove of cattle, stopped by the Hindus on the high road between 
Champaran and Chapra on 31 August, were taken for safety to the 
police station, but it was attacked by a large mob of Hindus armed 
with lathis. The police opened fire, killing two and injuring many. 75 

5. Calcutta Biots (1897). 

Maharaja Sir Jatindra-mohan Tagore obtained by a decree of the 
court a plot of land at Talla, just outside the northern limit of the city 
of Calcutta. There was a small hut on the piece of land which the 
Muhammadans claimed to be a mosque. So when the Tagore’s party 
went to take possession of the land, a large number of lower class Mu¬ 
hammadans gathered with a view to resisting the demolition of the 
hut. Though they were dispersed by the police, a group of them 
attacked the Calcutta Water-works pumping station in the neighbour¬ 
hood. This was the signal for a number of riots, in different parts 
of Calcutta, by detached parties of Muhammadans during the night 
of 30 June and on 1 July, in the course of which the police opened fire 
on several occasions. The total casualties included 11 killed and about 
20 wounded among the rioters, and 34 injured among the police. 
Eighty-seven of the rioters were arrested of whom eighty-one were 
convicted. 76 


1. See pp. 4-5, 12-3. 

la. See pp. 7-10. 

2. The Amrit Bazar Patrika, 12 August, 1869. 

3. Ram Gopal, 35. 

4. But cf. Vol. IX, p. 886. 

5. B. Majumdar, 393. 

6. The name was later changed to Central National Mohammadan Association. 
The Hindus were eligible for membership but were not entitled to vote on purely 
Muslim matters. For an account of it cf. Central Mohammadan Association of 
Calcutta and the Memorandum Presented to Lord Ri pon (1882), published by 
the Historical Research Institute, Pan jab University, Lahore (1963). It is 
noteworthy that all the three Muslim Associations were founded in Calcutta. 
It may be held, therefore, that the Bengal Muslims took up the cause of their 
communiy before Syed Ahmad, and anticipated, in some respects, the Aligarh 
Movement minus its extreme communal attitude. 

7. Ibid. 

8. Ibid, 394. 

9. Ibid, 395. 

10’ Blunt-1, p. 27. 

11. Ibid, 94. 

12. Ibid, 115-6. 

12a. Blunt always writes ‘Mulvi* for ‘Maulvi\ 

334 



MUSLIM COMMUNITY 


13. Ibid, 103. 

14. Ibid, 103-4. 

15. Ibid, 107-9. 

16. Ibid, 109-10. 

17. Ibid, 111-2. 

18. Ibid, 121. 

19. B. Majumdar, 399. 

20. Ibid, 211 ff. 

21. Blunt-I, 163. 

22. Ibid, 165. 

23. B. C. Pal-I, I. 417. 

24. Blunt-I, 112. 

25. Ram Gopal, op, cit., 36. 

26. Adam's Repoi*t, 248. 

26a. Aga Khan, India in Transition. 

26b. Unpublished record in CRO, London. 

27. See above, IX. 521. 

28. W. W. Hunter-I, p. 3. 

29. Graham, Sir Syed Ahmad, pp. 183-4. 

30. Eminent Mussalmans (Natesan), p. 32. 

31. Rajendra Prasad, India Divided, p. 99. 

32. Ibid, 100; Eminent Mussalmans, 32. 

33. Rajendra Prasad, op. cit. 99. 

34. Causes of Indian Revolt, 54-5. 

35. Sachin Sen, p. 42. 

36. Coupland-II, Part I, pp. 154-6. 

36a. Syed Ahmad Khan, Akhari Madamin, pp. 46-50. Quoted in Sources of Indian 
Tradition , pp. 746-7. 

37. R. Symonds, Making of Pakistan, pp. 30-1. 

38. Muslim League, p. 4. 

39. Masani, Dadabhai, pp. 254-5. 

40. Rajendra Prasad, op. cit., 103. 

41. Muslim League, p. 7. 

42. Rajendra Prasad, op. cit., 104-5. 

43. Asok Mehta, p. 60; Ram Gopal, p. 72. 

43a. Ram Gopal, op. cit., p. 73. 

43b. Ibid, 75. • 

43c. P.C. Ghosh, The Development of the Indian National Congress, p. 148. 

43d. Ram Gopal, op. cit., p. 67. 

43e. P.C. Ghosh, op. cit., 148-9. 

44. Hist. Congr., I. 67. 

45. A Nation in Making , 108. 

46. Hoyland, Gokhale, 160 (quoted in Buch-I, 183). 

46a. See p. 309. 

46b. Syed Ahmad Khan, On the Present State of Indian Politics, pp. 11-12. 

47. Noman, p. 40. 

47a. P.C. Ghosh, op. cit., 151-2. 

48. Muslim League, 4 

49. The Aligarh Institute Gazette, 21 July, 1888, p. 806. Quoted in Muslim League, 
pp. 5-6, Italics mine. Attention may be drawn to the expression ‘Mohamedan 
Nation’. 

50. Muslim League, pp. 25-6. 

51. See p. 296. 

52. A Nation in Making, 108. 

53. Muslim League, 25. 

54. Asok Mehta, p. 58. 

55. Lajpat Rai-II, 404; Rajendra Prasad, op. cit., 87. 

56. Seeley, 270. 

57. See p. 309. 

58. Asok Mehta, 54. 

59. G.F. Macmunn and A.C. Lovett. The Armies of India, p. 118; also see above p 309. 

60. Modem Review, 1911, I. 303; Lajpat Rai-II, 400. Colchester, EUenborough. 

61. Lajpat Rai-II, 401. 

62. See above, IX, 616. 

63. Indian Speeches of Lord Duferin; Modern Review, 1911, I. 303. 

63a. Noman, 55. 


335 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


63b. Ambedkar, Pakistan, 240-41. 

63c. This and the other letters referred to below are copied from the originals in the 
India Office (now C.R.O.) Library, London. 

64. Cumming, Political India, p. 110. 

65. See above, IX. 514, 519, 521. 

66. Cumming, op. cit., 110. 

67. Masani— Dadabhai, pp. 62-6. 

67a. Mody —Pheroze Shah Mehta, pp. 81-8. 

68. Statutory Report, Vol. IV, Part I, pp. 96-7. 

69. See pp. 11-3. 

69a. For the full enunciation of this view, Cf. B. Majumdar, p. 294. 

70. Masani— Dadabnui, p. 256. 

71. Ibid. 

71a. Unpublished Record. 

72. Bombay Gazetteer, XIII, Part 2, p. 524. 

73. Ibid, II. 476. 

74. Ibid, XI, 450-1. 

75. Buckland, II. 952. 

76. Ibid, 1 004. 


CHAPTER IX (XLVII). 


SOCIAL RELATION BETWEEN ENGLISHMEN 

AND INDIANS 

The attitude of a conquering people towards the subject races 
is bound to be rude and arrogant, at best condescending, in most cases, 
and the Englishmen in India formed no exception to this rule. The 
universal nature of this evil and its fundamental causes have thus 
been described by John Stuart Mill: 

“Now, if there be a fact to which all experience testifies, it is that 
when a country holds another in subjection, the individuals of the 
ruling people who resort to the foreign country to make their fortune 
are of all others those who must need to be held under powerful 
restraint. They are always one of the chief difficulties of the 
Government. Armed with the prestige and filled with the scornful 
over-bearingness of the conquering nation, they have the feelings 
inspired by the sense of absolute power without its sense of 
responsibility. 

“Among a people, like that of India, utmost efforts of the public 
authorities are not enough for the effectual protection of the weak 
against the strong: and of all the strong, the European settlers are 
the strongest. Wherever the demoralizing of the situation is not in 
a most remarkable degree corrected by the personal character of the 
individual, they think the people of the country mere dirt under their 
feet.” 1 

Apart from this spirit of arrogance which the Englishmen in 
India fully displayed like all conquering nations, there were other 
causes of estrangement between the two. Englishmen despised the 
Hindus as barbarians, with hardly any trace of culture and civiliza¬ 
tion, and some even regarded them almost as brutes. Immediately 
after he set foot on the soil of India as Governor-General, the Mar¬ 
quess of Hastings wrote: 

“The Hindoo appears a being nearly limited to mere animal 
functions, and even in them indifferent. Their proficiency and 
skill in the several lines of occupation to which they are restrict¬ 
ed, are little more than the dexterity which any animal with 
similar conformation, but with no higher intellect than a dog, 
and an elephant, or a monkey, might be supposed capable of 

337 

B.P.I.R.— 22 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

attaining. It is enough to see this in order to have full conviction 
that such a people can at no period have been more advanced in 
civil polity. Retrogradation from an improved condition of 
society never takes this course. According to the circumstances 
which have dissolved its government, the fragments of such a 
community either preserve the traces of effiminate refinement, 
or the rough fierceness stamped upon them by the convulsions 
amid which the centre of the fabric perished. Does not this 
display the true condition of India, and unveil the circumstances 
through which we have so unexpectedly and so unintentionally 
obtained empire here? There surely never has been an active 
and vigorous Hindoo population; nor are any of the bold, though 
rude, monuments of antiquity (as I think) ascribable to this 
race.” 2 

The above is an extract from the diary of the Marquess dated 
October 2, 1813, the day on which he reached the Diamond Harbour 
on his way from England to Calcutta, via. Madras. It refers mainly 
to Bengal. On June 23, 1814, he writes: “Every day more and 
more satisfies me that I formed a just estimate of those who inhabit 
Bengal at least.” 

Five years after the noble Marquess recorded his impressions 
of the Bengali Hindus, the eminent British historian Mill echoed his 
views. He seeks to prove that the abject condition in which the 
English found the Hindus in the eighteenth century represents their 
normal condition throughout their history. He ridicules the ‘hypo¬ 
thesis of a high state of civilisation’ propounded by Sir William 
Jones in regard to the ancient Hindus and observes: “Their laws 
and institutions are adapted to the very state of society which those 
who visit them now behold, such as could neither begin, nor exist, 
under any other than one of the rudest and weakest states of the 
human mind.” In forming a comparative estimate, Mill declares 
that the people of Europe, even during the Feudal ages, were greatly 
superior to the Hindus. Proceeding further he observes: Tn truth 
the Hindu, like the eunuch, excels in the qualities of a slave’. A 
few lines further on he remarks: “In the still more important qua¬ 
lities, which constitute what we call the moral character, the Hindu 
ranks very low.” After all this, it would scarcely surprise any one 
to be told that ‘it will not admit of any long dispute, that human 
nature in India gained, and gained very considerably, by passing 
from a Hindu to a Mohammadan government.’ 3 

But be it said to the credit of Englishmen, that some of them, 
at any rate, not only did not share such views but even strongly 
resented them. Sir Thomas Munro correctly diagnosed the situation 

.338 


SOCIAL RELATION BETWEEN ENGLISHMEN AND INDIANS 

when he wrote in 1817: “Foreign conquerors have treated the natives 
with violence, but none has treated them with so much scorn as we; 
none have stigmatized the whole people as unworthy of trust, as in¬ 
capable of honesty, and as fit to be employed only where we cannot 
do without them. It seems not only ungenerous, but impolitic, to 
debase the character, of a people fallen under our dominion.” 4 
Another contemporary Englishman, F. J. Shore, also wrote in the 
same strain. 6 

Even in the twentieth century, when the British imperialism 
was at its height, liberal-minded Englishmen were not wanting who 
followed in their footsteps. As the criticism or analysis of the Bri¬ 
tish attitude towards the Indians by an Englishman is less open to 
suspicion and is likely to carry greater weight, no apology is needed 
to reproduce a few extracts from the writings of Mr. T. G. P. Spear. 

“In Hindustan and Bengal the intercourse between the Euro¬ 
pean and the Mussulman was almost entirely with princes and nobles. 
...With the Hindus there is not so much evidence of extensive 
social intercourse... .But the seal of social intercourse is personal 
friendship, and this, too, had its place in the life of the eighteenth 
century. But as the century drew to its close, a change in the social 
atmosphere gradually came about... .The attitude of the average 
Englishman changed from one of disapproval of Hindu ‘superstition’ 
and Mussulman ‘bigotry’.. .into one of contempt for an inferior and 
conquered people. A ‘superiority complex’ was forming which regard¬ 
ed India not only as a country whose institutions were bad and peo¬ 
ple corrupted, but one which was by its nature incapable of ever 
becoming better.” “Such an attitude rankles in the mind like a 
festering sore__.” “It found expression in the eighteenth cen¬ 

tury—more commonly at the end than at the beginning—in the des¬ 
cription of all Hindus as effiminate and servile and of Mussulmans 
as cruel and faithless..., ” “Europeans”, wrote Captain Williamson 
in 1810 with twenty years* experience of the country, “have little con¬ 
nexion with natives of either religion except for business.” Mrs. 
Graham, visiting Calcutta in 1810 after living in Bombay and Mad¬ 
ras, deplored that “the distance kept up between the Europeans and 
the natives, both here and at Madras, is such that I have not been able 
to get acquainted with any native family as I did in Bombay....” 
“Amongst the Europeans the feeling was strong that Indians should 
always be subordinated to Europeans.” “As the new century ad¬ 
vanced things grew worse rather than better”. 6 

This characteristic trait of the Englishman in India may be 
traced from the beginning to the end, and was noticed by non-English¬ 
men. 


339 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


Syed Ghulam Husain, the author of the Seir-ul-Mutaqherin, noted 
as far back as 1782 that the Englishmen avoided social intercourse 
with the Indians. Joseph Chailley, a member of the French Chamber 
of Deputies,, who visited India twice, in 1900-1, and again in 1904-5, 
wrote: “With very rare exceptions, chiefly made by and on be¬ 
half of the Parsis, English and Indians have only business relations 
and do not meet in the ordinary functions of society. There is 
more, however, than mere abstention from social relations; there is 
active repugnance and hostility. Englishmen will not join volunteer 
corps if Indians are admitted thereto. British soldiers will assault, 
plunder or even kill natives. If they are prosecuted, a European 
jury is prone to shut its eyes to the evidence; while, if they have to 
be convicted, European opinion is moved to the point of addressing 
remonstrances to the Government of India.” 7 

This mental attitude was naturally reflected in the conduct of 
the British officials to the Indians. A classical example of the rude 
behaviour of English officials towards the Indians is furnished by the 
humiliation which Raja Rammohan Roy had to suffer in 1809 in the 
hands of the Collector of Bhagalpur. The details of the incident are 
recorded in a petition submitted by the Raja to Lord Minto, the 
Governor-General of India, and throw interesting light on the men¬ 
tal attitude of both Europeans and Indians of high positions. At 
about 4 o’clock in the afternoon on 1 January, 1809, the Raja was 
passing in his palanquin through a road in Bhagalpur, a new place 
where he had arrived on the same morning. Sir Frederick Hamilton, 
the Collector of the District, was standing among some bricks on the 
left side of the road, but as the door of the palanquin was shut to 
prevent dust, the Raja did not see him. The Collector, thinking 
that he was being slighted by a native, soon began calling out to 
him to get out of his palanquin, and that “with an epithet of abuse too 
gross” to be stated in the petition. The servant of the Raja, who 
was accompanying him on foot, tried to conciliate the irate Collector 
by explaining that his master had not observed the latter. But, in 
spite of it, the Collector not only continued the filthy abuse, but 
overtook the palanquin on horseback and demanded from the Raja 
‘the form of external respect due to a Collector’. Consequently the 
Raja, “notwistanding the novelty of the form in which respect was 
required to be testified”, “alighted from his palanquin and saluted 
Sir Frederick, apologizing to him for the omission” of that act of 
respect on the ground that he did not see him before. Sir Frederick 
was not fully satisfied and desired that the Raja must discharge his 
servant immediately after his (Frederick’s) departure from the place 
of occurrence The Raja made a spirited protest to the Governor-Gene¬ 
ral who issued directions to the Collector for proper behaviour to the 


340 


SOCIAL RELATION BETWEEN ENGLISHMEN AND INDIANS 


Indians. 8 There the matter ended; but it is worthy of note that the 
Raja had to submit to the humiliation and also offer apology. Dwaraka- 
nath Tagore, the grandfather of poet Rabindra-nath, and a very dis¬ 
tinguished man of his age, observed in a speech in 1836, that ‘twenty 
years ago the Company treated the Indians as slaves”. 9 The arro¬ 
gance of the Englishmen was further aggravated by the abject sub¬ 
mission of the Indians. Referring to this Dwaraka-nath remarks: 
“They are timid in the extreme, and very reluctant to come for¬ 
ward in asserting their rights. They fear that those who rule them 
will be displeased and would ruin therp by a stroke of the pen.” But 
then he immediately adds that “the fear is not without cause, for 
numbers of them have suffered for no other cause than displeasing a 
civil servant, or unintentionally omitting to make a salam when 
they are passing on the road.” 10 

Things were gradually worsening in this respect. Referring to 
the regime of Bentinck, an English writer remarks: “On going to a 
station no Englishman thought of calling on the notables of the dis¬ 
trict, as was once done as a matter of course; instead, certificates of 
respectability were required of the notables before they could be 
guaranteed a chair when they visited the officer.” 11 Sir Henry 
Strachey, in his report to Parliament, attributes many of the de¬ 
fects in the administration in Bengal to “the immeasurable distance 
between us and the natives.” and adds that “there is scarcely a na¬ 
tive in his district who would think of sitting down in the presence 
of an English gentleman.” 12 

Dwaraka-nath Tagore recognized that non-official Englishmen, 
living in Calcutta, were more sympathetic towards the Indians, and 
thanks to their attitude and co-operation the Indians living in Cal¬ 
cutta were much better off than those living in mo/ussil. 13 But even 
in Calcutta “many writers expected every Indian to salute them,” and 
no Indian could drive to the Governor-General’s house in a carriage 
until Bentinck “achieved fame” by permitting Indians to do so. 14 

But the events soon proved that the sympathy of non-official 
Englishmen towards the Indians was merely skin-deep. The violent 
agitation set up by them against the so-called “Black Acts” of 1849, 
referred to above, 14a demonstrated it beyond doubt. The poli¬ 
tical effect of the successful agitation of the Europeans on this 
occasion was the foundation of the British Indian Association in Cal¬ 
cutta. There were many European members in both the Land¬ 
holders’ Society and the Bengal British India Society, but when these 
were amalgamated into the British Indian Association, not a single 
European member joined it. 


341 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAim RENAISSANCE—H 


As regards the change in Indian sentiment, we can do no better 
than quote the views of Bhola-nath Chandra, an eminent contem¬ 
porary Bengali writer, expressed, long after the event: “There can be 
little room for mutual regard where a few persons are allowed to 
arrogate superiority, and others have to brook their humiliation in 
sullen discontent. The standing estrangement has caused a soreness 
between the two peoples, which has rankled down to the present 
generation. Worked upon by a heritage of passions that has deadened 
every feeling for fellowship, no rapprochement since made has ever 
proceeded from the heart of either race.” 16 But the effect of the 
same agitation on the social relationship was no less serious. It serv¬ 
ed to estrange the Indian and European communities which had 
hitherto co-operated in social and political activities. The Euro¬ 
peans now began to show those signs of aloofness from Indians which 
culminated in almost a complete isolation after the outbreak of 1857. 
A few concrete facts may be stated to illustrate the change in social 
relations. Englishmen at first maintained social relations with the 
Indians. They respected their religious and social customs and even 
married Indian women. They mixed with the Hindus in convivial 
parties, smoked hookah, chewed betels, and enjoyed the dancing and 
music of professional native girls. But Englishmen in the thirties 
referred to “the horrid example of the older generation of English¬ 
men, with their black wives running about picking up a little rice, 
while their husbands please them by worshipping the favourite idol”. 
Though changes were fast taking place, traditions of the old days 
had not died out altogether. Dwaraka-nath Tagore entertained 
big social parties of Europeans and Indians in his villa at Belgachia 
near Calcutta, and was not unoften a welcome guest of Lord 
Auckland at Barrackpur. In a magnificent breakfast held at Lakhnau 
op Christmas day, 1837, Auckland “sugared and creamed” the 
tea of the Nawab of Avadh (Oudh) who gave him some ‘pillau’ 
and offered buttered toast (rather cold and greasy) to his two sisters. 
At the end of the breakfast two hookahs were brought in so that the 
Governor-General and the Nawab might smoke together. ‘The old 
Khansamah wisely took care to put no tobacco in the former’s hoo¬ 
kah; but even then Auckland was quite distressed as he could not 
persuade the inanimate instrument ' to make the right kind of bubbling 
noise.’ 16 This pen picture by one of the two sisters, present on the 
occasion, reveals a state of things which was soon to become a historic 
memory. 

Lord John Lawrence issued orders restricting admission of 
Indians to entertainment at Viceregal Lodge. The European officers 
“assaulted respectable residents of the country because on passing 
a European in' the road they have not dismounted from their horses 


342 


SOCIAL, RELATION BETWEEN ENGLISHMEN AND INDIANS 


in token of their inferiority. A Lieutenant-Governor of a province 
did not consider it unworthy of his dignity to issue general orders re¬ 
garding the character of the head-dress to be worn by natives in the 
presence of their official superiors”. 17 

The official attitude towards Indian religions also underwent 
great changes. “The East India Company in early days patronized 
both the Hindu and Muslim religions. Offices were open on Sunday 
but closed on Indian holidays. Troops were paraded in honour of 
Hindu deities. A coconut was solemnly broken at the beginning of 
each monsoon, and British officials assisted in the management of 
Hindu religious trusts.” 18 . 

This phase ended early in the nineteenth century. The change 
was in a large measure due to the missionary activities. 18 * The right 
of unrestricted entry of Christian missionaries to India was conceded 
by the Charter of 1813. Henceforth the missionaries formed an im¬ 
portant element in society. In general, they were far more sympa¬ 
thetic and well-behaved towards the Indians, and many of them 
proved to be genuine friends of Indian masses. Reference has been 
made above to their attempt to protect the cultivators from the op¬ 
pression of the indigo-planters. 19 The missionaries were pioneers 
of English education and established schools for both boys and girls. 
Some of them like Carey and Marshman made valuable contribution 
to the growth of Bengali literature. For all this the Indians should 
ever remain grateful to them. 

Unfortunately, all these humanitarian acts were part and parcel 
of their proselytising mission, and the two were indissolubly bound 
up together. The general dislike of the Hindus towards their reli¬ 
gious propaganda has been described and explained by Raja Ram- 
mohan Roy in memorable words, quoted above, 20 which are lofty 
and dignified in tone and have a far wider application than the imme¬ 
diate context in which they were written. The missionaries, in their 
schools and religious tracts, poured forth venomous abuses against 
the Hindus, and this considerably estranged the relation between the 
two communities. In particular, the conversion of Hindus to Chris¬ 
tianity. by force or fraud as the Hindus thought, embittered the re¬ 
lations, sometimes almost to a breaking point. 

The Hindus felt alarmed at the efforts of the missionaries to 
educate Indian women with a view to propagating Christianity 
among them. The teaching of Christian doctrines was made com¬ 
pulsory in the girls’ schools especially founded by them, and their 
contemptuous reference to Hindu gods has been quoted above 21 

Contemporary Bengali periodicals frequently refer to cases of 
conversion to Christianity by means of methods which were regarded 


/ 


343 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

as highly objectionable, and there was a very strong agitation in 
the Hindu community against such practices. 

In Madras also there was a strong feeling on the subject. The 
Hindu community sent a memorial against Christian missionaries as 
well as highly placed English officials (including a Governor') 
whose activities were supposed to affect adversely the Hindu inte¬ 
rests and harm Hindu religion. That such apprehensions were not 
altogether without foundation is proved by a minute by the Governor 
(1806) showing the importance of converting the Hindus and 
Muhammadans into Christians. 21 * 

Spear observes : Another contributory factor to this growing 
racial estrangement was the influence of the evangelical missionaries 
and chaplains. Their denunciation of them (Hinduism and Islam) 
was so violent, that they propagated the idea of Indian society as ir¬ 
redeemably corrupt and degraded .... The violence of his (mis¬ 
sionary's) denunciations confirmed the Europeans in their belief that 
few Indians were fit to associate with, that it was a waste of time to 
mix with them.... ” 22 

The social exclusiveness of the Englishmen, their arrogance and 
insolent treatment of Indians, particularly the immunity which they 
practically enjoyed for their criminal acts, including even murder of 
Indians, were sources of grave discontent. There are numerous in¬ 
stances of all this in contemporary periodical literature and judicial 
records. Before referring to these it is worth while reproducing the 
views of Englishmen themselves who spoke from their personal 
knowledge. 

Routledge refers to Englishmen going through crowds of people 
elbowing their way as through a herd of cattle, and the people, as a 
rule, falling back on all hands. He further observes that “a man of 
the highest position in a District may be made to feel and feel sharp¬ 
ly that he is subordinate to some young officer fresh from England 
and ignorant of all life save in school. ,,s3 

The rudeness and brutal arrogance of the Britishers were more 

* 

often manifested in striking Indians, especially domestic servants. Sir 
Henry Cotton refers to the “cult of Nicholson" and the many stories 
he heard of “the exploits of these heroes of India with stick and 
whip!" Then he proceeds: “I am bound to say that this pernicious 
practice of striking natives, and especially domestic servants, prevail¬ 
ed as a common and general habit during the whole of my residence 
in India.... I remember once when I was walking through the 
streets of an up-country city with a high official, and a few miserable 
petitioners blocked the way by throwing themselves prostrate before 


344 


SOCIAL RELATION BETWEEN ENGLISHMEN AND INDIANS 


him and endeavouring to clasp his feet, he struck them right and left 
with his stick, and thought nothing of it. On another occasion when I 
had ventured to remonstrate with a distinguished officer for striking 
a lazy or careless gardener, I was met with the reply that there was 
no harm in it, and that everybody did it. When I retorted that I 
did not, I was told that I was the only man he had ever met who 
could say that. These are not reminiscences on which I love to 
dwell, but they serve to illustrate how subtle and unconscious is the 
poison of demoralisation in Anglo-Indian life.” 24 

A few more concrete instances are given by Sir Henry Cotton: 

A subaltern gets into a railway carriage, where to his disgust he 
finds a couple of Hindu gentlemen. He quietly waits till the train 
is in motion, and then, as he expresses it, ‘fires them out of the door.’ 
A petty raja going in a first class compartment “had been boxed up 
with a couple of sahibs, muddy from snipe shooting, who made him 
shampoo them all the way”. This story is corroborated by Sir David 
Barr, the late Resident at Hyderabad. Again Cotton writes: “It is 
but too common an outrage to assault respectable residents of the 
country because when passing on the road they have not dismounted 
from their horses in token of their inferiority. I have known a case 
in which an unfortunate old man died from the effects of blows so 
received.” 215 

As mentioned above, Raja Rammohan Roy was himself a victim 
of such outrage. But he had the courage to protest to the Governor- 
General who issued directives to remedy this evil. But admonish¬ 
ments, even of the highest authority, had no effect, and what was 
exceptional at first soon became a regular feature of Englishman’s 
life. Bankim-chandra Chatterji, the famous Bengali litterateur and 
a Deputy Magistrate, was similarly insulted, but he extorted an 
apology from the offending Colonel. 26 

The cases of assault of Indians by Europeans not only continued 
throughout the period under review, but seem to have been on the 
increase as years rolled by. This is proved by the official records of 
the Government of India. More than 200 cases were reported in 
1900 as well as in 1901. More than 75 out of these were brutal 
attacks on punkha coolies by European soldiers, and the others in¬ 
cluded outraging the modesty of women and assaults on coolies by 
European managers of tea-gardens. 

Even a cursory glance at the Index of the Home Department 
Files would show the nature and extent of these crimes. A some¬ 
what novel way of insulting an Indian is mentioned in a case where 
the Police Superintendent placed shoes on the head of a Brahmin 
constable. 


345 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

The Indian newspapers were full of reports of such crimes. 
Many Bengali newspapers gave harrowing details of the death of the 
labourers in tea-gardens from the effect of kicks administered by 
Europeans. These were very seldom reported to the authorities. 
But even when brought to trial, the European planter almost always 
got scot-free, because the medical report put down the death of the 
unfortunate coolie to an enlarged spleen. Cartoons in Bengali 
papers showed the pathetic character of such mock trials. The try¬ 
ing Magistrate having acquitted the Manager on the evidence of the 
European Doctor, the three left the court together with smiling face 
and cigars in their mouths, while the dead body of the coolie was 
lying in a comer with his widow and children crying by its side. 

The Indian papers also refer to the ludicrously light punishment 
awarded to European offenders:—a planter punished to nine months’ 
simple imprisonment for killing his maid-servant; a European soldier 
sentenced to one year’s rigorous imprisonment for stoning an Indian 
soldier to death; a veterinary Superintendent fined Rs. 100 for having 
thrown a native boy into fire and thus causing his death, etc. All 
these happened at the beginning of the twentieth century. 

The Barahanagdr Patrikd Samdchqr reports a case that Inspector 
Buckley, of the Barrackpur Station, entered the shop of an old man 
and dealt him a blow which knocked him down. On his rising and 
attempting to escape he was again knocked down. The Inspector 
also turned upon the people who had gathered on the spot by this 
time. The paper comments: “Acts of oppression like this have 
become, as it were, an ornament of the police.” The same paper 
reports that Inspector Smith of Dumdum Station tore off the beard 
of a carter for refusing him the use of a cart which had already 
been hired to another. 27 

In 1877 Mr. Digby examined a number of Indian papers cover¬ 
ing a consecutive period of a few weeks to note the tendencies they 
evinced and the characteristics they displayed. He noted that one 
of the prevalent ideas was that “Europeans ill-treated and are dis¬ 
courteous to the natives”. 28 

W. S. Blunt, who travelled widely in India in 1883, has quoted 
many instances, from his personal knowledge, of the racial arrogance 
of the Englishmen displayed towards the most eminent Indians. 
Raja Amir Hasan of Lakhnau told him that ‘he does not go into 
English society, because he dislikes being disrespectfully treated.* 29 
Blunt notes with surprise that “no hotel-keeper in India dares re¬ 
ceive a native guest through fear of losing his custom.” When at 
Bombay, he met Ali Rogay, the leading Muhammadan of the city 


346 



SOCIAL RELATION BETWEEN ENGLISHMEN AND INDIANS 

who had travelled in Europe, dressed in European dress. “Yet, 
happening one day to ask him to dine with me at my hotel, it was 
explained to me that this could not be, at least not in the public room, 
‘lest the English guests should take offence and leave the house. ” 23a 

A few extracts may be quoted from Blunt’s book: “In Bengal 
and Northern India things are still worse, and I think it is not too 
much to say that no native gentleman, whatever his rank, age, or 
character may be, can visit a place of public resort frequented by 
Englishmen, especially if he be in native dress, without a certain risk 
of insult and rough treatment. Railway travelling is notoriously 
dangerous for them in this respect, and nearly all my native ac¬ 
quaintances had tales to tell of abuse from English fellow-passengers, 
and of having been turned out of their places by the guards to accom¬ 
modate these, and now and then of having been personally ill-treated 
and knocked about.” 29 * 

“A painful incident of this liability to insult occurred last winter 
in my presence, which, as ocular evidence is always best, I will re¬ 
late. I had been staying at Patna with the principal Mohammedan 
. nobleman of the city, the Nawab Villayet Ali Khan, a man of some¬ 
what advanced age, and of deservedly high repute, not only with his 
fellow-citizens, but with our Government, who had made him a 
Companion of the Star of India for his services. On my departure 
by the morning train on the 7th January last, he and some thirty 
more of the leading inhabitants of Patna accompanied me to the 
station, and after I had entered the railway carriage, remained stand¬ 
ing on the platform, as orderly and respectable a group of citizens as 
need be seen. There was neither obstruction, nor noise, nor crowd¬ 
ing. But the presence of ‘natives’ on the platform became suddenly 
distasteful to an English passenger in the adjoining compartment. 
Thrusting his head out of window he began to abuse them and bid 
them be off, and when they did not move struck at them with his stick, 
and threatened the old Nawab especially with it if he came within 
his reach. I shall never forget the astonishment of the man when I 
interfered, or his indignation, at my venturing to call him to account. 
It was his affair, not mine. Who was I that I should interpose my¬ 
self between an Englishman and his natural right? Nor was it till, 
with great difficulty, I had procured the aid of the police, that he 
seemed to consider himself other than the aggrieved person.... 

“Moreover, it was evident to me that it was no unusual occur¬ 
rence. The railway officials and the police treated it as a matter of 
small importance, did their best to screen the offender, and declared 
themselves incomnetent to do more than register my complaint. On 
the other hand, the Nawab and his friends confessed with shame 


347 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-11 

that, though they were insulted, they were not surprised. It had 
happened to all of them too often before for them even to feel any 
special anger/’ 

“We certainly feel insulted”, writes one of them to me a day or 
two later, “but are powerless to take any action on it. We are used 
to such treatment from almost every Anglo-Indian.” 

“We account for his conduct,” says another, “by supposing that 
he thought us (the natives) to be nothing less than brutes and wild 
creatures”; while a third remarks: “From this you will see how our 
ruling race treats us with scorn and contempt. Had we been in 
English dress, then we would not, perhaps, have been so much hated.” 
“I beg to assure you,” writes a fourth, “that the incident was not 
(an only) one of its kind, but such treatment is becoming general. 
The alarm and dread with which the Anglo-Indians are regarded 
cannot be described. Alas! we are hated for no other reason but 
because we have a dark colour; because we put on a national dress; 
and because we are a conquered race.” 

“Allow me to say that it will be difficult for England to hold 
India long if such a state of feeling is allowed to progress without 
any check.” 30 Blunt refers to a mass of letters of this kind. 

“Mr. Mandlik, the Hindu Government pleader, holds the highest 
position of any native’s at the Bombay bar. I told him the Patna 
story. He told me he had often been insulted himself; on one occa¬ 
sion turned out of a railway carriage neck and crop between Benaras 
and Allahabad. Every native in Bombay had been subjected to such 
incidents, and he mentioned the instance of the Chief Translator to 
the Government, promising to furnish me with proofs.” 31 

This attitude of Europeans towards Indians was due to a sense 
of racial superiority—a “cherished conviction which was shared by 
every Englishman in India, from the highest to the lowest, that he 
belongs to a race whom God has destined to govern and subdue.” 32 

Reference may be made in this connection to Sir John Law¬ 
rence’s famous challenge, “Will you be governed by the pen or by the 
sword? Choose!” As Garratt observes, it was intelligible in its 
times and context. “But only an insensitive arrogance could have 
selected it to perpetuate on his statue in a great city (Lahore).” 33 

John Nicholson was called, not inaptly, by his brother officers, 
“the autocrat of all the Russias.” One day, while riding through a 
village, he observed that the Mulla of a mosque, “instead of salaam¬ 
ing to him, looked at him with a gesture of contempt or hatred. 
When he got home he sent his orderly to fetch the Moulla, and then 


348 


SOCIAL RELATION BETWEEN ENGLISHMEN AND INDIANS 

and there shaved off his beard!” 34 On another occasion he sent the 
following laconic note to John Lawrence: “Sir,—I have the honour 
to inform you that I have just shot a man dead who came to kill 
me. Your obedient servant, John Nicholson.” 35 

While the social exclusiveness hurt the feelings of a comparative¬ 
ly few Indians of upper strata, the spirit of the rank and file was em¬ 
bittered by the gratuitous insult, not unoften accompanied by bodily 
assault, which every Tom, Dick and Harry could, and often did, 
inflict with impunity upon the most respectable Indians, not to speak 
of coolies, servants or other lower classes. Occasionally, though very 
rarely, the authorities took, or promised to take some steps against it, 
but this irritating evil showed no tendency to decline. 

It was customary to find Europeans, and particularly English¬ 
men, insulting and humiliating Indians in every walk of life. The 
evidence in this respect is overwhelming. The difficulty, if any, is 
of selection from numerous cases of various descriptions bearing on 
the subject. The statement of Chailley has been quoted above. An 
American clergyman, Dr. C. C. Hall, who toured widely in India, 
said in 1908, “I have seen Indians of the highest intelligence and cha¬ 
racter, esteemed personal friends of mine, treated in India with posi¬ 
tive discourtesy by Englishmen. These same Englishmen would 
have cut off their right hands before they would have treated a Euro¬ 
pean so; but they will go out of their way to insult an Indian.” 36 

Mr. G. F. Abbott writes: “I have seen youngmen (young govern¬ 
ment officials in India) who have sprung from London suburbs, treat¬ 
ing in public aged Indian noblemen in a manner which a gentleman 
would not have adopted toward his valet. In any other country 
these things would have begotten sedition long ago. In India they 
beget a bitterness which is none the less harmful because it is rarely 
expressed in action.” 37 

Several factors contrived to widen still further the cleavage 
between the Englishmen and the Indians in the second half of the 
nineteenth century. The first was the horrors of 1857-8. The cruel¬ 
ties perpetrated by both sides were terrible enough, 38 but were exag¬ 
gerated by all sorts of wild stories. To the horrid details of Kanpur 
massacre and woes and miseries actually suffered by individual Eng¬ 
lishmen were added fantastic tales of outraging the modesty of white 
women and other indignities suffered by them. On the other side 
were stories of wholesale rapine and massacre of Indians on a wide 
scale, not only perpetrated in course of military campaigns during 
the progress of the outbreak, but also as deliberate measures of 
revenge after its suppression. The memories of these haunted the 


349 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

minds of both Indians and Englishmen for a long time and hampered 
the growth of sincere cordiality and mutual goodwill between the 
two. 

Bussell, the Correspondent of The Times in India during the Mu¬ 
tiny, writes in his Diary: “The Mutinies have produced too much 
hatred and ill feeling between the two races to render any mere 
change of the rulers a remedy for the evils which affect India.... 
Many years must elapse ere the evil passions excited by these dis¬ 
turbances expire.” 

The Mutiny also fostered a general attitude of indifference, 
sometimes bordering on cruelty, towards the Indian soldiers on the 
part of their officers. This is well illustrated by the Whipping Act 
on which Sir Henry Cotton observes as follows: 

“The Indian Whipping Act was passed in 1864 and is one of the 
disastrous consequences of post-Mutiny legislation. It is still in 
force, though I am thankful to say it has lately been modified, and 
some of its worst provisions have been repealed. The number of 
judicial floggings which used to be inflicted in India is appalling; in 
1878 it amounted to 75,223. That was a record, but even up to re¬ 
cent times it has always been excessive; in 1900 it was 45,054 and 
has rarely been below 20,000 in any year.” 39 

C. T. Garratt observes: “The English have never attempted to 
remove the irritation caused by their behaviour after the Mutiny, 
and from that time we must date the long and bitter estrangement 
between the two races. Bom of hatred and fear it was nourished on 
a series of unfortunate incidents, most of which were the direct 
result of the new spirit which the Mutiny encouraged amongst 
Europeans.” 40 

The effect of the Mutiny on Englishmen at home is thus describ¬ 
ed by Garratt: 

“Countless middle-class Englishmen learnt to look upon Indians 
as the creatures, half gorilla, half negro, who appeared in the con¬ 
temporary Punch cartoons. They were usually depicted standing 
over a murdered woman but cowering before an avenging Britannia 
who is praying to the God of Battles to ‘steel our soldiers' hearts*. 
For another generation their children learnt of India from the same 
source. The young men who went out East during and after the 
Mutiny left a country where ‘every one chuckled to hear how Gene¬ 
ral Neill had forced high Brahmins to sweep up the blood of the 
Europeans murdered at Cawnpore, and then strung them in a 
row, without giving them the time requisite for the rites of 
purification*.** 41 


350 


SOCIAL RELATION BETWEEN ENGLISHMEN AND INDIANS 

It is easy to imagine that the feeling would be far more intense 
among Englishmen in India. Garratt observes that the Englishmen 
found, on coming to India, that the spirit of hatred which they 
brought with them “was shared by the entire mass of our country¬ 
men. Invectives against the treacherous blood-thirsty Mussulmans, 
ironical sneers about the ‘mild Hindoo’, were nuts alike to the civi¬ 
lian and the planter. The latter rejoiced to hear the world acknow¬ 
ledge that his estimate of the native had been correct throughout.” 42 

As a matter of fact, Garratt is not far from right when he states 
that the Englishmen in India evolved certain definite anti-Indian 
ideas. One of these was that the only thing an oriental understood 
was fear. Another was that in view of the many lives and many 
millions which were lost to conquer India, the Englishmen deserved 
some more substantial recompense than the mere privilege of govern¬ 
ing India. But by far the most important principle that these Anglo- 
Indians adhered to as an axiom was that the life of one European 
was worth those of many Indians; the European’s life was sacrosanct 
and the Indian’s was of no consequence. 43 

Lapse of time might have helped to improve the relations bet¬ 
ween the two communities. Unfortunately, several other factors 
were at work which stood in the way of such reconciliation and con¬ 
tributed to the growth of social aloofness between the two 
communities. 

The improvement of communication between India and England, 
first by the introduction of steamship, and then by the opening of 
Suez Canal, introduced a great change in the attitude of Englishmen 
towards the Indians. India ceased to be looked upon as an adopted 
home by the Englishmen as they could now bring their wives with 
them and more frequently visit their own homes. This altered in a 
marked degree the relationship between the two races, increasing 
bitterness, hostility and fear. The presence of a much larger num¬ 
ber of English women added very greatly indeed to a new racial 
tension. Wilfrid Blunt, writing in 1909, observes: “The English 
woman in India during the last thirty years has been the cause of 
half the bitter feelings there between race and race. ...it is her 
constantly increasing influence now that widens the gulf of ill-feeling 
and makes amalgamation daily more impossible.” 44 

All these had the effect of considerably lessening “the free in¬ 
tercourse between Indians and Englishmen of bygone days and led on 
to what has been called in India the ‘Club’ life. This took more 
and more an exclusive turn, and a caste barrier was raised against 
the admission of any Indian into this whole area of an Englishman’s 
existence in the country.” 


351 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUR TCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

Wilfrid Blunt suggests another reason for the change. Com¬ 
paring older times with his own days (1883) he remarks, “that the 
men who came out to India as Government servants were, many 
of them, taken from a comparatively low rank in life, and that, 
being unused to refined society, or to being treated with much con¬ 
sideration at home, they lost their heads when they found themselves 
in India in a position of power.” 46 

Wilfrid Blunt, who came to India in 1883, and was singularly 
observant in these matters, noticed the rapidity of the change which 
had already become established when he arrived in India. 

“The account given me by the oldest and best informed of my 
native acquaintances of the gradual estrangement which has come 
about within their recollection between themselves and the English 
in India, is most instructive. In those days the general feeling of 
the natives towards the English civilian was one of respect and even 
o$ affection... He took pains to know the people; and in fact he knew 
them well. He was readily accessible. He lived to a great extent 
among the people, and according to the customs of the people. He 
did not disdain to make friends with those of the better class, and 
occasionally he married among them.... The Englishmen of that 
day looked upon India not unf requently as his second home.... The 
Anglo-Indian official of the Company’s days loved India in a way 
no Queen’s official dreams of doing now.” 47 

After this, he tries in his own way to explain the reason. It 
was, he says, because the civilian, under the Crown, looked much 
more to England than to India. His wife was with him, but she 
continually went backwards and forward: his young children were 
obliged to stay in England; and for these two reasons his heart re¬ 
mained where his real home was. His career became Europe- 
centred. Those who before had all their chief interests in India had 
changed their outlook. They talked about India as “this wretched 
country” and in this way became, what they often called them¬ 
selves, “birds of passage”. No one could wholly blame them, but 
it was necessary to blame the system which led to such unfortunate 
results. “Lastly,” he adds, “the Mutiny itself, with the bitter 
memories it left behind, put an end to the contracting by Englishmen 
of native habits and native ties.” 

Professor T.G.P. Spear of Cambridge also emphasizes the role 
of English women: “With the advent of women (from England) 
in large numbers a new standard was introduced, one set of customs 
and traditions died out and another equally rigid took its place.” 48 
“Every youth, who is able to maintain a wife, marries. The conjugal 


352 


SOCIAL RELATION BETWEEN ENGLISHMEN AND INDIANS 


pair become a bundle of English prejudices and hate the country, 
the natives and everything belonging to them... .The ‘odious blacks’, 
‘the nasty heathen wretches’, ‘the filthy creatures’ are the shrill 
echoes of the ‘black brutes’, the ‘black vermin’ of the husband. The 

children catch up this strain.” 49 

* 

The conservative nature of women and their ignorance of India 
made the English ladies less tolerant of the Indian habits and man¬ 
ners than Englishmen, and they set the standard in this respect in 
the English society in general. Blunt refers to one Lady S. who 
“complained of the shabby way the Anglo-Indian officials were treat¬ 
ed by Government, and thought it hard India should not be governed 
entirely for their benefit. They all. hated India so much that they 
ought to be handsomely treated for being obliged to live there.” 50 

The bitter feelings created between Indians and Englishmen by 
the incidents of the Mutiny thus went on increasing, and the English¬ 
men soon formed an exclusive ‘caste’ as it were, to whom all the 
Indians were ‘untouchable’. The following observations of two 
English writers clearly depict this and other evil effects of the 
Mutiny, 

“The racial cleavage”, write Thompson and Garratt, “became 
more marked, though the extent of the difference before and after 
the Mutiny has sometimes been exaggerated. It must be confessed 
that the growing number of English women who began to settle 
down in India with their husbands increased the tendency of the 
white population to form not only a caste but also a group of trade 
unions, and the recent vivid memories of 1857 inevitably encouraged 
a belief that these sacrifices merited ‘some more substantial recom¬ 
pense than the privilege of governing India in a spirit of wisdom and 
unselfishness... The rougher type of Englishman interpreted this 
prevalent feeling by classing all Indians into one opprobrious cate¬ 
gory, by a disregard for authority, and by a rudeness of bearing 
which was to be the cause of continual and growing friction during 
the next half century.” 51 

The following observations of Sir Henry Cotton support the same 
view: 

“Ten years had elapsed since the Mutiny, but the Mutiny was, 
in the early days of my service, a living memory in the minds of all. 
That memory was not a benign influence on the future career of the 
young Civilian. When I first arrived in the country, it was duly 
enjoined on me as a matter of vital importance that I should insist 
on all the outward and visible signs of deference and respect which 

353 


B.P.I.R.—23 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


Orientals with a leaning to sycophancy, resulting from generations 
of subjection and foreign rule, are only too willing to accord. Al¬ 
though I was a very chota (small) sahib, and posted only to the 
humble office of Assistant to the Magistrate and Collector of a dis¬ 
trict, I was early taught that, though I might be but a fly on the 
wheel of the official hierarchy, I was, in the eyes of the people among 
whom I lived, a representative of the Government and entitled as 
such to rights and privileges on no account to be foregone. 

‘‘Such was the atmosphere in which we lived; we were directly 
encouraged to assume an attitude of a patronising and superior cha¬ 
racter, which was obviously inimical to the best influences which 
should be exercised in the service of the state. The old Haileybury 
tone still pervaded the Civil Service, and the new class of competi¬ 
tioners to which I belonged and who had their spurs to win were 
easily attracted into the prevailing current. Nor was there any de¬ 
terrent from the Indian side; nothing could exceed the obsequious 
and cringing demeanour of the old class of Indians, especially those 
about the Law Courts, with whom mostly we were brought into 
immediate contact. It was, in fact, a demoralising environment 
into which we were thrown, and I am not ashamed to say that I suc¬ 
cumbed to it.” 52 

The demoralising environment, to which Cotton refers, was a 
legacy of the past. It was noted long ago by Dwaraka-nath Tagore, 
and he also traced its origin to the haughty and arrogant attitude 
of the English officials. The evils were accentuated after the Mu¬ 
tiny, and the English officials became more overbearing in their be¬ 
haviour towards the Indians. Apart from the social reasons noted 
above, there were several other factors at work. In the first place, 
the new method of recruitment by competitive examination put a 
premium on intellectual efficiency alone and effectively shut off from 
Indian Service the members of those high social ranks whose birth 
and breeding made them, generally speaking, more urbane and 
gentle. Secondly, as the rights and privileges of the officials were 
now directly guaranteed by the British Government rather than a 
trading company, and the control of the Crown was necessarily more 
. nominal than real, they arrogated to themselves a higher authority 
and greater power without any corresponding responsibility or ac¬ 
countability to any superior body. Each covenanted civil servant 
naturally tended to become a dictator in his own sphere. 

Thirdly, the high intellectual ability shown by the English- 
educated Indians made them an object of dislike to the English 
officials. These Indians proved themselves equal to the English 

354 


SOCIAL RELATION BETWEEN ENGLISHMEN AND INDIANS 

officials in intellectual eminence and attainments in all spheres of 
public activity, and this offended their vanity of ‘race superiority’—a 
delicate sensibility or sentiment deliberately fostered by the English 
officialdom in India. Sir Henry Cotton, who could speak from per¬ 
sonal experience, describes it as follows: 

“This abhorrence of equality rankles in the mind of all Anglo- 
Indians, and especially of officials. It is the peculiarity of residence 
in the East to develop sentiments of intolerance and race superiority. 
Nearly all young men, on their first arrival in India, are animated by 
kindly feelings towards the natives of the country. Their generous 
instincts recoil from the outward manifestations of dislike evinced 
by the older residents, and it is rare to hear them degenerate to harsh 
expression, until after they have become demoralized by bad exam¬ 
ple and the false position in which they are placed. Degeneration, 
however, soon sets in and few escape it.” 63 

Chailley observes: “The British official, while benevolent and 
sympathetic towards the poor, tends to be stiff and patronising to¬ 
wards the well-to-do.... I was told by a Brahman member of the 
Viceroy’s Legislative Council: ‘The Indian Civilian does not wish us 
to rise. When we learn his language, understand his ideas, and 
attain his intellectual level, he regards this not as a homage which 
he should welcome, but as an encroachment to be resented. We 
used to esteem them for their character, and we flattered ourselves 
that they would welcome in us just and independent men, but they 
only want baseness and servility, and thier favours go out to 
flatterers and time-servers.^ 54 

The social exclusiveness of the Anglo-Indians, the beginnings of 
which have been described in an earlier chapter, 64 * grew apace in 
the course of time. This was more and more resented by the growing 
number of Indians who had visited England. They had mixed freely 
on a footing of equality with Englishmen there, but found themselves 
treated in their own country like pariahs by the Englishmen, who 
refused them admittance into their family or club. Indians who 
were members of the best clubs in London, could not, on their re¬ 
turn home, even call on their English friends at the Yacht Club in 
Bombay. Whatever excuses might be offered to justify this con¬ 
duct, to the Indians it was nothing but a galling and humiliating 
racial discrimination which sometimes did more to antagonise them 
against the British rule than even political disabilities. 

The English officials, recruited by competitive examinations, 
were very capable men, and maintained a high level of efficiency 
and integrity. They were honest, hard-working and conscientious, 


355 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


and possessed a high sense of duty as they understood it. But much 
of the good effects of all this was marred by their arrogant and inso¬ 
lent behaviour towards the Indians, specially of the Western-educat¬ 
ed type. In this caste-ridden country they formed a new caste. 
Politically a Kshatriya oligarchy, and socially a Brahmana caste, they 
assumed the powers and pretentions of both, and looked upon 
all the Indians as Sudras. How closely the position of the Indians 
resembled the abject condition of the Sudras may be illustrated by 
two incidents mentioned by Blunt. He relates how a leading Indian 
had said to him, after receiving a cruel injury on the railway plat¬ 
form: “We feel insulted at such things, but we are not surprised/’ 66 
This reveals the whole inner world of humiliation and indignation 
in which the ‘natives’ lived. Again, in his diary, Blunt writes: “It 
is painful to see, what terror he (i.e. Sir Alfred Lyall) inspires in the 
‘natives’. Ferid-ed-din, in spite of his boldness, was struck speech¬ 
less in his presence, and stood before him barefooted. I told Ferid- 
ed-din to put his shoes on, but Lyall said he had better stay as he 
was”. 56 

Evidently, Blunt was unaware of the “shoe question” which 
caused a serious headache to the British officials for many years. In 
accordance with the old Muslim practice, the Indians had to appear 
before the British officials without shoes. This custom or etiquette, 
however, ceased to have any meaning when chairs were used instead 
of carpets in official functions, and it became a positive nuisance 
when Indians began to use shoes of European fashion. A practice 
therefore grew up in the Presidency towns and other large stations 
whereby natives wearing boots and shoes of European fashion were 
permitted to appear on all official and semi-official functions. But 
the same natives who could thus meet the Viceroy with shoes on were 
denied the privilege before a petty British official in a district. This 
created an anomalous situation; but prestige dies hard. So, after a 
great deal of discussion, and after “consulting all the principal offi¬ 
cers in the country, civil and political,” the Government of India 
went to the length of passing an official resolution in 1868 to the 
effect that native gentlemen who wore boots and shoes of European 
fashion’ could appear “thus habited” before Government officials 
at Durbar and on all official or semi-official occasions, but that those 
who wore shoes of Indian fashion must take them off within the cus¬ 
tomary limits. 67 

But the Indians smarted under something far worse than gratui¬ 
tous insult and humiliation at the hands of l^he Englishmen. As 
Garratt very properly observed, one potent factor of hatred and 
estrangement between the Indians and Englishmen was “the long 


356 


SOCIAL RELATION BETWEEN ENGLISHMEN AND INDIANS 

succession of murders and brutalities perpetrated by Englishmen 
which either went unpunished or for which, at the demand of the 
whole European community, only a small penalty was exacted/’ 68 
The same thing is testified to by Sir Theodore Morrison: “It is an 
ugly fact”, says he, “which it is no use to disguise that the murder 
of natives by Englishmen is no infrequent occurrence. In one issue 
of the Amrita Bazar Patrika of this month (August 11, 1898) three 
contemporary cases are dealt with, in none of which have the pri¬ 
soners paid the full legal penalty for murder. . .Juries in European 
cases are empannelled from towns; this is the very class in which 
the arrogance of a conquering race is most offensively strong, and 
their moral sense does not endorse the legal theory that an English¬ 
man should atone with his life for killing a nigger.” 59 Three artillery 
men, according to Morrison, were found guilty of killing one Dr. Su- 
resh Chandra in a brutal manner; but they were sentenced only to 
seven years’ rigorous imprisonment. A military officer comment¬ 
ing on this judicial sentence remarked “that in any other part of the 
world but India, the three artillery men would have been hanged.” 598 
It may be added that the Europeans received a far better treatment 

in jail than an Indian prisoner belonging to the highest class in 
society. 

The judicial records of the period under review are full of such 
cases, too numerous to refer in detail. Here, again, we shall begin 
with instances vouched for by eminent Englishmen. 

Thus Sir Henry Cotton writes: 

“I place on record here the circumstances of a criminal trial 
which occurred in 1874, because while it created the highest degree 
of local excitement in Calcutta, it is also typical of similar cases 
which inevitably recur from time to time , in which the elements of 
race antagonism are vigorously reflected and the most dangerous 
passions are roused. Gerald Meares was a stalwart young planter 
whom I knew very well, as his factory was in the Chooadanga Sub¬ 
division. For some reason or other he had mercilessly thrashed the 
Government postman who was bringing his letters. The scene of the 
offence was across the border in the Jessore District, and Meares, 
after a careful trial by the Magistrate of Jessore, was convicted and 
sentenced to two months’ imprisonment. The usual result followed: 
no stone was left unturned by Anglo-Indian agitation to obtain a 
reversal of the sentence. The whole volume of English opinion 
found expression in denouncing the verdict; Calcutta society talked 
of little else, the Anglo-Indian newspapers added fuel to the flames, 
public subscriptions were raised to pay the expenses of an appeal, 
and influentially signed memorials were addressed to the Govern- 


357 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 

ment praying for Meares’s release. The High Court appeal was 
heard by Justices Kemp and Morris, both civilian Judges, and the 
verdict of the Magistrate was upheld. The memorial to Govern¬ 
ment was rejected, and so the case ended. But in the meantime 
great harm had been done; all the flood-gates of passion and pre¬ 
judice had been let loose, and a corresponding feeling of resentment 
and anger had been excited among the members of the Indian com¬ 
munity.” 60 

Still more interesting and instructive is the “Fuller case” which 
occurred in 1876, about which Cotton wrote as follows: 

“The facts of the case are typical of a hundred similar cases be¬ 
fore and since . One Sunday morning Mr. Fuller, an English pleader 
at Agra, was about to drive to church with his family. When the 
carriage was brought to the door the groom failed to be in atten¬ 
dance, but made his appearance when sent for. For this fault 
Mr. Fuller struck the groom with his open hand on the head and 
face and pulled him by the hair so as to cause him to fall down. 
Mr. Fuller and his family drove on to church; the groom got up, 
went into an adjoining compound, and there died almost immediately. 
The medical evidence was to the effect that the man had died 
from rupture of the spleen, which very slight violence would be 
sufficient to cause in consequence of the morbid enlargement of the 
organ. The Joint Magistrate of the Station found Mr. Fuller guilty 
of Voluntarily causing what distinctly amounts to hurt’, and sen¬ 
tenced him to pay a fine of Rs. 30/- (or £ 2) which was to be paid 
over as compensation to the widow of the deceased. 

“At the request of the Local Government, the High Court of 
Allahabad expressed an opinion on the case, which was to the effect 
that the sentence, though perhaps lighter than the High Court would 
have been disposed to inflict under the circumstances, was not spe¬ 
cially open to objection. It was then that Lord Lytton rose in his 
wrath: 

‘The Governor-General in Council cannot but regret that the 
High Court should have considered that its duties and responsibili¬ 
ties in this matter were adequately fulfilled by the expression of 
such an opinion. He also regrets that the Local Government should 
have made no inquiry, until directed to do so by the Government of 
India, into the circumstances of a case so injurious to the honour of 
British rule and so damaging to the reputation of British justice in 
this country. 

‘The class of misconduct out of which this crime has arisen is 
believed to be dying out; but the Governor-General in Council would 


358 


SOCIAL RELATION BETWEEN ENGLISHMEN AND INDIANS 


take this opportunity of expressing his abhorrence of the practice, 
instances of which occasionally come to light, of European masters 
treating their native servants in a manner in which they would not 
treat men of their own race. This practice is all the more cowardly 
because those who are least able to retaliate injury or insult have 
the strongest claim upon the forbearance and protection of their em¬ 
ployers. But, bad as it is from every point of view, it is made worse 
by the fact, known to all residents in India, that Asiatics are subject 
to internal disease which often renders fatal to life even a slight 
external shock. The Governor-General in Council considers that 
the habit of resorting to blows on every trifling provocation should 
be visited by adequate legal penalties, and that those who- indulge 
in it should reflect that they may be put in jeopardy for a serious 
crime/ 

“The whole of this letter, which was addressed to the Govern¬ 
ment of the North-Western, now called the United, Provinces, was 
a scathing condemnation of what had taken place. Its publication 
evoked, as was to have been expected, a storm of Anglo-Indian and 
official indignation; while in the Indian Press there was, of course, 
a chorus of approbation/’ 61 

Blunt also refers to a case which is typical of many others. “I 
may here note that I heard from Akbar Huseyn of a case in which 
liberties had been taken by an English official with a Hindu woman, 
whose husband’s relations, finding her ‘no longer of any use to them/ 
killed her and laid her outside his tent. The cas • was taken up, and 
though there was no kind of doubt as to the facts, those who brought 
it forward were proceeded against by the Government as having 
brought a malicious charge, and were sentenced to a fine of one 
thousand rupees each, and three months’ imprisonment. My infor¬ 
mant added : ‘They will never allow a charge to be substantiated 
against an official for fear of injuring the British character.” 62 

One of the worst cases on record in this category is what is 
known as the ‘Cowan Case’. It arose out of the Kuka rebellion to 
which detailed reference has been made above. 63 But as the punish¬ 
ment meted out to the rebels illustrates the callousness, cruelty and 
•utter lack of a sense of justice on the part of the British officials, it 
deserves a separate treatment. Here, again, we may reproduce the 
account given by Sir Henry Cotton. After narrating briefly the cir¬ 
cumstances of the revolt and the surrender of 68 prisoners, Cotton 
proceeds: 

“On the 16th of January Mr. Cowan, who was then Deputy Com¬ 
missioner of the adjoining British District of Loodhiana, ordered the 


359 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—IT 

prisoners to be sent into Kotla, where he himself arrived during the 
day. That evening he wrote to his official superior, the Commis¬ 
sioner, a letter reporting that tranquillity had been completely restor¬ 
ed, and adding: ‘The entire gang has thus been nearly destroyed. I 
purpose blowing away from guns or hanging the prisoners to-morrow 
morning at day-break.’ About noon of the following day (the 17th) 
he received a note from Mr. Forsyth, the Commissioner, desiring him 
to keep the prisoners at Sherpore till a guard could be sent from Loo- 
dhiana. This note he says he put in his pocket ‘and thought no more 
about it.’ It was not until 4 p.m. on the afternoon of the 17th that 
the captured Kukas were marched into Kotla, and then and there, 
without delay or the semblance of a trial, Mr. Cowan caused forty- 
nine of them to be blown away from guns. Close on 7 p. m. when the 
last batch of six men had been lashed to the guns, there came an offi¬ 
cial order from Mr. Forsyth to send the prisoners to him for trial. In 
his explanation to Government, Mr. Cowan wrote of that order: 
‘After reading Mr. Forsyth’s letter, I handed it to Colonel Perkins 
with the remark that it would be impossible to stay the execution 
of the men already tied to the guns; that such a proceeding would 
have the worst effect on the people around us*; and so the last six 
rebels were blown away as had been the forty-three others before 
them. One man, who would have made the fiftieth, broke from the 
guard, rushed at Mr. Cowan and caught him by the beard, but was 
promptly cut down by the sabres of the native officers who were in 
attendance. 

“Such was Mr. Cowan’s share in this transaction. The Com¬ 
missioner, Mr. Forsyth, had repeatedly enjoined on him to proceed 
with legal formalities, and on the 17th he telegraphed to the Govern¬ 
ment: T am on the spot, and can dispose of the cases according to 
form and without delay. Exceptional action not necessary and would 
increase excitement better allayed.’ On the 18th, however, having 
been informed by Mr. Cowan of the ghastly tragedy which had been 
enacted, he wrote to him in the following terms: ‘My dear Cowan, I 
fully approve and confirm all you have done. You have acted 
admirably. I am coming out.’ He did come out, and sanctioned 
within the terms of the law the execution of the sixteen remaining 
prisoners. They were hanged. 

“The Government of India recorded an elaborate Resolution on 
these proceedings. It was understood to have been drafted by 
Mr. (afterwards Justice) Fitzjames Stephen, whose tenure of the 
Legal Membership of Council was then drawing to a close. ‘His 
Excellency in Council is under the painful necessity of affirming 
that the course followed by Mr. Cowan was illegal, that it was not 


360 


SOCIAL RELATION BETWEEN ENGLISHMEN AND INDIANS 

palliated by any public necessity, and that it was characterised by 
incidents which give it a complexion of barbarity.’ And so His Ex¬ 
cellency was compelled ‘with deep regret’ to direct that ‘Mr. Cowan 
be removed from the Service.’ As for Mr. Forsyth, he was severely 
censured and transferred to another province in a corresponding 
office with the same emoluments. He subsequently became Sir 
Douglas Forsyth, having been decorated for service beyond the fron¬ 
tier at Yarkand. 

“The circumstances of this case and of the orders passed divid¬ 
ed public opinion in India into two camps, in much the same way as 
Governor Eyre’s case had shortly before convulsed public opinion in 
England. The sympathy of officials generally and of the Anglo- 
Indian Press was with Messrs. Cowan and Forsyth. 

“The Indian Press at this time exercised but a feeble influence, 
but it raised its voice, such as it was, in horror of what had occurred. 
For my part, I can recall nothing during my service in India more re¬ 
volting and shocking than these executions, and there were many 
who thought, as I did and still think, that the final orders of the Gov¬ 
ernment of India were lamentably inadequate. The Viceroy of the 
time was Lord Napier and Ettrick, who was temporarily in charge 
between the death of Lord Mayo and the arrival of Lord Northbrook 
on the 3rd of May.” 64 

Reference has been made above, in the Fuller case, to the rup¬ 
ture of the spleen of the unfortunate victim of his brutal assault. 
This phrase, extenuating the crime, was repeated in the trials of 
almost all cases of assault by Europeans which ended in the death of 
Indians. We hear it too often in numerous cases concerning the 
murder of coolies (labourers) in tea-plantations. This was severely 
commented upon in Indian Press and caused bitter resentment among 
the Indians. These numerous instances not only brought home to 
Indian minds the utter callousness of Englishmen to Indian feelings 
and the little value they attached to lives of natives, but also exposed 
the sham of British justice, when Europeans were concerned. 

By far the most important incident of this nature centres round 
the personality of an Irish Judge, Mr. Pennel. It not only throws 
a lurid light on the travesty of justice which occurs when an English¬ 
man is the accused party, but also proves the extent to which even 
the highest authority in the land is guilty of this crime of denying 
justice to the Indian and shielding Englishmen from the clutches of 
law. The facts of the case may be summed up as follows: 

On August 19, 1899, the Police Superintendent of Chapra dis* 
trict, named Corbett, kicked the bottom of a constable, Narsingh. 

36 ! 


4 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

and the District Engineer, Simkins, hit him on the head with a rattan. 
Corbett then struck the man in the face with his fist causing him to 
fall against a house. Narasingh’s fault was that he had declined to 
do forced labour for the District Engineer. He was admitted in hos¬ 
pital where it was found that his wounds were of a serious nature. 
Fearing that a complaint might be made, Corbett asked Narsingh to 
give up service, as otherwise he would be proceeded against in the 
court. As Narsingh did not do so, he was prosecuted, and the trying 
Magistrate, Maulvi Zakir Hussain, under pressure from above, 66 sen¬ 
tenced him to two months’ rigorous imprisonment. He preferred an 
appeal before the District and Sessions Judge who was an Irish civi¬ 
lian named Pennel. Pennel allowed the appeal but invited trouble 
for himself. In his judgement he observed: “Assaults by Europeans 
upon natives are unfortunately not uncommon. They are not likely 
to cease until the disappearance of real or supposed racial superiority. 
It is proper no doubt that they should be punished, but excessive 
severity in punishing them, so far from improving, is more likely to 
exacerbate the relations between the two races, and to defeat itself. 
The better men among the native community are themselves disposed 
to make allowance for the irritability which this climate has a ten¬ 
dency to produce in the European character and the occasional acts 
of violence in which that irritability vents itself.” 

This judgement, passed on October 7, produced a commotion 
among officials throughout the province. Even the Lieutenant-Gov¬ 
ernor, Sir John Woodburn, was upset, and the Viceroy, Lord Curzon, 
considered PennePs act as an abuse of “liberty of enquiry”. Pennel 
was transferred to Noakhali by telegram. 

Some time after, Woodburn went to Noakhali, called Pen¬ 
nel in his private room, and told him: “Seeing your judgement I have 
grave doubts whether you are fit for judicial employment. The judi¬ 
cial officers are my officers just as much as the executive, and I want 
them to do well. Mind, I am speaking for your benefit and guidance. 
Reading your judgement leads me to doubt whether you were really 
so impartial as you should have been. The vindictive rancour with 
which you pursued the policemen and the district officers makes me 
think you must have had some quarrel with them.” 

Pennel—“You may think like that, but a judgement like that was 
worth two National Congresses.” 

Woodburn—“As impartial man I pass my opinion.” 

Pennel—“I know your Government had done all they could to 
prevent truth coming out.” 


t 


362 


SOCIAL RELATION* BETWEEN ENGLISHMEN AND INDIANS 

The Lt. Governor was a little agitated and said: “My Govern¬ 
ment! Be careful, Pennel, you had better be careful what you are 
saying.” 

Pennel—“You consulted the Legal Remembrancer whether wit¬ 
nesses need appear before me.” 

Woodburn—“Yes, I had every right to consult the Legal Remem¬ 
brancer. It was a trumpery case.” 

Pennel—“Trumpery case! Should I have any reference about 
this matter to the High Court?” 

Woodburn—“No, Pennel, I am not going to enter into any dis¬ 
cussion with the High Court. I am speaking to you privately.” 

In another case, Pennel had remarked in his judgement: “In 
this country the only people who will come forward to give evidence 
against officers in the cases of this kind are those who do not mind 
their houses being burnt, their shops looted, their relations turned 
out of Government employment, themselves and members of their 
families dragged up on false charges and sent to Jail.” 

In Noakhali, Pennel got the Police Superintendent, Raily, arrest¬ 
ed on a charge of perjury. Raily had attempted to secure ‘liberty 
for a murderer by giving false evidence/ Pennel sentenced the mur¬ 
derer to death. This case made Pennel a hero, and on February 15, 
1901, the day he delivered the judgement, 10,000 people followed 
him up to his bungalow calling him Dharmavatdr or a Daniel. But 
on a recommendation from the Government, the High Court sus¬ 
pended Pennel, and telegraphically ordered release of Raily on bail. 
When Pennel was leaving for Calcutta, 15,000 people of all classes 
silently accompanied him from his residence to the railway station. 
People were lined up on either side of the road on which was moving 
Pennel’s carriage. Pennel became the idol of the educated classes 
in Bengal. Mr. J. Chowdhury, Bar-at-law and a prominent public 
man in those days, observed: “The people could not forget the fact 
that it was for the sake of justice that Pennel sacrificed his own pros¬ 
pects and it was the cause of justice which had alone actuated him 
to act up to the dictates of his own conscience.” 66 

Mention has been made above 67 how justice was sacrificed by 
the English officers to protect the Indigo-planters, and these, natural¬ 
ly, were foremost in opposing the so-called Black Acts of 1849 which 
sought to bring them under the jurisdiction of the Indian officers. 
Similarly the Ilbert Bill, offering similar concessions to the Indians, 
was opposed tooth and nail by the tea-planters in order that, as a 


363 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

British Lieutenant-Governor put it, they might beat and kill with 
impunity a few more niggars. Blunt remarked: 

‘‘Throughout the agitation on the Ilbert Bill, the planters had a 
considerable backing in the official world. It was evident that the 
two societies were united in a way which would have been impos¬ 
sible in old times, in their opposition to the native hopes.” 68 

Tea-gardens offered numerous instances of miscarriage of justice 
when the European manager or his assistant was accused of inhu¬ 
man atrocities perpetrated upon the coolies (labourers) or even of 
murdering 1 them. Sir Bampfylde Fuller, Chief Commissioner of 
Assam, refers to two such cases. The following extract from 
his book, Some Personal Experiences (pp. 118-20), is most revealing 
in this respect. 

“On some gardens there was a good deal of flogging, and I will 
mention two cases which had some interesting features. In one of 
them a woman was stripped and flogged. Her husband brought a 
criminal charge against the garden overseer. He was acquitted by 
an Indian Assistant Magistrate on the score that he acted under the 
orders of his European manager. No further action was taken. I 
heard of the case through a vernacular Assam newspaper. In deal¬ 
ing with offences of this kind, it was essential to carry planting opi¬ 
nion with one , and to use only just so much severity as would suffice 
to prevent their recurrence. I was not sure of the discretion of the 
District Magistrate, and while ordering him to take the case up 
against the Manager, I wrote to him, privately and confidentially, 
instructing him to impose a fine equal to a month’s salary, should he 
find the man guilty. This was done. The Manager appealed to the 
High Court. But, rather to general surprise, the sentence was up¬ 
held, Many years afterwards, when dining at the Bengal Club 
with some High Court Judges, a discussion arose on the perennial 
subject of the complete independence of the judiciary from executive 
interference. I maintained that some guidance might be of ad¬ 
vantage, and told the story of this case. One of the company burst 
out laughing. 

“It was I who heard the appeal,” he said. “Your duffer of a 
magistrate had left your confidential letter pinned to the record. I 
felt mad for a while, but concluded that, after all, things had gone 
for* the best.” 

“The other case was still more serious. A coolie who had been 
flogged with a strirrup leather, under the direction of a young Euro¬ 
pean assistant, was killed by the punishment. He suffered from an 
enlarged spleen and this was ruptured. The young man, named 


364 



SOCIAL RELATION BETWEEN ENGLISHMEN AND INDIANS 

Bain, was'tried by a jury of planters, and, according to popular opi¬ 
nion, was assured of acquittal. But they found him guilty, and the 
judge—an officer of excellent discretion—-sentenced him to eighteen 
months* simple imprisonment. This may seem to be an Unduly 
light punishment. But it was a sufficient deterrent from the 
thoughtless use of flogging, and left the feelings of the planting com¬ 
munity unscandalized. I explained this to the Government of India. 
But Lord Curzon was dissatisfied, and ordered that an appeal should 
be made to the High Court for the enhancement of the sentence. 
This raised a storm amongst the European community of Calcutta, 
and the judge who heard the appeal actually acquitted Bain altoge¬ 
ther! I had felt very sorry for the youth. Beyond doubt, he had 
acted under the orders of his garden manager, and had refused to 
give him away—a married man with children to whom conviction 
would have been ruin. I had arranged that the English Police offi¬ 
cer who escorted him to prison in Calcutta should make things as 
smooth as possible for him. Meeting this officer after his return, I 
was told by him that after a whisky peg Bain had grown communi¬ 
cative. ‘You made one blooming error,* he said, ‘You. got hold 
of the wrong stirrup leather.” 68 * 

The first mse shows that according to both the head of the Pro¬ 
vince and the judge of the highest court in India, an offence of the 
most brutal type, involving the most shameful public dishonour to a 
woman, did not merit any higher punishment than a fine equivalent 
to a month’s salary, when the accused happened to be an English¬ 
man, and the victim, an Indian. 

Fuller’s own statement of the second case reveals the mentality 
of Europeans about the value of Indian life and the immunity with 
which it could be taken by any European. To the credit of Lord 
Curzon it must be said that he stood up boldly against this outrage 
on Indian sentiments. For this Lord Curzon’s Government was 
strongly denounced in the Anglo-Indian Press on the ground that 
there was undue interference with the freedom of the judiciary. 
Comment is superfluous and we need only refer to the case of Pennel 
jmd the draft letter written to the Magistrate by Fuller mentioned 
above. Lord Curzon’s interference did one good. It proved that 
European judges, even of the High Court, sacrificed all judicial sense 

to racial arrogance. 

It has been suggested by Lord Ronaldshay, the biographer of 
Lord Curzon, that the latter’s interference in this matter was merely 
nominal and that he probably signed the documents as a matter of 
formality. But fortunately there are other cases on record where 
we have definite evidence that Lord Curzon took a bold step against 

365 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

similar outrages on Indians by Europeans. The detailed minutes 
which he drew up in connection with some of these cases throw very 
interesting light on the whole history of similar offences and also 
the lenient manner in vhich the high officials concerned looked 
upon them. Indeed Lord Curzon’s stricture and denunciation are 
so revealing in character that no apology is needed for referring to 
these cases and to the minutes of Lord Curzon in some detail. The 
first case refers to an outrage committed in Rangoon on April 2, 
1899. ‘An elderly Burmese woman, named Ma Gun, while walking 
along a public road after performing her devotion at the Shwe Da- 
gon Pagoda, was seized by one soldier. He was soon joined by other 
soldiers and they all carried the woman to some rising ground and 
successively ravished her. She was then taken into a hollow and 
were again ravished by other soldiers. Two Burma ns and a Bur¬ 
mese woman, who were going along the road, reported the matter 
with the result that one soldier was caught on the spot but the rest 
dispersed. Some of the policemen who arrested this soldier stated 
that they saw this man rising from the woman ‘who was lying on 
her back, practically naked and in an exhausted condition.’ She 
was sent to the hospital, but her subsequent fate is uncertain. Ac¬ 
cording to the letter from the Chief Secretary to the Government 
of Burma to the Secretary to the Government of India, she escaped 
from the hospital almost immediately after she was taken there, 
but it appears from a note by Mr. Taw Sein Ko, Government Trans¬ 
lator, that the poor woman died in the hospital on April 4, and she 
remained almost unconscious after the outrage.’ 

In spite of the serious nature of the offence, and though one sol¬ 
dier was actually caught in the act, the authorities tried to hush up 
the whole matter and did not take any action, and Lord Curzon 
seriously took them to task and condemned them for their negligence 
of duty. 

The second case refers to a regiment newly arrived at Sialkot. 
At 9-30 p. m. two soldiers asked a native cook to procure a woman for 
them, and for having refused to do so he was set upon and brutally 
beaten by two men of the 9th Lancers. They broke two of his ribs, 
and he was left lying out all night. On the next morning he was 
found in such a feeble condition that he had to be carried on a 
stretcher to the hospital. His dying deposition was taken by the 
Cantonment Magistrate, and the high officials, who visited the scene 
of the outrage, found the ground still covered with big patches of 
blood. On the day after, he seemed so much better that they thought 
he might pull through. Thereupon everyone, civil and military com¬ 
bined, conspired to hush up the whole affair. No inquiry was 

3 66 


SOCIAL RELATION BETWEEN ENGLISHMEN AND INDIANS 

instituted, no evidence was taken, and until the man died a week or 
more later, nothing was done. 

The above account is taken from a minute of Lord Curzon him¬ 
self and there can be no question of doubting its authenticity in any 
particular. Lord Curzon concludes the above account with the 
following words: “In the post mortem the doctor found that the 
poor wretch had syphilis, but to contend that his death was due to any 
other cause than the savage assault by the soldiers, is out of the 
question.” 

Lord Curzon further states that within two months of the above 
tragedy some soldiers of the same regiment, namely, 9th Lancers, 
killed another native, a punkha~coolie , who expired from a kick 
inflicted upon him by a private. 

As in the Rangoon case, so in the Sialkot affairs, the authorities 
hushed up the whole affair and Lord Curzon had to reprimand them 
severely. A perusal of the minutes of Lord Curzon and other con¬ 
nected papers on the subject show in a staggering manner the utter 
callousness of the military authorities regarding the murder of Indians 
by English soldiers. We learn from Lord Curzon’s minutes that 
the authorities as a rule acted on the principle that these offences 
ought to be white-washed for fear of the scandal that they might 
cause. He says that this is the popular theory, but it is impossible 
for the Government of India to maintain it. Lord Curzon insisted 
that both the offending regiments should be punished as the soldiers 
conspired to withhold evidence against the particular offenders. The 
punishment was of a collective nature. The regiments were trans¬ 
ferred to undesirable stations and were precluded from joining some 
ceremonial parades. 

The following quotation from one of Lord Curzon’s minutes on 
this occasion puts the whole situation in a true colour. Although 
it is a long extract it will repay perusal: 

“When I came to this country I found that in spite of excellent 
pronouncements on the part of many of my predecessors, the number 
of cases of violent collision between Europeans and natives was in¬ 
creasing with a rapidity that appeared to me to be dangerous and 
menacing. I found also that the general temper and inclination of 
the European , as illustrated by the attitude of many of our officers, 
both military and civil, by the tone of the English newspapers, by 
the verdict of juries and by any other test that it was possible to 
apply , was in favour of glossing over and palliating rather than of 
exposing and punishing these crimes. I found that they were of 
more frequent occurrence in the army than elsewhere, not because 


367 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


the British soldier is a worse behaved individual than the British 
civilian, but because of the immense numerical superiority of the 
British army over any other class of white men in this country, be¬ 
cause of the exceptional opportunities for accident and collision af¬ 
forded by the shooting Rules as they then existed, and because of 
the contemptuous attitude that is entertained towards natives by the 
class from which the bulk of our soldiers are drawn. I found that 
in the recorded cases of violence between British soldiers and na¬ 
tives in the previous 20 years the result had been that 84 natives 
had been killed as compared with only 5 Europeans, and 57 natives 
seriously injured as compared with 15 Europeans, and 49 natives 
slightly injured as compared with 7 Europeans. I further found that 
so strong is the racial feeling in this country between the dominant 
and the subject race, that in the last half century on only two oc¬ 
casions have Europeans ever been hanged for the murder of natives, 
though the cases proved against them may be counted by the score. 
Then came the Rangoon outrage (which would never have been in¬ 
vestigated at all but for my intervention, since when I first mentioned 
it to the then Commander-in-Chief nearly two months after it had 
happened, it had never so much as been reported to him); but from 
which I learned that it was possible , even in the face of one of the 
most appalling and shameful outrages that can be conceived , for all 
the leading officers to join together in a conspiracy to defeat the 
ends of justice and to screen the guilty. I have seen other cases— 
that of the soldier O’Gara at Urn ball a who smashed in the head 
of a p unkha-coolie with a dumb-bell, that of the soldier O’Sullivan 
at Calcutta who murdered a tailor and then feigned madness, and 
many others, in which there has been the most wholesale perjury 
and an attempt at all hazard to get the guilty European off. I could 
allude to a score of other cases in which little or no assistance has 
been lent by the authorities involved towards the detection and 
punishment of obvious and palpable crime. Now what has been my 
feeling about these cases? I am not so foolish as to ignore the senti¬ 
ment of racial prejudice which they illustrate or to sit in judgment 
upon what may seem to be the moral obliquity of my fellow country¬ 
men. 

“I know that as long as Europeans, and particularly a haughty 
race like the English, rule Asiatic people like the Indians, incidents 
of hubris (sic) and violence will occur and that the white man will 
tend to side with the white skin against the dark. But I also know, 
and have acted throughout on the belief, that it is the duty of states¬ 
manship to arrest these dangerous symptoms, and to prevent them 
from attaining dimensions that might even threaten the existence 
of our rule in the future.” 69 


368 


SOCIAL RELATION BETWEEN ENGLISHMEN AND INDIANS 

It is hardly necessary to note that the English newspapers, as 
usual, were loud in their denunciation of Lord Curzon. But some¬ 
thing more serious than this followed. During the time of the Delhi 
Durbar in 1903, when the 9th Lancers, guilty of the Sialkot crime, 
were passing in parade before the Viceroy and the assembled guests, 
they received hearty ovation from the European spectators. In reply 
the Indians heartily cheered the Viceroy. It was impossible to mis¬ 
take the significance of all this, and Lord Curzon’s biographer tells 
us that the Viceroy felt deeply hurt at this demonstration of his 
countrymen. 

The following extracts from the correspondence between Lord 
Curzon and Lord George Hamilton are most revealing in respect of 
the attitude of Englishmen towards the Indians: 

1 . Hamilton to Curzon , 6 July , 1899- 

“You do not seem to be making much progress in bringing to 
justice the perpetrators of the Rangoon outrage. I am very glad to 
find that, in our letters, which crossed, the same idea pervades both 
—that, if these guilty cannot be convicted for want of evidence, 
some punishment should be inflicted upon the regiment. I am some¬ 
what perturbed at your remark that you believe that the number of 
cases of such outrages is on the increase. I have had an uneasy 
suspicion that such was the case, and I am afraid, that, if this is the 
fact, it is due to the knowledge that this class of offence can be com¬ 
mitted with comparative immunity from the extreme difficulty of 
obtaining a conviction from the jury. I understand that, ever since 
Ripon raised, by his inconceivable stupidity, racial feeling in India, 
it has affected the decision of the juries in cases where they have to 
adjudicate between Europeans and Natives, and that, previous to 
Ripon’s advent in India, it was easier to get juries, no matter what 
their composition might be, to look at the question submitted to them 
impartially rather than from the standpoint of the colour of the de¬ 
fendant. The British soldier is treated with far greater conside¬ 
ration in India than in any other part of the world, and he is sur¬ 
rounded with comforts and with attendants such as he never gets 
elsewhere; and if, under such conditions, he misuses his power or 
superior strength, I quite agree that it is for you to take some notice 
of such improper conduct. But pray, be very cautious and circum¬ 
spect in anything that you propose. I admit that this class of outrage 
is perhaps more damaging to our rule, and creates more deep- 
seated resentment in the Native mind, than any class of transactions 
connected with our rule in India. To successfully arrest and diminish 
this class of offence it is necessary to carry with you, to a certain 

369 

B.P.I.R.—24 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

extent, Anglo-Indian opinion. I recollect Lytton issuing a Minute, 
the substance of which was indisputably correct, and in connection 
with a case in which a European, who had accidentally killed a 
Native, had been subjected to ridiculously lenient sentence. But 
it created a great uproar at the time, and undoubtedly subjected 
JLytton to very great unpopularity, and this diminished for the 
future bis influence with Europeans in India.” 

2. Hamilton to Curzon, 27 July , 1900 

"‘These cases, constant as they seem to be, of misconduct of 
certain members of the Civil Service, by which collisions are pro¬ 
voked with Natives, are very distressing. It argues a low tone 
and utter absence of either a sense of duty or of that honour which 
we are supposed to associate with gentlemen in responsible posi¬ 
tions. About five and twenty years ago we tapped a very bad 
stratum of the social world, and the Indian Civil Service is, I think, 
now paying the penalty. The class from which many of the can¬ 
didates then came was not only socially very inferior, but the boys 
had no University, and many of them no public school education. 
They were coached in London, lived in London, and got an entirely 
erroneous idea of what a gentleman’s conceptions and aspirations 
should be, and were sent out to India at the worst stage of hobble¬ 
dehoy ism.” 

3. Curzon to Harriilton, 17 September , 1900. 

‘‘I am sorry to say that, in the whole of my campaign on the 
subject of these accidents and collisions, I meet with nothing but 
tacit discouragement and sublatent antagonism from the soldiers. 
They are banded together throughout India in a compact body, ani¬ 
mated by the fiercest espirit de corps. They will wink at things 
done by a fellow soldier, which they would denounce if committed 
by a civilian. The moment one is censured, all the rest are up in 
arms. They cannot see why the poor soldier should not be allowed 
to go out, and shoot and harry at his own sweet will; and if in the 
course of the excursion a Native is killed, their attitude is that of 
a very fast bowler at cricket whom I once met, and who having 
killed a man by the ball jumping up and striking him on the temple, 
said to me, ‘why did the d-d fool get his head in the way?’ Noth¬ 
ing to me since I came to India has been more surprising or more 
disappointing than the attitude and capacities of the leading mem¬ 
bers of the Military service....I told the Commander-in-Chief 
quite plainly that I had not taken up this affair in order to be de¬ 
feated or baffled.... 


370 


SOCIAL RELATION BETWEEN ENGLISHMEN AND INDIANS 

“Since I last wrote to you there has been another bad case. 
At Dinapur, where as you know, there has been much ill-feeling 
between the soldiers and the Natives, one of the Munsters has 
stabbed a washerman.” 

(Curzon then relates that in "Fort William a British soldier 
murdered an Indian tailor against whom he had a grudge and plead¬ 
ed insanity. Another soldier hit a boy without any provocation with 
a stove and broke his leg.) 

4. Curzon to Hamilton, 28 August, 1901 . 

“I was talking last night with MacDonnell about the case in 
the Cawnpore Cotton mill, which I mentioned to you last week. He 
admitted the flagrant inadequacy of the sentence imposed by the Ma¬ 
gistrate; but said that it is of no use to take such cases to the High 
Court. Such is their admitted partiality and incompetence.” 

(In this case a European Supervisor kicked a coolie who lay 
insensible and unattended for 3 hours after which he was removed 
to his house where he died. The European was fined Rs. 300/-.) 

5. Hamilton to Curzon, 2 October, 1901. 

(Reference to the papers sent by Curzon on the Travancore Plan¬ 
ter’s case, in which a European planter flogged an Indian to death). 
“It would appear that in India, where we have established for ge¬ 
nerations a complete code of criminal law and procedure, the Euro¬ 
pean claims an immunity from punishment for murder and assault 
when committed upon the person of a Native that even in the wildest 
parts of West coast of Africa is not given to European officials .” 

6. Curzon to( Hamilton, 29 January, 1903. 

“In this very week has come up another case of three soldiers 
who, in violation of the shooting rules, were engaged in shooting in 
the vicinity of a native village, and shot, though they fortunately 
did not kill, a native boy. They were then set upon and hustled by 
the villagers. The latter were tried by the District Magistrate, a 
young Englishman of only three years’ service. He delivered one 
of the most partisan and monstrous judgments that 1 have ever read , 
letting the soldiers off scot-free, sentencing the villagers to savage 
terms of imprisonment, and inflicting ten stripes upon the wounded 
boy. Just before I left Delhi I had a similar case of three soldiers, 
who assaulted and shot a native Forest Guard down at Madras, who 
had come up and asked them what they were doing in the forest 
reserve. The three men were identified out of the whole regiment, 


371 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

though one of them had shaved off his moustache to escape recogni¬ 
tion. They were proved to have been out shooting without passes 
on that day, they were proved to have been in the very reserve 
where the assault took place, and they were shown to be the only 
three British soldiers out shooting on that day. Nevertheless, be¬ 
cause the Forest Guard was the only actual witness of the assault 
upon himself, and because he was a native, his testimony was dis¬ 
credited and the case against the men was dismissed. There, again, 
the Collector delivered a judgment saturated with gross partiality- 
I spoke to Ampthill (Lord Ampthill, Governor of Madras) about it, 
and the case is now being taken by Government for a re-hearing be¬ 
fore the High Court. None of these cases are known to the public. 
They are more or less successfully kept out of the newspapers, and 
no one, except at headquarters, where, of course, the soldiers never say 
a word about the subject, has any knowledge of the state of things 
that goes on from one end of India to the other, and of the terrible 
injustice that prevails.” 69 * 

Lord Curzon’s minutes and correspondence have been quoted 
at some length in order to give a quietus to those apologists of British 
justice in India who have been able, after laborious research, to 
hunt out a few cases where Englishmen were adequately punished, 
even sentenced to capital punishment, by British judges, and parade 
them before the public. The conspicuousness of such instances is 
the best evidence of their rarity. Lord Curzon, than whom there 
can be no greater authority on this subject, categorically states that 
during the latter half of the nineteenth century only two Europeans 
were hanged for the murder of the natives, though there were scores 
of such offenders whose crime was definitely proved. The attitude 
of the British judges, juries and the Anglo-Indian public and news¬ 
papers, to which Lord Curzon has drawn such a pointed attention, 
proves, as nothing else could prove, the real attitude of the British 
towards the Indians, and it can be hardly denied that the Britishers 
who lived in India formed an unholy alliance to deny justice to the 
Indians as against any one with a white skin. These are no doubt 
strong words and a severe indictment which no historian should 
indulge in except on very conclusive evidence. But such evidence 
we possess in this particular case. 

Sir Walter Strickland, a British Baronet, is the author of a small 
booklet, entitled British Justice and Honesty, from which a few 
extracts are quoted below: 

“The English in India and elsewhere boast of their even-handed 
justice. As English by birth, my personal experience is that this 

372 


SOCIAL RELATION BETWEEN ENGLISHMEN AND INDIANS 




boast has no foundation whatever... .A Singapore paper not long 
ago stated that it was no uncommon thing for Burmese defendants 
to be flogged to death in their own prison at Rangoon....This scharf - 
richter mode of meting out “even-handed justice” is apparently had 
recourse to by the jaded, drunken alien to save himself the trouble 
of hearing the defence. I called on the editor of this paper and he 
assured me that his authority for the statement was unimpeachable. 
In spite of this, I should be inclined to doubt it, were it not for the 
following fact, notorious all over Rangoon. Not very long ago an 
Irish private soldier murdered a beautiful Burmese girl whom he 
was “in love”(!) with and her mother, and then raped one or both of 
the still warm bodies. For this little error of judgment he who 
awarded such comfortable quarters in Rangoon gaol that he has no 
desire whatever to quit them.... These instances, which might 
he multiplied a hundred-fold , are enough to demonstrate that the 
parochial English are quite incompetent to deal out even-handed 
justice when their own ‘superior* race and ‘inferior’ ‘nigger’ ones are 
in question.” 

Apart from isolated cases of ill-treatment to individual Indians, 
some form of cruel treatment had hardened into a normal practice. 
Lord Minto, Viceroy of India (1905-10), when asked by the Secretary 
of State of the allegations of insolence and cruelty of the English 
towards the Indians, wrote in a letter, dated 28 May, 1906, to Morley: 
“It does exist, and to me it is galling to see a symptom of it, and if 
galling to me how much more so to them”. But then he took com¬ 
fort in the idea that things were much worse before. “He (Minto) 
had memories of bad dinners in Afghanistan, and young Neville 
Chamberlain’s commonplace request to Sir Fred. Roberts—‘Please, 
Sir , can I beat the cook?’—-a ceremony at once approved and sum¬ 
marily performed” 691 * 

Before bringing this review to a close it is necessary to point 
out that some of the worst phases of British attitude towards the 
Indians persisted throughout the century and they found their spokes¬ 
men ip writers like Rudyard Kipling. It is hardly necessary to point 
out that the number of Englishmen, who formed their opinion from 
these writers and were influenced by them, exceeded more than thou¬ 
sand times those on whom the speeches and writings of the few 
liberal-minded Englishmen and friends of India produced any effect. 

The Bengalis, who were more advanced in political ideas, were 
the bete noire of the Jingo imperialists. A strong anti-Bengali feel¬ 
ing, to which reference has been made above, 690 marked the average 
Englishmen throughout the nineteenth century. To what extreme 
the vilification of the Bengalis proceeded, unchecked by sober Eng- 


373 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

lishmen, may be judged from the following extracts from an article 
published in 1855 in the Calcutta Review: 

“What Jew looked for any good thing out of Galilee? What 
Anglo-Indian looked for fighting in Bengal?... , 

“The cowardice of a Bengali is indeed a thing by itself.... 

“Like a pate de foie gras from Strassbourg, or Eau de Cologne 
from Jean Marie Farina, or shawls from Cashmere, or rose-water 
from Ghazeepore, cowardice from Bengal is the only genuine com¬ 
modity of the name. All other specimens are but imperfect and 
spurious.... 

“Bengal of course must be inhabited by Bengalis, and what are 
Bengalis, but the sleek, cringing sircar, the fat plausible Baboo, 
the be-Bacon’d and be-Shakespear’d School-boy, the lying witness, 
the patient coolie, whom we meet every day? These are metropoli¬ 
tan specimens. Provincial Bengalis are the same, unsophisticated, 
and uneducated; mere varieties of the timid, cunning, perfidious 
race, which dynasty after dynasty has conquered, used and 
despised.... 

“First in the row, look at the Bengali; for in all his phases, 
as a citizen, a villager, a rich man, a poor man, a rajah, 
a ryot, an ignoramous, a school-boy, a Brahmin, a Sudra, a Bengali 
is the antithesis of a warrior. He is dressed unlike a man of action, 
according to our modern ideas of dress. Physically he is weak, 
effiminate, sedentary, of low stature, of dark colour, of mild counte¬ 
nance. He possesses an intellect susceptible of the highest polish, 
but not of remarkable strength or vigour. Morally he is cunning, 
treacherous, cowardly, avaricious, a victim to a degrading supersti¬ 
tion, and, we must add, terribly false. No nation on earth presents 
a more uniform surface. But the man must have very little sense, 
or very little experience, who fails to detect a Bengali under any 
disguise. His slender frame cannot be concealed even by occasional 
obesity. No swaggering will cover his constitutional cowardice. No 
affectation or nonchalance his characteristic cunning. No educa¬ 
tion his national peculiarities. In his case it may safely be said— 
Ex uno disco onines (From one you may learn all). 

“Next, what is to be done with the Bengalis? They are cer¬ 
tainly not savages; and yet what are they? Are they civilized or 
uncivilized? Calcutta philanthropists will, we suppose, decide for 
the former alternative; but we may doubt whether they are justi¬ 
fied in doing so. If civilization means merely softness of character 
and manner, we allow that they are civilized. If civilization means 
a spread of education, erection of public works, commercial pur- 


374 


SOCIAL RELATION BETWEEN ENGLISHMEN AND INDIANS 


suits and such like, we allow that the country is civilized. But if 
civilization means that wholesome and prosperous state of society 
fitted for self-government, that good hearty condition, as Leigh Hunt 
has it, ‘a state of manhood befitting man/ we cannot save ourselves 
from saying that Bengal of the Bengalis is not civilized. Civiliza¬ 
tion, in its highest sense, means a manly, vigorous, national existence 
at its zenith. We decline to award the name either to effete or to 
weak Infantine societies. Hie Bengalis are in one or other of these 
positions. It is difficult to determine in which. But between the 
two alternatives, we may gather that Bengal civilization is not yet. 

“Bengal of the Bengalis is a land of cowards and liars; and 
what remark can convey a more signal proof of hopelessness? A 
race of savages is more hopeful than a race of cowards and liars. 
Germs of civilized manliness may lie deep in the former; but the 
latter is a stock on which little good can be engrafted. What is to 
be done with a nation of cowards?... 

“Bengal of the Bengalis is plainly then in no good way. A 
Mcrison’s pill of Baboos in Council, or on the Sudder Bench, in 
whatever numbers, will not cure its distemper. We are curious to 
see what the new educational regime in the hands of Mr. Pratt will 
effect. In the meanwhile it must not forget its degradation. It must 
be ground down. It must be kept low, even in the dust. It is but 
a race of women, not men!” 70 

Such wild ravings might have been ignored as the result of 
eccentricity or mental aberration on the part of one or a few. But 
what gives them significance and importance is the fact that they 
were considered fit to be published in a reputed journal like the 
Calcutta Review , the most distinguished organ of the cultured Eng¬ 
lish society. The passage is ostensibly a caricature of the Bengalis, 
but it is really a faithful pen-picture of the debased anti-Indian me¬ 
galomania of a section, perhaps a large section, of the British com¬ 
munity in India in the nineteenth century. 

When the great Brahma leader Keshab-chandra Sen visited Eng¬ 
land, he delivered a lecture containing powerful indictment of the 
general conduct of the Britishers in India in their dealings with the 
natives of the country, as well as of the excise policy (liquor traffic) 
of the British Government in India. Keshab was “unanimously and 
vigorously abused” by the Anglo-Indian Press and almost every 
Englishman discontinued his subscription to the Indian Mirror , edit¬ 
ed by Keshab. An Englishman in Bombay publicly threw out a 
challenge that he would give Rs. 500 to anyone who would venture 
to read the lectures in his presence while he stood horsewhip in 
hand. 70 * 


375 


THE BRITISH PAKAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

The Indian feeling in respect of such attitude of the English¬ 
men was best expressed by Professor Gilbert Murray of Oxford in his 
address at the opening of the Conference on Nationalities and Sub¬ 
ject Races. We subjoin an extract: 

“If ever it were my fate to administer a Press Law, and put 
men in prison for the books they write and the opinions they stir 
up among their countrymen, I should not like it, but I should know 
where to begin. I should first of all lock up my old friend, Rudyard 
Kipling, because in several stories, he has used his great powers to 
stir up in the minds of hundreds of thousands of Englishmen a blind 
and savage contempt for the Bengali. And many Bengalis naturally 
have read these stories. You cannot cherish a savage contempt for 
anyone without its being quickly reciprocated. And when both 
sides regard each other with the same savage contempt it is not 
likely that they can dwell together in peace. And in case Mr. Kipling 
should feel lonely in his cell, I would send him a delightful com¬ 
panion, Mr- Anstey of Punch. Year after year, clever natives of 
India come over to England at great sacrifice of money and trouble, 
to study in our Universities and satisfy the tests for obtaining posi¬ 
tions in their own country. They compete with us well, and with 
all the odds against them. And year after year they have found in 
our greatest newspaper caricatures of themselves—ridiculous Ba- 
boos, cowardly, vain, untruthful, in every way absurd, talking bad 
and bombastic English (not nearly so correct, I suppose, as Mr. 
Anstey } s Hindustani), held up for the amusement of the public. Now 
if these men are to be in any sense our subjects, that sort of thing 
is not fair play. It is not fair play, and it is not decent policy. 
If you must insult somebody, insult one who is free and can 
hit you back. If you want to govern a man, and to have 
him as a loyal and friendly citizen—well, you must give up that 
luxury. You cannot govern the man and insult him too. This in¬ 
cessant girding at the Bengali, the most intellectual and progressive 
of the peoples of India, has an ugly look. It goes along with much 
irritable hostility to the Congress, to the students, to almost every 
Indian society that professes high aims—such, for instance, as the 
Arya Samaj. There is in such sneers something perilously like 
jealousy. And if ever in a ruling race there creeps in a tendency to 
be jealous of its subjects, to hate them for their good qualities rather 
than their bad, to keep them out of power not because they are 
unfit for power, but because they are too obviously fit; such a ten¬ 
dency is, I believe, disastrous to any Empire, and the individuals 
and parties who foster and inflame it have forfeited their claim to 
stand among thereat leaders and governors of the world.” 71 


376 


SOCIAL RELATION BETWEEN ENGLISHMEN AND INDIANS 


The last sentence in the above extract seems to give a very 
correct analysis of the Anglo-Indian mentality and reflects the sen¬ 
timent of educated Indians during the latter part of the nineteenth 
century. But even the utterance of such eminent Englishmen had 
little salutary effect upon the power-intoxicated Englishmen in 
India. 

That the arrogance and social exclusiveness of the British per¬ 
sisted up to the very end, would be apparent to any one who reads 
the account of Joseph Chailley, mentioned above. This distingui¬ 
shed Frenchman has described the British attitude towards the 
Indians as he found it at the beginning of this century, just at the 
close of the period covered by this volume. Some of his views have 
been quoted above. 72 He has also referred to the justification 
offered by the British for their social exclusiveness in India. Some 
Englishmen told him: “It is not we who keep the natives at arm’s 
length, it is they who hold aloof from us. Caste and its rules, to 
say nothing of their personal tastes, prevents intimate relations”. 
The Englishmen then described the orthodox customs like purdah. 
Chailley was also told: “Can innocent English girls or married 
ladies...........be really intimate with Indian women, who are so 

much nearer a state of nature and are slaves to their husbands”? A 
young Englishman said to Chailley, “The mere smell of a native 
woman would prevent one marrying her”. 73 

Anyone who has any knowledge about the educated Indians— 
men and women-—in the opening years of this century would And 
the hollowness and shameless character of these excuses. How far 
Chailley was deceived by these excuses and explanations of the 
British may be judged by his cursory remark that if a young English 
girl marrying an Indian in England arrives in India, she will not be 
received in English society. He also mentions that a Bengali I. C. S. 
told him, “My European colleagues treat me as an inferior and patro¬ 
nise me”. 74 Blunt also repudiated the arguments of the English¬ 
men on the strength of his personal experience in India. 716 

The real explanation of the British attitude towards the Indians 
is to be found not only in racial arrogance and the mentality develop¬ 
ed by a conquering nation towards the conquered, to which reference 
has been made at the beginning of this chapter, but also in certain 
inherent characteristics of the Englishmen. Mr. T.G.P. Spear has 
referred to many of these in his very interesting and illuminating 
book, The Nabobs , from which a few extracts are quoted at random. 76 

“Insularity of the English character made the English persist 
in their customs and habits of life even in most unfavourable cir¬ 
cumstances.” The Englishmen possessed “a maximum of national 


377 




THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


pride and a minimum of desire to understand the country’'. They 
thought “it was the extremity of bad taste to appear in anything of 
Indian manufacture”, and exclaimed, “How nice India would be if 
it wasn’t for the Indians”. In reality “India became an unknown 
country to the English inhabitants of Calcutta and Madras”. Blunt 
also observed: “No Collector’s wife will wear an article of Indian 
manufacture to save her soul from perdition, and all her furniture 
even her carpets must be of English make.” 77 

Chailley remarked: “The Anglo-Indian, whether he be an offi¬ 
cial or a non-official, is usually interested in India only by reason of 
the income he derives from it and the use which it is to his country”. 78 
Anyone who has dispassionately read the history of India in 
the nineteenth century would find it difficult not to agree, generally, 
with this observation. 

It is, however, only fair to point out that the British attitude to¬ 
wards the Indians was partly the result of a superiority complex—the 
superiority of the white race over the black—which swept the whole 
of Europe during the nineteenth century. This has been very tersely 
put by an Englishman as follows: “There can be no question that 
the twenty-five years which have elapsed since 1884 have seen a 
change in the attitude of the white races of mankind towards their 
fellowmen of other hue and lineage, and in their avowed conduct 
towards them”. The Christian teaching of human brotherhood “has 
given place to a pseudo-scientific doctrine of the fundamental in¬ 
equalities of the human kind which, true as a statement of fact, has 
been exaggerated and made political use of to excuse white selfi¬ 
shness and white exclusiveness, and to reinforce the white man’s 
pretension of rightful dominion over the non-white world at large.” 79 


1. Mill, J. S., Considerations on Representative Government, Chapter XVIII, p. 
113. 

2. Private Journal of the Marquess of Hastings, p. 17. 

3. Mill, n. pp. 109, 115, 148, 342, 365-6. 

4. Garratt-I, 398-9. 

5. Shore, F.J., Notes on Indian Affairs, 2 Vols. (1847). 

6. Spear, T.G.P., pp. 134-44. 

7. Chailley, p. 192. 

8. 1HRC, XXI. 50. 

9. Mitra, Kishorichand, Memoirs of Dwarakanath Tagore, p. 53, 

10. Ibid, 54. 

11. Spear, T.G.P., 140. 

12. THG. 306 ( 274). Hie bracketed figure refers to page number in 1958 edition. 

13. Memoirs , 54. 

14. Spear, T.G.P., 140. 

14a. Vol. IX, p. 346. 

15. Life of Digambar Mitra, 1.110. 

16. Emily Eden, Up the Country, p. 55. 

17. Cotton-1, 42. 

18. Garratt-H, 398. Cf. also, Mayhew, 147. 

18a. Cf. p. 153. 

19. See Vol. IX, pp. 918, 933-6. 


378 



SOCIAL RELATION BETWEEN ENGLISHMEN AND INDIANS 


20. See pp. 15-6. 

21. See p. 285. 

21a. Original Records in Madras Archives. 

22. Spear, T.G.P., 141-2. 

23. Routledge, 277-8. 

24. Cotton-II, 65. 

25. Cotton-L 69-70. 

26. H. P. Ghose, p. 26. 

27. Ibid, 26-7. 

28. Ibid. 

29. Blunt-I, 152. 

29a. Ibid, 263. 

29b. Ibid.. 

30. Ibid, 264-66; cf. also pp. 140-41. 

31. Ibid, 174. 

32. The passage has been quoted in full in Vol. IX, p. 871. 

33. THG. 391 (348). 

34. Ibid, 391-2 (348-9). 

35. Ibid. 

36. Sunderland, 72. 

37. Ibid. 

38. Cf. Vol. IX, pp. 591-602. 

39. Gotton-II, 79. For strong denunciation of the Whipping Act by the Indians, cf. 
four articles by Girish-chandra Ghosh, in the Hindoo Patriot, 12 September, 
1861, and in the Bengalee, 24 February. 15 December, and 22 December, 1866. 
The last two disclose the horrible nature of flogging inflicted even for petty 
offences. A boy of eight, who stole a guava, died as a result of the flogging. 
(Selections from the writings of Girish Chunder Ghose, the Founder and 
First Editor of “The Hindoo Patriot” and “The Bengalee”, edited by Manma- 
thanath Ghosh, Calcutta, 1912, pp. 396, 576, 646, 654. 

40. Garratt-I, 116. 

41. Ibid, 115. 

42. Ibid. 

43. Ibid, 118. The term Anglo-Indian in this chapter includes all persons of pure 
or mixed British blood residing permanently or temporarily in India. 

44. Blunt-I, 261. 

45. Andrews and Mookerji, 85. 

46. Blunt-I, 74. 

47. Blunt-H 44-46; Blunt-I. 60. 

48. Spear, 140. 

49. Ibid, 141. 

50. Blunt-I, 218. 

51. THG. 414. 

52. Cotton-II, 65-6. 

53. Andrews and Mookerjee, 81. 

54. Chailley, 193. 

54a. See pp. 26-7. 

55. Blunt-I. 265. For the incident, see above, pp. 347-48. 

56. Ibid. 145. 

57. Buckland, I. 428-9. Cf. G.C. Ghose’s article in the Hindo Patriot, 11 May, 1854 
(Selections, 159). 

58. Garratt-I, 116-7. 

59. Morrison, Imperial Rule, 27-8. 

59a. Ibid, 28. 

59a. Ibid, 38. 

60. Cotton-II, 124-5. Italics mine 

61. Cotton-II, 166-8. Italics mine. 

62. Blunt-I, 163. 

63. Cf. Vol. IX, p. 904. 

64. Cotton-II, 111-3. Italics mine. A pension of Rs. 300 per month was granted to 
Cowan from the Indian exchequer (Essays Presented to Sir Jadunath Sarkar, 
Edited by Dr. H.R. Gupta, p. 121). 

65. The trying Magistrate admitted that to avoid troubles, he consulted the Dis¬ 
trict Magistrate beforehand. He said: “What I mean is that sometimes when 
cases are disposed of. and Magistrates do not like it, that they find fault and so 
I settled beforehand’’. 


379 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


66. The full details of the case are given by H. Das Gupta in his Bengali work 
‘Bharater Jatiya Congress’ , I. 204-15. 

67. Vol. IX, p. 923. 

68. Blunt-X, 268. 

68a. The italics in the above extracts are not in the original. 

69. Home Department Public A—1899, Nos. 220-250; December, 1902, Nos. 390- 
400. Italics mine. 

69a. Unpublished Records in CRO, London. Italics mine. (These letters have since 
been published. Cf. A.K. Majumdar, Advent of Independence, pp. -319 ff.) 
69b. BPP. LXXX. Part II (1960), p. 72. 

69c. See pp. 23-4, 338-9. 

70. CR. July, 1853. pp. 138-40, 146, 155-6. 

70a. B.C. Pal, Brahmo Samaj and the Battle of Swaraj in India, p. 60. 

71. Quoted in the Modem Review, VHI. 463. 

72. See pp. 340, 355. 

73. Chailley, 195. 

74. Ibid, 193. 

75. Blunt-I, 262. 

76. For these extracts, see pp. 126, 142, 182. 

77. Blunt-I, 248. 

78. Chailley, 197. 

79. Blunt-I. 233. 




380 


CHAPTER X (XLVni) 

BRITISH POLICY TOWARDS INDIA 

The final collapse of the Maratha powers and the consolidation 
of the British dominion in India quickened the imperial instincts of 
Britain, and henceforth the British people looked upon this vast sub* 
continent as their own. Though nominally India was the posession 
of a private trading company, the British Government treated her 
as an imperial domain, existing for the benefit of the English peo¬ 
ple as a whole. This idea, though of gradual growth, was firmly 
established during the period under review. Nor was it unnatural: 
Lord Ellenborough wrote to Queen Victoria in January, 1843, that 
4 ‘he can see no limit to the future prosperity of India if it be gov¬ 
erned with due respect for the feelings and even the prejudices, 
and with a careful regard for the interests, of the people, with the 
resolution to make their well-being the chief object of the Govern¬ 
ment, and not the pecuniary advantages of the nation of strangers 
to which Providence has committed the rule of this distant empire.” 1 
But it was a big “If”. Such a lofty ideal of ruling a conquered 
country for the interest of the conquered had no place in the prac¬ 
tical politics anywhere in the world. It is a curious coincidence that 
at the very moment when Ellenborough penned these lines, a British 
historian told the very plain truth that “it is remarkable that the 
interests of India should be invariably sacrificed whenever they are 
the subject of British legislation.” 2 

It is easy to pick up from the writings and speeches of English¬ 
men, and even from the Acts of the British Parliament, ‘pious plati¬ 
tudes*, and occasionally even sincere professions, of the high ideal of 
ruling India for the interest of the Indians alone, treating Indians with 
justice and fair play, and making an earnest effort to make them 
fit for ruling their own country. Nor is it difficult, on the other hand, 
to quote very frank expressions to the effect that India was a con¬ 
quered country, and must ever remain so for the benefit of English¬ 
men. The history of Indo-British relations leaves no doubt that the 
latter class alone represented the real voice and will of the British 
people as a whole, whatever might have been the views of individual 
Britons. 

A generous sympathy towards the Indians and their political 
aspirations was expressed by many Englishmen, including high 
officials. 


381 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


This is what we find in The Private Journal of the Marquess 
of Hastings under date, the 17th of May, 1818: 

“A time not very remote will arrive when England will, on 
sound principles of policy, wish to relinquish the domination which 
she has gradually and unintentionally assumed over this country, 
and from which she cannot at present recede. In that hour it would 
be the proudest boast and most delightful reflection that she had 
used her sovereignty towards enlightening her temporary subjects, 
so as to enable the native communities to walk alone in the paths 
of justice, and to maintain with probity towards their benefactress 
that commercial intercourse in which we should then find a solid 
interest.” 3 

Elphinstone wrote in 1819 that The most desirable death for us 
to die of should be the improvement of the natives reaching such a 
pitch as would render it impossible for a foreign nation to retain 

the Government; but this seems at an immeasurable distance. 

A time of separation must come; and it is for our interest to have 
an early separation from a civilised people, rather than a rupture 
with a barbarous nation, in which it is probable that all our settlers 
and even our commerce would perish, along with all the institutions 
we had introduced into the country.” 4 

Only a few men were sufficiently far-sighted to realize that a 
paternal foreign government contains within itself the seeds of its 
own decay. Next to the Marquess of Hastings and Elphinstone a 
writer in the Anglo-Indian paper, the India Gazette, made a remarka¬ 
ble statement in 1820, which has proved to be almost prophetic in 
character. After referring to the spread of education, establish¬ 
ment of peace and security, and other benefits of the British rule, 
he continues: “All these will have the inevitable effect of 
qualifying the people of India for enjoying political and civil liberty 
and of furnishing them both with the will and the power to claim 
what they deem to be their rights. The separation of India from Great 
Britain cannot in the nature of things be prevented. It must come 
sooner or later; and after appropriating to the mother country all 
the advantages which colonial possessions can confer during the 
period of our rule, the true system of governing them should aim 
to provide that the separation shall be safe, gradual and friendly, 
whenever it may take place, so as to prevent the possible evils and 
secure the greatest benefits both to Great Britain and her colonies 
when the power of the former shall cease.” 6 

Thomas Munro also expressed a similar view: “We should look 
upon India, not as a temporary possession, but as one which is to 


382 



BRITISH POLICY TOWARDS INDIA 


be maintained permanently until the natives shall in some future 
age have abandoned most of their superstitions and prejudices, and 
become sufficiently enlightened to frame a regular government for 
themselves, and to conduct and preserve it. Whenever such a time 
shall arrive, it will probably be best for both countries that the Bri¬ 
tish control over India should be gradually withdrawn.” 6 

Sir Charles Trevelyan also hoped that as a result of education 
the Indians would achieve independence without any struggle or mu¬ 
tual exasperation and “we shall have exchanged profitable subjects 
for still more profitable allies.” 7 That many others, even some English 
officers, held similar views between 1829 and 1832, is testified by 
Jacquemont’s letters from India. 8 All these were cast into shade 
by the speech of Lord Macaulay in the House of Commons in the 
course of the discussion of the Charter Act of 1833. The following pas¬ 
sage has become classic, and though often quoted, will bear repetition. 

“It may be that the public mind of India may expand under 
our system till it has outgrown that system; that by good govern¬ 
ment we may educate our subjects into a capacity for better govern¬ 
ment; that, having become instructed in European knowledge, they 
may, in some future age, demand European institutions. Whether 
such a day will ever come I know not. But never will I attempt 
to avert or to retard it. Whenever it comes, it will be the proudest 
day in English history.” 9 

As the nineteenth century rolled on such sentiments gradually 
evaporated. By the end of the century, even the most liberal Bri¬ 
tish Premier would not go further than what Gladstone observed in 
1877: “Our title to be in India depends on a first condition that our 
being there is profitable to the Indian nations; and on a second con¬ 
dition that we can make them see and understand it to be profitable”; 
or said by way of passing remark ‘that India should be ruled by 
the Indians.* 10 But these casual expressions did not really mean 
much. 

As a striking contrast to these views reference may be made to 
the characteristic expressions of some high officials. Lord Ellen- 
borough said in the House of Lords: “Our very existence depended 
upon the exclusion of the (Indians from) military and political power. 
We have won the empire by the sword and we preserve it by the same 
means.” Lord Elgin also held out the threat that India was conquer¬ 
ed by the sword and shall be held by the sword. 10 * Lord Salisbury, 
who held the office of the Secretary of State for India before he became 
Prime Minister of Great Britain, spoke in the same strain. He spoke of 
the “blackman” with that indefinable menace of disdain, characteristic 
of the English Grand Seigneur. And it was he who cut short with 

383 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


a sharp word the mournful complaint about Indian wrongs presented 

by a member of Parliament: “What good these hypocrisies?. 

The Hindus know that they are governed by a ‘superior race’. When 
a man has a black, red, or yellow skin, and I should add when he 
has the ‘Providential’ chance of being governed by whites, he ought 
not to have, he has not in fact, an opinion. It is enough to bow down 
and utter thanks ” 11 Reference has been made above to similar 
expressions of views during the debate on the Council Act of 1892. 12 
In a public meeting in A. D. 1886, while discussing the Home 
Rule Bill for Ireland, Lord Salisbury remarked: “There were races 
like the Hottentots and even the Hindus, incapable of self- 
government.” 

The views of British statesmen during the last quarter of the 
nineteenth century more or less conformed to this pattern. They 
were determined not to grant representative institutions to the 
Indians nor to diminish the number of European officers in India. 
A few extracts may be quoted from the correspondence between the 
Secretary of State and the Viceroy 12 * to indicate the spirit of British 
administration in India. 

1. Cross to Dufferin, 17 February, 1887. 

“Of course anything like a representation with a population of 
250 millions is absurd—and it is never to be forgotten that the claims 
are raised by the educated few, very few in comparison with the 
population, but by a noisy and educated few.” 

2. Cross to Lansdowne , 23 January, 1890. 

(After referring to the Congress agitation for Permanent Settle¬ 
ment, an outcome of “the great blunder perpetuated in giving Ben¬ 
gal such a settlement,” Cross proceeds:) 

“This, however, to my mind, affords an additional reason for 
the greatest caution in the matter of adopting in any form the elec¬ 
tive principle. It was the election of some 86 Home Rulers which 

gave Mr. Gladstone’s mischievous scheme such an impetus_I am 

very glad at all events to find that both Lord Dufferin and yourself 
are entirely opposed to its being applied to the Supreme Council. 

I think that such a step would be fatal to our rule in India. As 
regards the Provincial Councils, I know from private correspondence 
that both Lord Reay and Lord Connemara are entirely against it, 
and I presume that their Councils would be of the same opinion.” 

3. Hamilton to Curzon, 14 April, 1899. 

“We cannot give the Natives what they want: representative 
institutions or the diminution of the existing establishment of Eqro- 


384 



BRITISH POLICY TOWARDS INDIA 

peans is impossible. That being so, it seems to me that we can 
only cultivate reciprocally friendly relations with them by showing 
interest in them personally, and by utilising opportunities for com¬ 
ing in contact with representative men and representative bodies.” 

• 

4. Hamilton to Curzon, 5 January , 1900. 

“Looking at the extreme difficulty of proposing any fresh mea¬ 
sures or schemes which will fit in with the aspirations of ‘young 
India,’ it is most desirable to encourage in every way we can ‘older 
India.’ It was through the noblemen and country gentlemen of 
India that the earlier civil servants of the East India Company gov¬ 
erned the country.” 

The British statesmen paid but scant attention to the views of 
the educated Indians. It would be hardly an exaggeration to say 
that they had supreme contempt for them. The two following ex¬ 
tracts are illuminating; 

5. Cross to Lansdowne, 11 April, 1890. 

“I read the comments on the Indian Councils Bill in the Indian 
papers, with much interest, and am well satisfied. I care nothing 
for the Babu comments.” 

i 

6. Hamilton to Elgin , 16 September, 1897. 

“If we can keep the affection of the fighting races and higher 
orders of society in India, we can ignore the dislike and disaffection 
of the intellectual non-fighting classes, the baboos, students and 
pleaders.” 

The attitude of the Eritish towards the appointment of Indians 
to senior administrative posts in India has been described later in 
detail. One or two interesting points may be noted here. 

There was a proposal from Lord Cross that an Indian should 
be a member of the Secretary of State’s Council. Dufferin and his 
Executive Council \ opposed this chiefly on the ground that no suit¬ 
able Indian could be found for such post. How little suitability 
counted in these matters will be evident from the following letter 
from Lord Hamilton to Lord Elgin, dated 12 November, 1896. 

“There is a strong feeling here that the Government should in 
some way mark its appreciation of Dr. (J.C.) Bose’s remarkable 
labours and researches in science. The highest scientists here express 
great admiration of the little man, who is undoubtedly the foremost 
scientific authority amongst the educational officers of the Indian Gov¬ 
ernment, both European and Native. He receives, however, the native 

.385 


B.P.I.R.—25 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


salary, only two-thirds of the salary of an European.To bring 

his salary up to the European standard would be an awkward prece¬ 
dent, but I think your ingenuity could suggest some other means of 
meeting his merits.” 

It was thus a fixed policy to keep even the senior Education 
Service a close preserve for the Europeans. That this was not at 
all due to superior merits of the latter was admitted even by Lord 
Curzon. On 1st October, 1901, he wrote to Hamilton: 

“The other day I saw with pleasure that you had appointed to 
the Indian Educational Service a young and distinguished Indian 
Graduate named Mr. Harinath De. I think this was a wise step. 
Our English professors and lecturers out here about whom I wrote 
recently to Godley, take such little interest as a rule in their pupils, 
and perform their duties so mechanically, and with so little real 
enthusiasm in their work, that perhaps a Native of ability, and who 
has received a good University training in England, may do better.” 

Yet, for many years to come, the appointment of an Indian to 
the Indian Educational Service was an exception rather than the 
rule. 

The British Governors-General, with perhaps a few exceptions 
like Ripon, were guided by the principles described above. Some 
of them, like Lytton and Curzon, made no secret of their motived 
and actions, while in most others, particularly Ellenborough, Dal- 
housie, and Dufferin, there was a wide gulf between professions and 
practices. But Ripon was decried and insulted by the Englishmen 
in India as will be described later. 

Worse fate befell Sir Charles Trevelyan, Governor of Madras, 
who disapproved Wilson’s financial budget presented in February, 
1860, embracing proposals for three taxes—income tax, a licence 
duty and an excise duty on home-grown tobacco,—and described its 
main provisions as “three tremendous taxes.” His unfavourable 
view in respect to the budget, besides exercising great influence with 
his colleagues at Madras and his principal officers, affected public 
opinion throughout Southern India. He then allowed the local news- 
papers to publish the protest which he had deemed it his duty to 
record against the proposed taxation. This publication caused ex¬ 
citement at Calcutta and other centres of opinion in India, and was 
thought to constitute an official collision between the Government 
of Madras and the Supreme Government. Sir Charles Trevelyan 
shortly left Madras (having been recalled by the Government of 
England) amidst the regrets of the whole country—European and 
native—in the Madras Presidency. 12b 


386 


BRITISH POLICY TOWARDS INDIA 


Lord William Bentinck has earned fame and popularity by his 
various reforms, notably the abolition of Sati, the introduction of 
English as the medium of higher education and the appointment of 
the Indians to higher appointments. But he was an imperialist to 
the core, and never desired the real uplift of India. This would 
be evident from his policy towards Mysore and the annexation of 
Coorg, Cachar and Jaintia, to which reference has been made 
above- 12c But more revealing in this respect is his Minute of 13 
March, 1835, i.e. just on the eve of his retirement from India. He 
emphasized the fact that in India “one hundred millions of people 
are under the control of a Government which has no hold whatever 
on their affections.” So he held that “spread of knowledge and ope¬ 
ration of the press weaken the respect for European character and 
prestige for British superiority,” and “regarded the higher elevation 
of character, knowledge, improved morality, courage, etc., on the 
part of the Indians as internal evils from the point of view of the 
British Government.” The irony of the whole thing is that it is to 
this Bentinck that Macaulay paid the following tribute which has 
been accepted by posterity as genuine truth: “Who never forgot 
that the end of government is the welfare of the governed; whose 
constant study it was to elevate the moral and intellectual character 
of the Government committed to his charge.” 

The India Office was. as a rule, antagonistic to the political aspi¬ 
rations of the Indians, for “the council of the Secretary of State has 
always been the stronghold of reactionary officialdom.” As Mr. Hume 
put it, “the India Office is an organization perpetually employed in 
popularizing the official view of all Indian questions.” 13 

The non-official Englishmen may be divided into three classes 
in respect of their attitude towards India. The majority of them 
made no secret of their imperialism of the Jingo type, to which an 
artistic literary expression was given by Hudyard Kipling. This is 
what could be naturally expected, and it is not difficult to under¬ 
stand their point of view. If it is realized that every one out of 
five Englishmen depended for his livelihood on Indian dominion, 
it would be idle to expect an average Englishman to be willing to 
forego the hold of England over India from abstract considerations 
of justice and fair play. Human nature being what it is, this atti¬ 
tude can be easily excused, even though Indians cannot possibly 
sympathise with it. But far less excusable is the conduct of those 
Englishmen who uttered liberal views with a mental reservation 
that these had no application to the east of Suez. 

The most outstanding personality of this type was John Morley, 
the shining light of the British Liberal Party and the author of the 


387 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

Life of Gladstone. He was regarded as one of the most liberal- 
minded statesmen, and the Moderate party of the Indian National 
Congress pinned their faith on him, but he was really no friend of 
India. 

When in 1885 Lord Randolph Churchill advocated a Royal Com¬ 
mission of Enquiry into Indian affairs, Mr. Morley delivered a vio¬ 
lent attack on Lord Randolph's scheme, speaking of “an excitable 
mass of barbarism rampant in India,” which, he said, the Royal 
Commission would inflame. 

Mr. William Digby, well-known for his very valuable ser¬ 
vices to India, who published an account of his interview with 
Mr. Morley in the Amrita Bazar Patrika of January 22, 1901, gave 
it as his definite view that “Mr. John Morley was never an ardent 
friend of Indian aspirations and, so far as I know, is not now.” 
He (Morley) said, he would not agree that Gladstone, at Limehouse, 
in what he said about India, spoke for the Liberal Party. 14 

But Morley was merely a representative of a class, to whom 
reference is made by Sir John Lawrence: “The difficulty in the 
way of the Government of India acting fairly in these matters is 
immense. If anything is done, or attempted to be done, to help 
the natives, a general howl is raised which reverberates in England, 
and finds sympathy and support there. I feel quite bewildered 
sometimes what to do. Everyone is, in the abstract, for justice, 
moderation, and such-like excellent qualities; but when one comes 
to apply such principles so as to effect anybody's interests, then a 
change comes over them.” 16 

While the overwhelming majority of the Englishmen belonged 
to one or other of the two types mentioned above, a few non-official 
Englishmen, who made an earnest endeavour to study the actual con¬ 
dition of India in a detached spirit, formed a small but distinguished 
class by themselves They not only expressed great concern for the 
miserable plight of the Indians but also frankly denounced the ini¬ 
quities of the British Government and held it to be primarily res¬ 
ponsible for this sad state of things. The boldness with which they 
exposed the real nature of the British administration and its injurious 
effect on India are above all praise, particularly when it is remem¬ 
bered what an amount of odium and unpopularity they thereby in¬ 
curred among their own people. It is the public conduct of this 
handful of Englishmen that kept up for long an illusion in the mind 
of a large section of politically minded Indians about the generosity 
and sense of justice of England. To the very last, these Indians clung 
almost pathetically to the belief that England was sure to do justice 
to India. This belief exercised a considerable influence upon the 
Indian politics of the nineteenth century. 


388 


BRITISH POLICY TOWARDS INDIA 


Apart from this factor of great importance, it may be pointed 
out that these few Englishmen echoed the real views and sentiments 
of the advanced political thinkers among the Indians who, for 
obvious reasons, could not give public expressions to them with the 
same frankness and boldness as characterised their English sympa¬ 
thisers. For gaining a true insight into the real Indian view of the 
British rule in India during the nineteenth century, one cannot do 
better than peruse the speeches and writings of these few English¬ 
men who may be regarded as the “friends of India” in the true sense 
of the term. It is necessary, therefore, to refer to this at some 
length. 

One of the earliest of this noble band of Englishmen was George 
Thompson, whose six lectures, delivered in Manchester at the latter 
part of the year 1839, and published in the form of a book three years 
later, constitute a grave indictment against the British administra¬ 
tion in India, as will be seen from the extracts quoted above. 16 

While every single word in these long extracts—and in the 
book as a whole—echoed the feelings and sentiments of politically 
conscious Indians, it would be difficult to name any Indian politician 
who dared give expression to them in public. It is a lurid commentary 
on the Indian National Congress that up to the very end of the 
nineteenth century its leaders never went beyond what Thompson 
said in 1839, and even seldom approached his level. 

John Bright was a worthy successor of Thompson. “In the 
famous debate on Sir Charles Wood's India Bill of 1853, Mr. Bright 
entered a vigorous protest against the system of Government esta¬ 
blished in India and categorically pointed out nearly all the defects 
of that system, some, if not most, of which are still applicable to the 
present-day arrangement. In his passionate eloquence he called the 
attention of the House to the extreme inadequacy of Parliamentary 
control over the administration of India which both sides of the House 
formally agreed in proclaiming as a ‘solemn sacred trust,' though 
neither side raised its little finger even to treat it as more than a graz¬ 
ing common. He held that there was no continuity or consistency of 
any settled policy with regard to India, while everything was allowed 
to drift, there being no real disposition to grapple with any difficulty; 
that Indian opinion was unanimous in calling for a constitutional 
change and in complaining of the delay and expense of the law courts, 
the inefficiency and low character of the police and the neglect of 
road-making and irrigation; that the poverty of the people was such 
as to demonstrate of itself a fundamental error in the system of Go¬ 
vernment; that the statute authorising the employment of Indians in 
offices of trust was a dead letter; that the continuance of the system 
of appointments and promotion by seniority in the covenanted 

389 





THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


service was a ‘great bar to a much wider employment of the 
most intelligent and able men among the native population;* 
that taxation was clumsy and unscientific and its burden intolerable 
to a people destitute of mechanical appliances; that the salt-tax was 
unjust and the revenue from opium precarious; that the revenue was 
squandered on unnecessary wars; that the Civil Service was over¬ 
paid; that there was no security for the competence and character 
of the Collectors whose power was such that each man could make 
or mar a whole district; that Parliament was unable to grapple fairly 
with any Indian question; that the people and Parliament of Britain 
were shut out from all considerations in regard to India, and that 
‘on the whole the Government of India was a Government of se¬ 
crecy and irresponsibility to a degree that should not be tolerated.” 17 

Five years later (1858) John Bright said: 

“The population of India were in a condition of great impoverish¬ 
ment and the taxes were more onerous and oppressive than the 
taxes of any other country in the world. Nor were the police ar¬ 
rangements, administration of Justice, the educational policy and 
the finances in a satisfactory condition.” 18 

Charles Bradlaugh also had great sympathy for India. In a 
speech in the Parliament on 31 December, 1883, he said: ‘I am of 
opinion that we have obtained our authority in India in a great part 
by means, of which we ought to be heartily ashamed. And I think 
if we continue to govern India there is the weightiest duty upon 
every Englishman and Englishwoman to take care that the despotic 
authority of England should be used, as much as it can be, to redeem 
our past and to make our Indian fellow-citizens desirous of being 
governed by us/ 18a . 

Samuel Smith, a member of the British House of Commons, 
visited India twice, once in 1863 and again in 1886. After his second 
visit he wrote his own impression of this country, particularly the 
changes he had noted among the educated people. He seems to have 
studied the Indian situation with great care and circumspection and 
hit unerringly at the vital points. His representation of Indian views 
and suggested remedies remarkably agree with those expressed by 
contemporary Indians, but gains additional strength from the im¬ 
partial character which must be attributed to the observations of 
an English politician favouring reforms in India. 

In his small pamphlet, India Revisited , Smith refers to the 
extreme poverty of India. He observes that “there is now an edu¬ 
cated native tribunal by which our actions are closely scrutinised. 
This constitutes a totally new element in Indian problems as com¬ 
pared with former times.” 


390 


BRITISH POLICY TOWARDS INDIA 


He analyses as follows the principal objections urged by the 
Indians against the British rule. 

I. It is too expensive and drains the country of its wealth, 
The European officers are very highly paid and spend 
most of their salaries outside India. Their pension is a 
heavy drain. The cost of the army is also very high as a 
white soldier is paid three or four times more than what a 
native sepoy gets. Most of this money is also spent in 
England. 

II. India is saddled with the cost of expeditions in which she 
had no interest, as for example Kabul Expedition and 
Egyptian Expedition. 

III. Growth of foreign trade at the expense of home industry. 

IV. England forced upon India a fiscal policy not suited for her, 
but adapted to develop Britains’ commerce. 

V. Exclusion of natives from all higher posts in the adminis¬ 
tration. 

Smith observes that the Indians do not desire to get rid of British 
rule. What they wish is not to overthrow British authority but to 
mould it into a truer Indian form, and above all, to get a substantial 
share of the administration and an effective voice in determining 
the policy of the Government. The main reform upon which the 
Indians insist in order to achieve the above purpose is the election 
of representative members to the Legislative Councils of India. 
The impression of the Indians is that the English officials stand be¬ 
tween them and their just rights and claims. No such complaint is 
made of the British people, and there is a strong belief among the 
Indians in their sense of justice and good faith. Indians also ob¬ 
ject to the constitution of the Council of India in London. As it con¬ 
sists mainly of retired officials of India it merely serves as a court 
of appeal from the acting bureaucracy in India to the retired bureau¬ 
cracy in London. 

Smith suggested a few remedies for the grievances of the Indians. 
These may be summed up as follows:— 

1. Return of a few members directly from India to British 
Parliament. 

2. Election of a proportion of the Council of India in London 
by the Indians. 

3. Inclusion of elected representatives in the various Councils 
of India. 


391 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

4. Greater admission of Indians to Civil Service by holding 
simultaneous examinations in India. 

Smith concluded by saying that these reforms are certainly 
not revolutionary. 

II. M. Hyndman was also a great well-wisher of India. This 
will be quite clear from the following passages from his letter writ¬ 
ten to Robert Ruies La Monte who requested him to write an article 
on India: 

“I recognise to the full the importance of putting the truth 
about India before the American people and American Socialists. 
What a time it takes to force any truth home. I began writing on 
India in 1874. My articles in the Nineteenth Century in 1878-79 
were translated into nearly every known language. Yet here we 
are, thirty years later, with all that has been done in the meantime, 
still met by the grossest ignorance and the most insurmountable pre¬ 
judice. Our role is heinous to India in every way.... It is very, 
very sad, to see a glorious old civilisation, capable of the highest 
development, crushed under the unsympathetic and unimaginative 
capitalist domination of our race. And things are getting worse 
instead of better. The men of to-day are inferior to the men of 
yesterday and our accursed English hypocrisy and colour prejudice 
shuts us out from real knowledge of Indian life.” 

Once he wrote to Dadabhai Naoroji ‘that little could be done 

for India until we had a revolution here_ The same class- 

—the capitalists—which is ruining you ruins also our own 
workers.” 1 ® 

Fawcett was another genuine friend of India, whose views and 
activities will be referred to in Chapter XIII.“ In 1870 he vehemently 
protested against the orthodox practice of introducing the Indian 
Budget at the fag end of a session to be silently debated before empty 
benches. He maintained that India was a -poor country and com¬ 
plained that the British public failed to appreciate the dangerously 
narrow margin upon which the mass of the population lived on the 
verge of starvation. In 1871 it was at his instance that a Parlia¬ 
mentary Committee was appointed to inquire into the financial ad¬ 
ministration of India, he himself being elected as its President. All 
this time India was keenly watching the movements of the one man 
who was, single-handed, fighting her cause against tremendous odds, 
and in 1872 a huge public meeting in Calcutta voted an address to 
Fawcett expressing India’s deep gratitude towards him and urging 
him to continue the fight in defence of her dumb and helpless mil¬ 
lions which he had voluntarily and so generously espoused. At the 


392 


BRITISH POLICY TOWARDS INDIA 


general election of 1874, Fawcett, like many other Liberals, lost 
his seat for Brighton and for the first time in those days, India seem¬ 
ed to have practically risen to the exigencies of the situation. A 
subscription was at once started in this country and a sum of £750, 
in two instalments, was remitted to England to enable Fawcett to 
contest another seat at the earliest opportunity, and soon after Faw¬ 
cett was returned member for Hackney.” 20 

There were a few other Englishmen of the type represented by 
Thompson, Bright, Hyndman and Fawcett. Preference may spe¬ 
cially be made to Hume, Wedderbum and Cotton. The names of 
these true friends of India are remembered with gratitude by the 
Indians even today for their sympathy with, and active support to 
Indian aspirations, though their voice was merely a cry in the 
wilderness and had had no effect on practical politics. 

So far as the British people in general were concerned, they 
were mostly ignorant about India and had no definite opinion either 
for or against her, so long at least as their material interests were 
not affected. Raja Rammohan Roy, in the thirties, and Dwaraka- 
nath Tagore in the forties, of the nineteenth century, were warmly 
received by many notable persons in Britain. Rammohan Roy was 
requested to place his views about the reforms in Indian adminis¬ 
tration before a Committee of the House of Commons and was given 
a respectful hearing. Dwaraka-nath was invited to lunch and dinner 
by Queen Victoria. The citizens of Edinburgh presented him an 
Address in which they expressed the hope that in India “the rod of 
oppression may be for ever broken, and that the yoke of an unwilling 
subjection may be everywhere exchanged for a voluntary allegi¬ 
ance.” 21 All this was said just before the most unjust annexation 
of Sindh and the tyrannical coercion of Gwalior by Ellenborough, 21 * 
but these did net provoke any reaction among the English public. 

The reception of Keshab-chandra Sen in England in the six¬ 
ties was reminiscent of the old days. The election of Dadabhai 
Naoroji to the British House of Commons clearly testified to the 
sympathy which a section of the British public still had for India, 
but the violent denunciation of him by the Conservative Party, in¬ 
cluding its prominent leaders, was a rude reminder of the change 
that had come over the British people. The general popular sym¬ 
pathy and respect for India grew less and less in proportion to the 
assertion by the Indians of their right to govern themselves. The 
reception—rather rejection—of the world-famous poet Rabindra-nath 
in London offers a sad contrast to that accorded to his grandfather 
Dwaraka-nath, and shows that much water had flown by the Thames 
during the interval. 


393 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

Throughout the nineteenth century the people of Britain as a 
whole had been supremely indifferent to India and took little in¬ 
terest in Indian affairs. This was condemned by Macaulay and 
Thompson as far back as 1833 and 1839. The passage in which 
seventy years later Lord Curzon passed a severe indictment on Eng¬ 
lishmen for this reason has become almost classic and would bear 
repetition. 

“I sometimes think that the most remarkable thing about Bri¬ 
tish rule in India is the general ignorance that prevails about it in 
England. Seventy years ago (i.e. in 1833) Lord Macaulay said, 
in his speech about the Government of India, that a broken head in 
Coldbath Fields produced a greater sensation amongst us than three 
pitched battles in India. Twenty years later Lord Dalhousie, that 
celebrated proconsul, wrote that nothing short of a great victory 
or a great defeat in India was sufficient to create in English society 
even a transient interest in Indian affairs. 

“But I think that things have somewhat advanced since those 
days. Communications have greatly improved between the two 
countries; postal and telegraphic charges have been cheapened; more 
cold-weather visitors come out to us in India every year; and there 
is always an intelligent minority of persons here who follow, with 
the utmost interest, everything that goes on there. Yet, in its main 
essentials, the indictment still remains true, and you have only to 
look at the morning newspapers, to see that, with rare exceptions, the 
average Englishman is much more concerned in the latest, football 
or cricket match, in a motor trial, or a wrestling encounter, than he 
is in the greatest responsibility that has been untertaken by his 
fellow-countrymen on the face of the earth.” 22 

But although the Englishmen in general knew little and cared 
less about India, their imperial instincts were naturally opposed to 
any real advance of Indian interests. As one of them put it, they 
were sorry for the Indians, but they must place their own interests 
above all other considerations. This conviction, dictated by mate¬ 
rial considerations, was strengthened by the views of the reaction¬ 
ary Englishmen. It is the writings of this class of Englishmen, and 
not those of Thompson, Bright, Fawcett and a few other liberal- 
minded Englishmen, which both reflected and shaped the views of 
the average Englishman at home. It is hardly necessary to say 
that the views of the Englishmen in India were most reactionary 
and this also had effect upon the Englishmen at home, for they have 
always a blind faith on the men on the spot. The state of things 
in 1856 is thus described by Sir John Kaye: 


394 


BRITISH POLICY TOWARDS INDIA 


“To suggest that in an Asiatic race there might be a spirit of 
independence and a love of country, the manifestations of which 
were honourable in themselves, however inconvenient to us, was 
commonly to evoke, as the very mildest result, the imputation of 
being ‘Anti-British/ whilst sometimes the ‘true British feeling’ 
asserted itself in a less refined choice of epithets, and those who 
ventured to sympathise in any way with the people of the East were 
at once denounced as ‘white niggers’. Yet among these very men, 
so intolerant of anything approaching the assertion of a spirit of 
liberty by an Asiatic people, there were some who could well ap¬ 
preciate and sympathise with the aspirations of European bonds¬ 
men, and could regard with admiration the struggles of the Italian, 
the Switzer, or the Pole to liberate himself, by a sanguinary contest, 
from the yoke of the usurper. But the sight of the dark skin sealed 
up their sympathies. They contended not merely that the love of 
the country, that the spirit of liberty as cherished by European 
races, is in India wholly unknown, but that Asiatic nations, and 
especially the nations of India, have no right to judge what is best 
for themselves; have no right to revolt against the beneficence of a 
more civilised race of white men, who would think and act for them, 
and deprive them, for their own good, of all their most cherished 
rights and their most valued possessions.” 23 

How little these ideas were changed in course of time may be 
judged from the following statement of Malleson who, with Kaye, 
were the joint authors of the History of the Sepoy War in India . 

“More than thirty years have elapsed since the Mutiny was 
crushed, and again we witness a persistent attempt to force Western 
ideas upon an Eastern people. The demands made by the new¬ 
fangled congresses for the introduction into India of representa¬ 
tive institutions is a demand coming from the noisy and unwarlike 
races which hope to profit by the general corruption which such a 
system would engender. To the manly races of India, to the forty 
millions of Muhammadans, to the Sikhs of the Punjab, to the warlike 
tribes on the frontier, to the Rohillas of Rohilkhand, to the Rajputs 
and Jats of Rajputana and Central India, such a system is utterly 
abhorrent. It is advocated by the adventurers and crochet- 
mongers of the two peoples. Started by the noisy Bengalis, a race 
which, under Muhammadan rule, was content to crouch and serve, 
it is encouraged by a class in this country, ignorant for the most part 
of the real people of India, whilst professing to be in their absolute 
confidence. The agitation would be worthy of contempt but for the 
element of danger which it contains.... 


395 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

“Concession to noisy agitation on the part of the ruling power 
would place the lives, the fortunes, the interests of the loyal classes 
of India at the mercy of the noisiest, most corrupt, and most despised 
race in India.” 24 

The ignorance and indifference of the British people towards 
India, except when their material interest was at stake, was reflected 
in the action of the British Cabinet as well as in the deliberations of 
the Parliament. Since the transfer of the administration to the 
Crown in 1858, no opportunity was given for a free discussion on the 
affairs of India, such as was offered by the periodical revisions of the 
Charter of the East India Company, which was regarded with a jeal¬ 
ous eye by many who did not share its profits. The check afforded 
by this wholesome jealousy was now gone, and since 1858 there was 
“no account of stewardship, no day of reckoning for official 
delinquencies.” 

The manner in which the British Government now superintend¬ 
ed the Indian affairs is thus described by Wedderbum: 

“In theory, the Secretary of State in Council is supposed to be 
the servant of the House of Commons; and in theory, he is supposed 
to occupy a position of judicial impartiality, as the Court of Appeal 
for Indian grievances. But neither of these suppositions has any 
foundation in fact. In point of fact, no matter which Party is in 
power, the Secretary of State, as a member of the Government com¬ 
manding a Parliamentary majority, is not the servant but, in Indian 
matters, the master of the House of Commons; and in dealing with 
the independent member who questions his authority, he does not 
even affect impartiality, but comes before the house as the indignant 
apologist of the department for which he is responsible. 

“In other departments of the administration, an independent 
member, seeking redress of grievances, gets ready support from the 
Front Opposition Bench. But this is not so in the case of a Radical 
daring to voice India’s complaint of destitution, famine, and pesti¬ 
lence. Him a Tory Secretary of State denounces for his malignant, 
though unaccountable, want of patriotism, while the ex-Minister, 
emerging from his retirement on the Liberal benches, re-echoes these 
sentiments, praises his own past administration, and proclaims the 
unspeakable blessings of British rule. With a few honourable ex¬ 
ceptions, the London Press follows suit, finding subject for amuse¬ 
ment when the House empties itself, as soon as it is a question of 
India’s suffering, not seeing any shame in this shameful disregard 
of national duty.” 26 

Blunt also makes similar scathing comments: “The India Office”, 
says he, “represents of necessity the traditions of the past, and the 


396 


BRITISH POLICY TOWARDS INDIA 


Council, which was designed to check it, has proved a more con¬ 
servative and acquiescent body than even the old Board of Directors, 
its prototype and model. The reason of this is obvious. The 
Council, composed as it is almost exclusively of retired civil or 
military servants, views Indian matters from the point of view only 
of the Anglo-Indian service. It is even less amenable than this is to 
the influence of new ideas, and is more completely out of touch 
with modern native thought. Its experience is always that of a 
generation back, not of the present day, and it refuses, more per¬ 
sistently even than the younger generation in active service, to 
admit the idea of change. 

“Thus the Secretary of State, who is dependent on this blind 
guide, is in no other position at home than is the Viceroy in India. 
Ignorant, as a rule, of all things Indian, and dependent for advice 
on the India Office and his Anglo-Indian Council, he never gets at 
the truth of things, and blunders blindly on as they direct.” 25 * 

The Press is justly regarded as the Fourth Estate in Britain, as 
it largely reflects as well as influences public opinion. It is therefore 
significant to note that, as a general rule, the British Press reflected 
the imperialist view. It expressed no sympathy for the poli¬ 
tical regeneration of the Indians or their economic development, and 
always opposed any economic policy which had the remotest chance 
of clashing with the interests of the British people. While a few 
liberal-minded Englishmen expressed their sympathy for India, John 
Bull’s real voice was heard through the Anglo-Indian and British 
Press. One specimen would suffice. In a series of letters to the 
Englishman , a writer, who styled himself Britannicus, poured out 
day after day and week after week the most violent and offensive 
trash that ever was penned. Referring to Pherozeshah Mehta’s 
speech on the Ilbert Bill in a public meeting held at Bombay on 28 
April, 1883, he wrote: 

“It also shows not only that we must hold India by the sword , 
but that we must encourage as many loyal men as possible capable 
of using the sword to settle in the country, if we wish to hold India 
successfully against enemies who are not to be despised. In order 
to effect this desirable object, the only safe policy for Government to 
pursue is to encourage as many Britons as possible to settle in the 
country by throwing open the services to them, by fostering instead 
of hampering tea, indigo and other European industries and by re¬ 
fraining from degrading Englishmen by subjecting them to the crimi¬ 
nal jurisdiction of conquered and emasculated races”. 26 

If anyone supposes that this vitriolic attack was an unnatural 
outburst due to the heat caused by the Ilbert Bill agitation, the 


397 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


impression would be removed by the editorial of the London Times on 
the Proceedings of the First meeting of the Indian National Congress 
in Bombay in 1885, quoted in Chapter XV, which breathes the same 
spirit. It hurled forth thunder against the Congress for making de¬ 
mands for political reforms, which were generally regarded in India 
as extremely moderate, and made it clear that the British would not 
yield to talk but only to sharp sword. This policy of holding India 
by the sword also swayed the British Cabinet and British statesmen, 
though it was occasionally hidden under the cloak of sweet phrases 
or nominal concessions. The Indian National Congress came to be 
looked upon as the gravest potential danger to the British rule and 
the Government of India adopted various means to curb its growth. 
British imperialism was at the height of its power at that time and 
India was justly regarded as the crest-jewel of the British Empire. 
No wonder, that the British were determined never to let go its 
hold upon India. 

As a specimen of the imperial demeanour displayed by the 
British statesmen, attention may be drawn to the following letter 
addressed by the Secretary of State, Lord George Hamilton, to Lord 
Elgin, the Viceroy of India. 

‘T observe that in the debate on Budget one of the Native Legis¬ 
lative Members spoke of our Government as an alien Government. 
I think this is the first time that the obnoxious expression has been 
used at any official gathering. The speech seemed to me to have 
been a carefully prepared one, and which, not improbably, was 
written out or drawn up in England. 

“Mr. Naoroji and his colleagues are becoming more and more 
violent in their language here, and he is consequently losing what¬ 
ever little influence or weight he might previously have had. I un¬ 
derstand that he trades a good deal on the assumption that he has in¬ 
fluence at the India Office, and can act as an efficient intermediary 
between the Secretary of State and various interests and individuals 
in India. As soon as it is known that any request, memorial, or peti¬ 
tion which passes through his hands, or with which he is in any way 
connected, is prejudiced from the very fact of having been associated 
with him, I have no doubt his influence will even more rapidly decay 
and vanish. Long residence in England and association with the 
least reputable portion of the political world have hopelessly deterio¬ 
rated whatever brains or prescience he may originally have 
possessed.” 27 

As will be shown later in Chapter XIV, Dadabhai Naoroji was 
noted for his unflinching loyalty to the British throne and moderate 
views on Indian politics. He was elected to the British Parliament 


398 


BRITISH POLICY TOWARDS INDIA 

and regarded as one of the greatest Indians of his age. All over 
India he was hailed as the ‘Grand Old Man’ in his later life. The 
views expressed about him by the Secretary of State for India in the 
last sentence would give a rude shock to every Indian, and perhaps 
also to not a few Englishmen who knew him. But still more impor¬ 
tant is the evidence it gives of one of the worst phases of intoxication 
produced by the wine of imperialism. 

4 

All this was the result of a deliberate policy that the Indians 
should not be granted any higher political status. It was often 
hidden under the cloak of a humanitarian feeling for the “Indian 
poor, the Indian peasant, the patient, humble, silent millions, the 80 
per cent, who subsist by agriculture.” 28 Lord Curzon openly declar¬ 
ed that the Indian masses “should be the first and the final object of 
every Viceroy’s regard.” Hence the great Viceroy did not offer any 
political concessions to the educated classes because he “did not re¬ 
gard it as wisdom or statesmanship in the interest of India itself to 
do so.” Lord Curzon repudiated “the claim constantly made that a 
man is not merely a Bengali, or an Uriya, or a Mahratta, or a Sikh, 
but a member of the Indian nation.” “I do not think,” said he, “it 
can yet be said that there is any Indian nation, though in the distant 
future some approach to it may be evolved.” But, he added in the 
same breath, “however that may be, the Indian is most certainly a 
citizen of the British empire. To that larger unit he already be¬ 
longs”. 29 But this is to be understood with the distinct corollary 
that the Indians must always play the under-dog within that empire, 
petted and humoured, but always subservient to the British masters. 

The mentality of the English in respect of India is clearly re¬ 
flected in the deliberate policy of ignoring solemn declarations as well 
as provisions of the Acts of Parliament. The Charter Act of 1833 
placed the Englishmen and the Indians on the same footing in res¬ 
pect of participation in Indian administration by laying down that 
“no native of India nor any natural-bom subject therein, shall, by 
reason only of his religion, place of birth, descent, cclour, or any of 
them, be disabled from holding any place, office or employment under 
the Company.” 30 This principle was reaffirmed in the Royal Pro¬ 
clamation of 1858 by which Queen Victoria assumed the administra¬ 
tion of India in her own hands. It is doubtful if even those 
who drafted them had any serious inclination ever to give effect to it. 
In any case both documents remained a dead letter. Lord Lytton 
had the candour to admit that they were deliberately ignored, as will 
be evident from the extract from his confidential minute quoted 
above. 31 


399 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 


It was not, however, long before the British Government took 
good care to demonstrate publicly that the old policy was changed 
in favour of a new one which openly marked the Indians with a 
stamp of inferiority so far as recruitment to public services was 
concerned. On the recommendations of a Commission appointed 
in 1886 to reorganise public services, these were divided into two 
nearly water-tight compartments, the higher one, called Imperial, 
being practically reserved for the British and the lower one, called 
Provincial, alone being open to the Indians. 32 Even some English¬ 
men had the candour to admit that “suph a system bore the stamp, 
barely disguised, of racial discrimination, at variance with the spirit, 
if not the letter, of the Queen’s proclamation.” We can easily ima¬ 
gine the effect of this upon the sentiment and sensibility of the large 
body of Western-educated Indians, who believed, with good reason, 
that they were not a whit inferior, in any respect, to the English 
recruits, and that this badge of inferiority was solely due to less 
whitish colour of the skin. 32a 

The policy, referred to by Lord Lytton, dominated the counsels 
of the British Cabinet throughout the nineteenth century. Thus 
the Secretary of State, Lord Hamilton, wrote to the Viceroy, Lord 
Elgin, on 7 May, 1897: “I do not think we should put very promi¬ 
nently forward the Queen’s Proclamation of 1858. As a piece of 
English it is fine, but 40 years’ practice has shown the extreme diffi¬ 
culty of giving effect to the academic utterances as to equality of 
races.” 

This British policy towards India was not materially changed 
down to the end of the nineteenth century. Lord Curzon, who 
came out to India as Viceroy in 1899, may be regarded as the typical 
representative of British statesmen in so far as their attitude towards 
the Indians was concerned. His speeches and activities give us a 
fair measure of the British imperialism, in its best form, so far a 3 
it solidified itself towards the close of the nineteenth century. 

Lord Curzon had no sympathy with the political aspirations of 
the educated Indians, and had a particular grudge against the Indian 
National Congress. In a letter written to the Secretary of State for 
India, dated 18th November, 1900, he says: “My own belief is that 
the Congress is tottering to its fall and one of my greatest ambitions 
while in India is to assist it to a peaceful demise”. He was equally 
determined to keep the higher administrative offices in India as 
a special reserve for Englishmen. He not only ignored the demands 
of the Congress, repeated year after year, for the appointment of a 
gradually increasing number of Indians to higher offices, but even 
went a step further. In a letter to the Secretary of State dated 


400 




BRITISH POLICY TOWARDS INDIA 


April 23, 1900, he referred to “the extreme danger of the system 
under which every year an increasing number of the 900 and odd 
higher posts that were meant, and ought to have been exclusively 
and specifically reserved, for Europeans, are being filched away by 
the superior wits of the natives in English examination”. 32b 

The Secretary of State, Lord George Hamilton, fully endorsed 
these views and wrote to Curzon on 17 May, 1900: “The large scale 
preponderance of Natives in appointments above a certain grade as 
compared with Europeans always fills me with apprehension as 
regards the future. The preponderance will increase rather than 
diminish. All the educational influences at work in India tend to 
widen rather than to narrow the inlets into our administrative ser¬ 
vice. One of the greatest mistakes that ever was made was the 
issue in the Proclamation annexing India of the principle that per¬ 
fect equality was to exist, so far as all appointments were concerned, 
between European and Native.” 

Lord Curzon, who stoutly defended this policy, sought to ex¬ 
plain away the meaning of the Charter Act and Queen’s Proclama¬ 
tion by specious arguments. In his Budget speech before the Legis¬ 
lative Council on March 30, 1904, Curzon mentioned two general 
principles regulating the public appointments in India. 

“The first is that the highest ranks of civil employment in India, 
those in the Imperial Civil Service, though open to such Indians as 
can proceed to England and pass the requisite tests, must, never¬ 
theless, as a general rule, be held by Englishmen, for the reason that 
they possess, partly by heredity, partly by up-bringing, and partly 
by education, the knowledge of the principles of Government, the 
habits of mind, and the vigour of character, which are essential for 
the task, and that, the rule of India being a British rule, and any 
other rule being in the circumstances of the case impossible, the 
tone and standard should be set by those who have created and are 
responsible for it. The second principle is that outside this corps 
d’elite we shall, as far as possible and as the improving standards of 
education and morals permit, employ the inhabitants of the coun¬ 
try, both because our general policy is to restrict rather than to ex¬ 
tend European agency, and because it is desirable to enlist the best 
native intelligence and character in the service of the State. This 
principle is qualified only by the fact that in certain special depart¬ 
ments, where scientific or technical knowledge is required, or where 
there is a call for the exercise of particular responsibility, it is neces¬ 
sary to maintain a strong European admixture, and sometimes even 
a European preponderance.” 33 

401 

B.p.i.R.—ae 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


When Gokhale pointed out that this was at variance with the 
principles laid down in the Charter Act of 1833 and the Queen's 
Proclamation of 1858, Curzon observed: 

“I am familiar with both those documents, and 1 also remem¬ 
ber—which those who quote them sometimes forget—that the late 
Queen’s words contained a qualification, not indeed modifying their 
generosity, but limiting their application by the necessary tests, 
firstly of practical expediency, and secondly of personal fitness. 
These were the words: ‘It is our will, that so far as may be, our 
subjects of whatever race or creed be freely and impartially admit¬ 
ted to offices in our service, the duties of which they may be quali¬ 
fied by their education, ability, and integrity duly to discharge.’ 
There is not one sentence in that memorable paragraph from which 
any Government of India or any Governor-General has ever either 
desired or attempted to recede. But the Hon. Mr. Gokhale’s his¬ 
torical references stopped short at 1858. He altogether forgot to 
mention the findings of the Public Service Commission of 1887, which 
deliberately laid down that the service in India should in future be 
divided into two branches, firstly, an Imperial Service called the 
Civil Service, to be recruited by open competition in England only; 
and, secondly, a Provincial Service recruited in India, and consist¬ 
ing almost entirely of natives of this country.” 

Lord Curzon’s bold assertion that no Governor-General or the 
Government of India had ever desired to recede from the pledges 
given to India is not only belied by the practice of the Government 
of India in filling up higher appointments, but is in striking contrast 
to the candid confessions of Lord Lytton and Lord Hamilton quoted 
above. 

As to the first, a passage in a letter from Lord Cross to Lord 
Lansdowne, dated 6 June, 1889, is most illuminating. Referring 
to the “recommendation of the Public Service Commission as to the 
raising of the age of the examination of candidates before the Civil 
Service Commissioners”, he writes: “Though I am favourable to 
it myself, the large majority of my Council are against me—for two 
reasons—1st, they think that too many natives will get in; 2nd, they 
think that it will be very hard upon parents of English boys to keep 
them at school so long.” 

As to the second, the confidential despatch of Lord Lytton, quot¬ 
ed above, 33 * clearly admits that the policy was never given effect to. 
Who spoke the truth? Lytton or Curzon? No one today—either Bri¬ 
tish or Indian—would have a moment’s hesitation in answering the 
question. Lord Curzon’s assertion, therefore, is a very lamentable 


402 


BRITISH POLICY TOWARDS INDIA 

negation of another bold statement made by him about the same 
time, namely, that the ideal of truth was a virtual monopoly of the 
West. 

Hamilton had the candour to admit that he regarded the Queen’s 
Proclamation a mistake, thereby implying that it had the same mean¬ 
ing as Gokhale attached to it. But Curzon had not the honesty to 
follow his chief, and defended his position by what may be called a 
piece of casuistry. It was most disingenuous on the part of a Viceroy, 
who was an astute politician to boot, to put the recommendations of 
a Public Service Commission on the same category as, and capable of 
infringing, an Act of Parliament or a solemn declaration of the 
British sovereign. 

Lord Curzon quoted figures to show how the principles of pub¬ 
lic appointment, enunciated by him in the extract quoted above, ‘are 
vindicated in practice’. According to his own statement the pro¬ 
gress of higher appointments given to Indians from 1867 to 1904 
is indicated by the following figures: 

Even in Provincial Service, generally meant for Indians, in the 
highest grade of Rs. 700-800 per month, the proportion of Indians 
rose from 5 to 13 per cent, during the period; in the next grade (600- 
700), from 15 to 27 p.c.; and the next lower grade (500-600), from 
9 to 25 p.c. But these were all subordinate posts. In the supe¬ 
rior posts, which formed the steel-frame of the Government, to use 
Lloyd George’s happy phrase, there were only 12 Indians out of 648 
in 1867, and 92 out of 1370 in 1903. This was the “progressive in¬ 
crease in native employment,” which, in the opinion of Lord Curzon, 
rendered altogether “fallacious” the charge of the educated Indians 
that “we give an inadequate representation to the ability of the 
country in our Government.” 34 

Lord Curzon triumphantly declared, with an eye to the outside 
world opinion, that the British empire employed less than 6,500 of 
its own countrymen and 21,800 of the inhabitants of the country it¬ 
self. 35 This was a trap for an unwary reader, as it was no doubt 
intended to be; for the fact is that it was the result of a jugglery, 
unworthy of a Viceroy. For Curzon got the number 21,800 by in¬ 
cluding all posts bearing a salary of Rs. 75 per month, and upwards. 
But, as noted above, of the 1370 superior officers, who really shaped 
the policy of the administration and supervised its execution, only 
92 were Indians in 1903, i.e. less than 7 p.c., after more than a cen¬ 
tury of British rule in India. 36 The form of Government in India 
may thus be described, by a parody of Abraham Lincoln’s famous 

403 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


definition of democracy, as ‘the rule of the Indians, by the British, 
and for the British.’ 

The principle or ideal to which Lord Curzon gave expression 
in the above extracts, fairly represents the British imperial policy 
towards India in its most developed form. But there was a brighter 
side in Curzon’s conception of imperialism which found little echo 
in the hearts of his successors or of Englishmen either in India or 
in Britain. He wished to broadbase the British rule in India on 
strict principles of justice and equity within the limitations of the 
imperial policy as mentioned above. He hoped that to every En¬ 
glishman in India, as he ends his work, might be truthfully applied 
the phrase, “thou hast loved righteousness and hated iniquity”. The 
noble words in which he described, on the eve of his final depar¬ 
ture from India, the duties of Englishmen to Indian people, consti¬ 
tuting “Englishmen’s justification (to be) in India”, portray the 
other side of the shield of imperialism, which, alas! was ignored 
by most Englishmen. Lord Curzon had the candour to admit that 
“there are few of us who make anything but a poor approximation 
to that ideal.” “But”, he added, “let it be our ideal all the same. 
All other triumphs are tinsel and sham.” 37 

It must be said to the credit of Lord Curzon that he carried his 
precept into practice. He was perhaps the only Viceroy who had 
the strength and courage to punish the Britishers for their brutal con¬ 
duct towards Indian men and women. But the opposition he met 
with from the highest civil and military officials and the public 
insult he received for his generous conduct at the hands of his own 
countrymen in India tell their own tale. 38 

Lord Curzon’s enlightened imperialism also led him to look 
upon the Government of India as the guardian “of Indian interests 
where they are liable to be impugned by external policy or in¬ 
fluence”. He is fully entitled to the credit which he claims in the 
following lines: 

“We resisted to the best of our ability the heavy charge of 
more than three-quarters of a million sterling that was imposed 
upon Indian revenues by the increase of pay in the British Army 
—a measure about which we were not consulted and with which we 
did not agree. We protested more successfully against the placing 
upon Indian revenues of the charge for the entertainment of the 
Indian guests at the Coronation in London. We were also successful 
in resisting the suggestion that India should pay £400,000 per an¬ 
num for a call upon a portion of the British garrison in South Africa. 
We have now finally established the principle (disputed till a few 
years ago) that when we lend troops from India to fight campaigns 


404 


BRITISH POLICY TOWARDS INDIA 


for the Imperial Government in different parts of Asia and Africa, 
every rupee of the charge, from embarkation to return, shall be 
defrayed by the Imperial Government.” 39 

The real significance of Lord Curzon’s achievement may be 
realized if we remember that the costs of the Burmese and Afghan 
wars and even of the military expedition to Abyssinia in 1867, as 
well as the expenditure of entertaining the Sultan of Turkey in a 
Ball dance at the India Office, were charged on Indian revenue. 

Lord Curzon also waged a 4 ‘battle in defence of the Indian emi¬ 
grant in South Africa” against the harsh and discriminatory treat¬ 
ment accorded to him by the British Colonial Government of that 
country. Some of their measures, said Lord Curzon, “seemed to the 
Government of India to be unduly severe and inconsistent with the 
reasonable claims of the people of India as subject of the British 
Empire,” 

The preservation of ancient monuments in India is another fea¬ 
ture of Curzon’s high conception of British imperialism. 

In his address to the Asiatic Society of Bengal on 7 February, 
1900, Lord Curzon referred to the vandalism of the past rulers of 
India. After mentioning the destruction of Hindu temples by Mus¬ 
lim rulers and cf Muslim sanctuaries by the Marathas and the Sikhs, 
he describes similar activities of the British officials in the past. In 
order to illustrate “how strongly the barbarian still dominated the 
aesthetic in the official mind”, he cites the following instances: “In 
the days of Lord William Bentinck the Taj was on the point of being 
destroyed for the value of its marbles. The same Governor-General 
sold by auction the marble bath in Shah Jehan’s Palace at Agra, 
which had been tom up by Lord Hastings for a gift to George IV, 
but had somehow never been despatched. In the same regime a pro¬ 
posal was made to lease the gardens at Sikandara to the executive 
engineer at Agra for the purpose of speculative cultivation. In 1857, 
after the Mutiny, it was solemnly proposed to raze to the ground 
the Jumma Musjid at Delhi, the noblest ceremonial mosque in the 
world, and it was only spared at the instance of Sir John Lawrence. 
As late as 1868 the removal of the great gateways of the Sanchi 
tope was successfully prevented by the same statesman.” 

Referring to the new policy which he proposed to adopt, Curzon 
observed: “To us the relics of Hindu, Mohammedan, Buddhist, Brah¬ 
min and Jaina, are, from the antiquarian, the historical, and the 
artistic point of view, equally interesting and equally sacred. One 
does not excite a more vivid and the other a weaker emotion. Each 
represents the glories or the faith of a branch of the human family. 


405 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-II 


Each fills a chapter in Indian history. Each is a part of the heritage 
which providence has committed to the custody of the ruling power.” 

These are noble words, and nobly did Lord Curzon carry out his 
high policy. 

All these things indicate that Lord Curzon had an enlightened 
view of the British Empire. But it is significant to note that he 
visualised India of the future not as an independent kingdom, free 
from British control, as Munro, Elphinstone and Macaulay did be¬ 
fore him, but as a member of the British empire. It indicates a 
great change in the attitude of England towards India—a mean be¬ 
tween the extreme ideals of holding India by the sword and setting 
her up as a free State. Lord Curzon hoped that “history will recog¬ 
nize myself as having done much (whether wisely or unwisely) to 
accelerate the lifting of India from the level of a Dependency to the 
position which is bound one day to be hers, if it is not so already, 
namely, that of the greatest partner in the Empire”. Unfortunately, 
the definite verdict of history is that he ruined the prospect of any 
such consummation. 

Lord Curzon’s conception of a Viceroy was that of a benevolent 
autocrat. But in the judgment of his career by the Indians the 
scale weighed heavily in favour of autocracy as against benevolence. 
Lord Curzon’s career in India also illustrates another characteristic 
of imperial statesmen of Britain, namely, the wide gap between pro¬ 
fession and practice. It would be difficult, for example, to improve 
upon the following words in which he paid tribute to the value of 
public opinion in India: “That public opinion has been growing 
all the while, is articulate, is daily becoming more powerful, cannot 
be ignored. To contend that it does not exist, that it had not ad¬ 
vanced in the last fifteen years, or that it may be treated with general 
indifference is to ignore the great change which is passing over 
this country.” 40 But in actual practice no Viceroy in India has so ruth¬ 
lessly and systematically trampled upon public opinion as did Lord 
Curzon. Evidently, Lord Curzon reserved to himself the right to de¬ 
cide ‘when public opinion was an exposition of views based on sober 
reasoning and supported by obvious justice, and when it was a mere 
frothy ebullition of irrational sentiments.’ This was also typical of 
English statesmen. 

In view of all that was said and done by Lord Curzon, it is hardly 
a matter of surprise that his administration, as a whole, was re¬ 
garded with great disfavour by the Indians. His attitude was most 
reactionary and repressive in respect of the educated classes in 
India. There were four fields in which they had been steadily mak¬ 
ing their influence felt, but in all of them Lord Curzon’s policy 


406 


BRITISH POLICY TOWARDS INDIA 

sought to put them back. He fettered the press by the Official Se¬ 
crets Act, placed higher education under official control, took away 
the self-government in city Corporations—granted a quarter of a cen¬ 
tury ago—, abolished competition for high offices, and made every¬ 
thing dependent upon the pleasure of officials. He explained away 
the Queen’s Proclamation, as noted above, and evidently thought 
that it was not to the interest of the Englishmen that educated classes 
should be more and more associated with the government of their 
country. So the Indians were led to believe that the British rule 
was maintained not to promote their interests but for a selfish purpose. 

These views were forcefully expressed by Gokhale, the sober 
leader of the Moderate Party, in one of his speeches. In his address 
as President of the Congress in 1905 he drew the best pen-picture 
of Lord Curzon in the following words: 

“His Lordship will always be recognized as one of the greatest 
Englishmen that ever came out to this country. His wonderful in¬ 
tellectual gifts, his brilliant powers of expression, his phenomenal 
energy, his boundless enthusiasm for work,—these will ever be a theme 
of just and unstinted praise. But even the most devoted admirer of 
Lord Curzon cannot claim that he has strengthened the foundations 
of British rule in India. Alas! the gods are jealous; and amidst 
such lavish endowments they withheld from him a sympathetic 
imagination, without which no man can .ever understand an alien 
people, and it is a sad truth that to the end of his administration 
Lord Curzon did not really understand the people of India. . . .For a 
parallel to such an administration we must, I think, go back to the 
times of Aurangzeb in the history of our own country. There we find 
the same attempt at a rule excessively centralized and intensely per¬ 
sonal, the same strenuous purpose, the same overpowering cons¬ 
ciousness of duty, the same marvellous capacity for work, the same 
sense of loneliness, the same persistence in a policy of distrust and 
repression, resulting in bitter exasperation all round. Lord 
Curzon’s highest ideal of statesmanship is efficiency of administra¬ 
tion. He does not believe in what Mr. Gladstone used to call the 
principle of liberty as a factor of human progress. He has no sym¬ 
pathy with popular aspirations, and when he finds them among a 
subject-people, he thinks he is rendering their country a service by 
trying to put them down. 

“To him India was a country, where the Englishman was to mo¬ 
nopolise for all time all power, and talk all the while of duty. The 
Indian’s only business was to be governed, and it was a sacrilege on 
his part to have any other aspiration. In his scheme of things there 
was no room for the educated classes of the country; and having 


407 


THE BRITISH PAHAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-11 

failed to amuse them for any length of time by an empty show of 
taking them into his confidence, he proceeded in the end to repress 
them. Even in his last farewell speech at the Byculla Club in Bom¬ 
bay, India exists only as a scene of the Englishman’s labours, with 
the toiling millions of the country—eighty per cent, of the popula¬ 
tion—in the background. The remaining twenty per cent., for aught 
they are worth, might as well be gently swept into the sea !” 40ft 

But Lord Curzon’s crowning act of folly was the partition of 

Bengal which was carried out in the teeth of persistent and almost 

» 

unanimous opposition of the whole of the province. Its wider effects on 
Indian politics will be treated in the next volume. It would suffice to 
state here that it chilled the enthusiasm even of the most moderate 
type of politicians, and many of them openly expressed in utter des¬ 
pair the futility of cherishing any hope for justice or generosity from 
the British Government. As a matter of fact, it is now generally re¬ 
cognized that it was his reactionary administration that practically 
killed the Moderate party in India, and facilitated the rise of an ex¬ 
treme section in the Indian National Congress, which ultimately 
changed the entire character of the organization and paved the way 
for the successful struggle against the British for the freedom of 
India. Lord Curzon’s rule amply proves the dictum that sometimes 
oppressions of rulers are a blessing in disguise and produce an effect 

very much the opposite of what was intended by their perpetrators. 

% 

It is not necessary to say much about the non-official English¬ 
men resident in, or visiting India. That there were some, particularly 
among the missionaries, who felt genuine sympathy for the Indians, 
has been shown above in connection with the Indigo plantation. Un¬ 
fortunately, the number of such men—men of the type of Rev. Long, 
Wilfrid Blunt or George Thompson—-were so few that they could be 
almost counted on one’s fingers. The general attitude of the English¬ 
men in India towards the enjoyment of civil and political rights by 
their fellow-subjects in India was fully displayed when they set up 
violent demonstrations against the so-called Black Acts of 1849 and 
the Ubert Bill of 1883. The Englishmen in India showed their aver¬ 
sion to the political advance of India when the Indian National 
Congress put forth demands for administrative and constitu¬ 
tional reforms. With a few honourable exceptions, the non-official 
Englishmen were bitterly hostile to this political organization of the 
Indians. They not only ridiculed or abused it, as suited the occasion, 
but, with official help, tried to destroy it, or at least to neutralise its 
utility, by fomenting dissension and discord between Hindus and Mus¬ 
lims, and creating anti-Congress blocs among the people by patroniz¬ 
ing all hostile demonstrations to the Congress. 


408 


BRITISH POLICY TOWARDS INDIA 


Finally, one must consider that class of Englishmen, who had 
the largest share in shaping the destiny of India, and have been 
regarded, not without good reason, as the steel frame of British rule 
in India. This was the famous Indian bureaucracy, the corpora¬ 
tion of Indian Civil Service, whose efficient administration of India 
was the most effective challenge to the demands for reforms. To 
a casual observer, specially an Englishman without intimate know¬ 
ledge of Indian life and thought, the period of twenty years that 
intervened between the foundation of the Indian National Congress 
and the partition of Bengal, might well be regarded as an era of 
peace and material progress in India, for which the credit was en¬ 
tirely due to that paternal autocratic Government which controlled 
her destiny, almost as a divine dispensation. The scars left by the 
Mutiny were being gradually healed up, the revolutionary activity 
and the sentiment of disloyalty were things of the past, and the poli¬ 
tical activities of the people were now not only open and above 
board, but least likely to cause embarrassment or nervousness to 
the foreign ruling powers. The alarming prospects of a general 
outbreak envisaged by Hume in the early eighties totally disappear¬ 
ed, thanks to the masterstroke of his policy which turned the national 
feelings into a safe channel within controllable bounds, and the 
local disturbances that occasionally broke out here and there were 
not such as to disturb the equanimity of the rulers. 

But to those who had eyes to see and ears to hear, and 
could dive beneath the surface, the outlook did not appear quite so 
pleasant. Grave discontent which prevailed among all shades of 
opinion and classes of Indians in the preceding period were enhanc¬ 
ed rather than diminished, for though the causes remained more or 
less the same, the national consciousness grew more sensitive and 
the people as a whole more restive than before. In every age and 
country discontent has proved to be the seeds of rebellion, and India 
could not possibly be an exception to the rule. Yet, strangely 
enough, the Government did not take any serious steps to remove 
the grievances of the people. The British came to regard them¬ 
selves as the trustees for the welfare of the Indian people, and the 
conviction was gradually growing upon them that this trusteeship 
would last for ever. This determined the attitude of the local offi¬ 
cials who were now organized into a powerful bureaucracy. The 
absence of periodical scrutiny into Indian affairs, such as took place 
during the regime of the East India Company, and the indifference 
of the English people and their representatives in the House of Com¬ 
mons towards Indian questions, except when they touched their 
interest, virtually rendered the Indian Government a dictatorial 
authority, which brooked no criticism and had an unbounded faith 


409 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

in their own sense of what was right and proper for them to do in 
order to serve the interests of Indian people. 

In order to understand the full implication of this changed state 
of things it is necessary to say a few words about the great trans¬ 
formation which the Government of India had undergone in the mean¬ 
time. The rapid expansion of the British dominions and the grow¬ 
ing needs of a modern type of State to which British India gradually 
conformed, led to the growth of a huge and complex administrative 
machinery with a large number of departments. The .^ghest posts— 
the key-posts as one might call them—in this machinery were filled 
by the members of the Indian Civil Service recruited in England by 
competitive examination. The Viceroy’s Executive Council which 
controlled the entire system was dominated by them. The District 
Officers at the bottom, as well as the Secretaries of the different de¬ 
partments at the top, who formed the pivot and pillars of British ad¬ 
ministration, were all recruited from tVem. As noted above, 41 it 
was the deliberate policy of the British Government to keep the 
I. C. S. a safe preserve for the youths of England, a policy dictated 
alike by the material interests of the Britishers and a desire to main¬ 
tain the British character of the administration. The result was the 
growth of a strong fraternity—the corps d’elite —who formed a 
close hierarchy of official aristocracy. They have been not inaptly 
called the neo-Brahmins of India, having the same pretentions of 
intellectual superiority and social supremacy, leading inevitably to 
the same narrowness of outlook and the same spirit of exclusive¬ 
ness. Even an Englishman, by no means friendly to the Indians, 
and full of admiration for the great intellectual ability, administra¬ 
tive efficiency and integrity of character displayed by the I.C.S.— 
virtues which a large majority of them undoubtedly possessed—has 
been constrained to refer to some of their drawbacks which, in the 
long run, brought them into conflict with the educated Indians and 
rendered nugatory all the high qualities which distinguished them 
as a class. The following passage, quoted from one of his books, 
puts in a mild form what most Indians felt as the crux of the whole 
problem and denounced in no uncertain terms. 

“But the Secretariats, v/hich from the headquarters of provin¬ 
cial governments as well as from the seat of supreme government 
directed and controlled the whole machine, became more and more 
self-centred, more and more imbued with a sense of their own om¬ 
niscience. Even the men with district experience, and those who 
had groaned in provincial secretariats under the heavy hand of the 
Government of India, were quick to adopt more orthodox views as 
soon as they were privileged to breathe the more rarefied atmo- 


410 


BRITISH POLICY TOWARDS INDIA 


sphere of the Olympian Secretariats, that prided themselves on be- 
ing the repositories of all the arcana of ‘good government.’ Of 
what constituted good government efficiency came to be regarded . 
as the one test that mattered, and if was a test which only English¬ 
men were competent to apply and which Indians were required to 
accept as final whatever their wishes or their experience might be.” 42 

Blunt’s comment about the all-powerful I.C.S. is more to the 
point: 

“The net result of his (Ripon’s) Viceroyalty has been almost nil. 
Every measure that he has brought forward has been defeated in de¬ 
tail; and so powerful has the Civil Service been that they have forced 
the Home Government into an abandonment, step by step, of all its 
Indian policy. This they have effected in part by open opposition, in 
part by covert encouragement of the English lay element, in part by 
working through the English press.... The Anglo-Indian bureaucracy 
had shown itself his master in spite of Midlothian.” 424 

The great philosopher-statesman, John Morley, entertained the 
same opinion about the highly placed British officials in India from his 
experience as Secretary of State for India. Anyone who reads his 
Recollections cannot fail to be impressed by his frequent references to 
the orthodox, illiberal spirit of these officials, whom he called, on that 
account, by the hated Russian name of Tchinovniks. He looked upon 
them as the most reactionary element in the Government of India 
which thwarted at every step the generous move of the Home Gov¬ 
ernment and the Viceroy. He held these die-hards in the Indian 
bureaucracy solely responsible for the popular discontent leading 
to unrest. He wrote to Lord Min to: 

“It is not you nor I who are responsible for ‘Unrest’, but the 
over-confident and over-worked Tchinovniks who have had India 
in their hands for fifty years past.” 

Once, in great indignation, he wrote to Minto not to pay any 
heed to their advice. Writing in a lighter vein, he even suggested 
that some of them should be deported along with the terrorists 
under Regulation III of 1818. He wrote to Minto: 

“To tell you the truth, the more I think both of—and—the less 
do I value the judgment of either one or the other. And now by 
the way, that we have got down the rusty sword of 1818, I wish you 
would deport—and—.” 42b 

The first sign of the new pirit of the time could be easily seen 
in the gradually widening cleavage between the Civil Service and 
the English-educated Indians. There were many reasons for the 
growing conflict between the two, some of which are easy to under- 


411 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


stand. The I. C. S. as a class were guided in all their actions by a 
strong determination to raise their power and prestige, and at the 
same time to exclude the Indian element as far as possible from what 
they considered as their own preserve. This was naturally interpre¬ 
ted by the Indians as due to a selfish spirit of maintaining intact not 
only their own material interests and prospects but also those of the 
Service to which they belonged, and thereby indirectly of the entire 
British pople who would hereditarily enjoy those privileges. It has 
been claimed that although such selfish motives might not have been 
altogether absent, they were equally influenced by their conviction 
that they had better knowledge of the needs, interests, and wishes of 
the people of India, and were therefore more fitted to rule over the 
masses and look to their true welfare than the English-educated 
Indians who were out of touch with them and had little knowledge of, 
and less inclination to do good to, the ignorant and inarticulate masses 
of India. 

On the other hand, the very natural desire of the Indians to take 
their due share in the administration was set down by the Englishmen 
to a sordid desire for loaves and fishes. But here, again, though 
consideration for the material interest of individuals or communities 

9 

might not altogether be absent, one might, perhaps more justly than 
in the other case, give them credit for a more elevated sentiment or 
political wisdom which looked forward to the Indianisation of higher 
Services as the first step towards political advance of the country. 
That this is no mere surmise or theoretical speculation is proved by 
the persistent demand made by the press and from political platform 
for recuitment of Indians to the higher Services as the first step 
towards the reform of Indian administration. 

It is hardly necessary to examine in detail the pretensions of 
the British bureaucracy in India that the interests of the people 
were more safe and secure in its hands than those of the educated 
section of their own community. There is not a single instance in 
the history of the world where the foreign rulers of a conquered, 
country have more sincerely tried to achieve its moral and material 
interests than its own people. In any case, the undeniable fact of 
the growing and grinding poverty of the masses in India, to which 
detailed reference has been made above, 43 gives lie direct to the 
pretensions of those self-constituted trustees of the people or 
guardians of their interest. 

Considerations such as these, entertained on both sides with 
equal firmness, gradually brought about an estrangement between 
the two, which ere long developed into an antagonism between the 
‘sun-dried bureaucrats* and the ‘Bengali Babus’ as they designated 


412 


t 


BRITISH POLICY TOWARDS INDIA 

each other. This is all the more significant, if not deplorable, as 
the English-educated classes were the great champions of British 
rule in India, to secure whose co-operation and goodwill was one of 
the main planks in the administrative policy of the early British 
rule, such as is foreshadowed in the great Charter of 1833. 

In view of what has been said above, it will hardly cause any 
surprise that the British authorities at Home were completely ir¬ 
responsive to the just demands of the Indians, as formulated by the 
Indian National Congress. 44 It is true that, now and then, they 
made some concessions by way of reforms in the administration, 
as, for example, they did by the Acts of 1861 and 1892. But as 
has already been mentioned above, these concessions were always 
both halting and belated. The reforms which were conceded in 
1892 would have fully satisfied the Indians in 1861, and similarly, 
to anticipate events, the reforms which were conceded in 1909 
would have fully satisfied the Indians in 1892. But, as it is, the 
reforms which were actually granted in any one of these years 
failed tp satisfy the just aspiration of the Indians, and the political 
discontent found vent ultimately in the growth of a national and 
radical school. It may be said without much exaggeration that 
the words ‘‘too late” were writ large on the door of India Office in 
London, and this characteristic of English politics is mainly res¬ 
ponsible for undermining the strength of that political party in 
India which had implicit faith in the British justice and which 
hoped to attain their ends by constitutional agitation. The reason 
seems to be that the authorities at Home possessed very little 
knowledge of real India. All that they knew was from the reports 
submitted by the Government of India, and they did not take any 
adequate step to keep themselves acquainted with the real feelings 
and sentiments of politically conscious India. Besides, it was evident 
that, as before, the idea of safeguarding British interests dominated 
their whole outlook towards India. Reference has been made in 
a previous chapter to the enormous drain of wealth from India 
which formed a permanent feature of British rule in this country. 
There was no change in this aspect even though the British fully 
realised its character. 

The British knew full well that the interests of India were 
sacrificed for those of Britian. The following account of the inter¬ 
view which Sir E. N. Baker, the Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal, 
gave to. Mr. Frank G. Carpenter, an American journalist, is very 
revealing: 

“Said I: ‘Suppose you were the absolute ruler of India, Your Ex¬ 
cellency. Suppose you were not controlled by Great Britain, but that 


413 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-II 

you had the same armies and the same administrative machinery that 
you have to-day, what would you do to better the condition of 
these people?” 

“I would give them a protective tariff. I would encourage the 
establishment of factories and favour them in every way as to the 
making of goods for India in competition with those of Europe, 
Japan and other parts of the w T orld. What India needs is industrial 
development, and a protective tariff would bring that about. As 
it is, we are tied up by the manufacturing industries of Great Bri¬ 
tain. We can levy no duties to speak of upon our imports of cottons. 
We once had a tariff of 5 per cent., but the Manchester mill men 
objected, saying that it ruined their trade. They demanded that 
an excise duty be added to equalize our competition, and the re¬ 
sult was that the duty was reduced to 3J per cent., that amount 
being levied on all goods made in India. Do you wonder that the 
natives object? A protective tariff would foster our industries and 
we could in time build up a mighty industrial empire.” 

“Could you do this along other lines than the textiles?” “Yes. 
There is no reason why Indians should not make everything in Iron 
and steel.” 44a 

But few Englishmen would endorse Baker’s views. For exam¬ 
ple, Sir Roper Lethbridge held that to give India fiscal free¬ 
dom—i.e., to permit her to impose protective tariffs upon English 
goods if she thought fit—would lead to the disruption of the 
Empire. 44 * 

Apart from this economic question, another proof, if any were 
needed, was supplied by the admission of Sir Henry Fowler that 
the British were opposed to simultaneous examinations for the 
Indian Civil Service for political reasons. 46 This point was 
further emphasised by the fact that though a Resolution introduced 
by Herbert Paul for the simultaneous examinations of Indian Civil 
Service was passed by the House of Commons in 1893, it was not 
given effect to through the machinations of India Office and the 
Government of India. 

Another settled policy of the British Government was to 
maintain their interest in India by playing one class against 
another. This policy of Divide and Rule took different shapes and 
forms according to circumstances. They tried to play the Hindus 
against the Muhammadans, the princes against the Indian people, 
and the common people against the educated classes. By this they 
proposed to hold the balance of power in their hands without 
creating any public discontent, as they would be in a position to 


414 


BRITISH POLICY TOWARDS INDIA 


point out that they had to maintain their position in India in order 
to safeguard the interests of the different classes and communities, 
who would, otherwise, fly at each other’s throat. This aspect of 
the question has been partly discussed in Chapter VIII and will 
be more fully discussed in the next volume. 

After all, it is difficult to deny that the whole British policy 
towards India has been beautifully summed up by the French 
statesman, Chailley, in a single sentence: 

'‘India is one of the main pillars upon which the grandeur of 
the British Empire rests, and England will not willingly let her 
go.” 46 

The same truth was more elaborately expressed, in a slightly 
different form, by a still more eminent foreign statesman, William 
Jennings Bryan, the Secretary of State of the U.S. A. He has exposed 
the character of the British rule within a small compass. His views 
may be summed up in his own words: 

“The trouble is that England acquired India for England’s ad¬ 
vantage, not for India’s, and that she holds India for England’s 
benefit, not for India’s. She administers India with an eye to Eng¬ 
land’^ interests, not India’s, and she passes judgement upon every 
question as a judge would were he permitted to decide his own 
case.” “The Briton has demonstrated, as many have before, man’s in¬ 
ability to exercise with wisdom and justice, irresponsible power 
over helpless people. He has conferred some benefits upon India, 
but he has extorted a tremendous price for them. While he has 
boasted of bringing peace to the living he has led millions to the 
peace of the grave; while he has dwelt upon order established be¬ 
tween warring troops, he has impoverished the country by legaliz¬ 
ed pillage. Pillage is a strong word, but no refinement of language 
can purge the present system of its iniquity.” 47 

The moderate Indian view on the nature of British rule was 

) 

summed up by Gokhale, the Prince of Moderates, in his Presiden¬ 
tial Address at the Banaras session of the Indian National Congress 
in 1905. He passed a stern verdict on British rule in India: “For a 
hundred years England has ruled India, but four villages out of 
every five were without a school-house, and seven children out of 
eight grew up in ignorance.” After mentioning how the solemn 
pledges of 1833 and 1858 regarding the appointment of Indians to 
higher administrative services were deliberately broken, Gokhale 
continued: 

“Our whole future, it is needless to say, is bound up with this 
question of the relative position of the two races in this country. 


415 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


The domination of one race over another, especially when there is 
no great disparity between their intellectual endowment or their 
general civilization, inflicts great injury on the subject race in a 
thousand insidious ways. On the moral side, the present situation 
is steadily destroying our capacity for initiative and dwarfing us as 
men of action. On the material side, it has resulted in a fearful 
impoverishment of the people. For a hundred years and more 
now India has been for members of the dominant race a country 
where fortunes were to be made to be taken out and spent else¬ 
where. As in Ireland the evil of absentee landlordism has in the 
past aggravated the racial domination of the English over the Irish, 
so in India what may be called absentee capitalism has been added 
to the racial ascendancy of Englishmen. A great and ruinous 
drain of wealth from the country has gone on for many years, the 
net excess of exports over imports (including treasure) during the 
last forty years amounting to no less than a thousand millions ster¬ 
ling, The steady rise in the death-rate of the country—from 24 per 
thousand, the average for 1882-84, to 30 per thousand, the average 
for 1892-94, and 34 per thousand, the present average—is a terrible 
and conclusive proof of this continuous impoverishment of the 
mass of our people. India’s best interests—material and moral— 
no less than the honour of England, demand that the policy of 
equality for the two races promised by the Sovereign and by Par¬ 
liament should be faithfully and courageously carried out.” 

Gokhale then turned to the bureaucracy, and bitterly blamed 
the system, adding that “the bureaucracy is growing frankly sel¬ 
fish and openly hostile to their (the educated classes) national 
aspirations. It was not so in the past.” And he spoke of the differ¬ 
ent feeling within living memory, when the rulers looked forward 
to India’s self-government. It was pretended that the people 
were indifferent, but “what the educated Indians think to day, the 
rest of India thinks to-morrow.” 

This represents the view of those who had unflinching faith in, 
and loyalty to, the British Government. 

1. Colchester, 64-5. Italics mine. 

2. Thornton, V. 356-7. 

3. Panini Office Edition, p. 365. 

4. Griffiths, 245. 

5. B. Majumdar, 73. 

6. Griffiths, 246. 

7. O’Malley, 743. 

8. Letters from India, 1829-32, translated by C. A. Phillips (1936), p. XXV 

9. Keith, I. 265. 

10. Blunt-II, 175; Masani— Daddbhai, 304. But Gladstone’s views were repudiated 
by Morley on behalf of the Liberal Party (cf. p. 388). 

10a. Chintamani, p. 28 fn. 

11. Modem Review, HI. 519. 


416 



BHmSH POLICY TOWARDS INDIA 


n. VoL DC, p, 770. 

12a. Unpublished records in the C.R.O. library, London. These And Other similar 
letters in this chapter have since feem published (CL A. K. MaJ\under, Advent 
of Independence, 346 $L). 

12b.Tfemple-n. p. 191. 

12c. VoL IX, pp. 37-46, 130-40. 

13. Hume, 90. 

14. Modern Review, H, 333. Cl. p. 383 above for Gladstone's statement 

15. Letter to Sir Rrskine Perry, quoted In Chintamaiif p. IS. 

18. Cf. Voi DC pp m~m. Cf. also Ch. XIL 

17. Quoted is. Maxumdar, A.C., pp. 9-10, along with extracts from other speeches. 

18. Ibid, 11. 

18a. Bradkugh's fpeech is quoted by Hemendra Das Gupta in Congress, L 48. 

It. 292. 

20. MazumdAr, A.C., pp. 14-15. 

21. Mitre, K .—Memoirs of Dwargkanath Tagore, pp, 85 IE. 

21a. Cf. VoL DC, pp, 202-33. 

22. Kaleigh, pp. 33-4. For Macaulay’^ iproeh, cf. Vol. DC, p. 315. 

2$. Mcdem Review, IV, 261 

24. MaUeaon, The Indian Muting of 1857 , pp. 4m. 

25. Hume, 91-2. 

25a. Blunt-XL 159-80. 

26. Mody, Pherozeghah Mehta, I. 133. 

27. Unpublished Records in C, R. O. library. 

28. Raleigh, 584. 

29. Ibid, 499. 

30. Vol. XX, 314. It is curious that the vital word c ofibe* is omitted in the passage 
m quoted by Keith (L 273). 

31. Vol. DC, 786-7. 

32. Cf. Vol. DC, p. 789. 

32a. Cf. Hamilton's Letters to Elgin dated 16 September, 1897 and 12 November, 
1896* quoted on p 385. 

32b. CR. April, 1954, pp, 46, 50, SL 

33. Raleigh, 143. 

33a. Vol. DC, 786-7. Cf. Hamilton’s letter quoted on p. 385. 

34. Raleigh, 145. 

35. Raleigh. 146. 

36. Cf. VoL DC, pp. 1153-4 for the statistics given by Gokhaie, 

37. Raleigh, 589. 

38. See above, pp. 306-9. 

39. Raleigh, 163. 

40. Ransudshay, XX. 326-7. 

40a. Speeches, pp. 1091 ff. 

41. See p. 401; also VoL IX. 786-7. 

42. Chirol-I, 102. 

42a. Blunt-n, 158. 

42b. Morley, Recollections, II. 265, 231, 214. 

43. VoL DC, pp. 1157 ff. 

44. The British policy towards the Indian National Congress has been fully dis¬ 
cussed in Ch. XV, section II, which really forms a supplement to this chapter. 

44a. MR, VIH 463-4. 

44b. Ibid, 464. 

45. Banerji, S.N., A Nation in Making, p. 152. 

46. Chailley, p. 166. 

47. William Jenningi Bryan, British Rule in India (1915), pp, 8,13. 


8.P.I.R.—27 


417 











' 

CHAPTER XI (XLIX) 

THE ATTITUDE OF INDIANS TOWARDS 

BRITISH RULE 

It has been related above, how the Hindus in Bengal acclaimed 
the establishment of British rule as a divine dispensation for their 
deliverance from the tyrannies of Muslim rule. Leaders like Raja 
Rammohan Roy, Dwaraka-nath Tagore, Prasanna-kumar Tagore and 
others gave public expression to this view, and some of them even 
went so far as to assert that they preferred the British rule to the 
rule by the Hindus themselves. The Muslims also accepted the 
British rule, in sullen resentment but without any active protest. 
The same thing was more or less true of the other parts of India, 
and so far as evidence goes, there was no general reaction to British 
rule anywhere in the British dominions in India. 

The attitude of the Hindus towards the British and their rule 
in India was, however, gradually changed. The early enthusiasm 
over the blessings of the British rule became cold as the memory 
of the anarchy and confusion preceding it and the evils of Muslim 
rule faded more and more from living memory. It is almost a 
universal truth that there is no gratitude in politics. This applies 
as much to individuals as to nations. The crowned hero of the 
people soon passes out of public memory, even if a worse fate does not 
befall him. For, the people easily forget the benefits they owe to 
him, and merely remember his lapse or failure to keep abreast with 
the progressive ideas. So was it with the Indians vis d vis the 
British rule. They fully recognized the immense good that the British 
had conferred upon India, but general opinion gradually lost sight 
of it, and discontent and disaffection at the failure to obtain what 
they had a right to expect, proved a far more potent force than the 
gratification which they had felt or should still have felt for what 
they had already gained. It is useless to discuss in this context 
whether the benefits of British rule did or did not exceed its evils, 
for, the people are never in a mood to consider such a question in a 
calm and dispassionate manner. The resentment at immediate and 
visible wrongs always stirs the human feelings more deeply than, 
and out of all proportions to, the generous impulses invoked by 
acts of benevolence which are either too remote or do not lie on the 
surface. 


418 



THE ATTITUDE OF INDIANS TOWARDS BRITISH RULE 


Among the wrongs which caused the repulsion of Indian feel¬ 
ings against the Englishmen and their rule in India, the foremost 
place should be given to the deeds actuated by racial arrogance, re¬ 
ferred to in Ch. IX. Numerous instances have been quoted there of 
the insult and humiliations suffered by Indians in daily life, and 
not infrequent assaults and bursting of Indian spleens by European 
kicks. The farce of criminal trial which usually let off the 
English offender, and the hue and cry raised by the entire Anglo- 
Indian community even if a very nominal penalty was imposed, 
left no doubt that the offence was neither exceptional nor of an 
individual character, but was the product of racial arrogance. These 
incidents, unfortunately only too common, rankled in the minds of 
Indians of all classes, and their utter helplessness to retaliate made 
the feeling more bitter and poignant. Little did the British realize, 
or do even now recognize, the profound nature of the discontent 
and disaffection caused by these individual acts and the support 
given to them by the whole community. They had no eyes to see 
how they struck at the very foundations of the loyalty and good 
will of the Indians to the Englishmen and their rule. It would be 
hardly any exaggeration to say that these incidents of assault and 
affronts, and the immunity from due punishment enjoyed by their 
perpetrators, did far more to kindle the fire of animosity against 
the British and their political authority than even graver abuses of 
their administration and economic exploitation. 

Reference has been made to these administrative abuses in de¬ 
tail in the preceding chapters (Vol. IX) specially dealing with these 
topics. It will suffice here to refer to some general features. The griev¬ 
ance which wounded most the feeling and susceptibilities of the 
English-educated Indians was the deliberate policy to rule India 
mainly for the interest of England, and to keep out the Indians 
from their legitimate share in the administration of their own 
country. In both these respects they offered a most unfavourable 
contrast to the preceding Muslim rule; and they formed the prin¬ 
cipal complaint against the British, and called forth the most per¬ 
sistent demands for reform, throughout the nineteenth century. 
Even when a competitive examination was introduced for selecting 
candidates for superior services, the lowering of the maximum age, 
manipulation of subjects for examinations, and refusal to hold a 
simultaneous examination in India—all to the extreme disadvant¬ 
age of an Indian candidate—merely underlined the policy of the 
British authorities to keep out the Indians as much as possible from 
the key-posts in the administration. 

The Indians pointed out that though the competitive examina* 
tion was theoretically open to all, the holding of the examination 


419 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

in England alone proved to be a great handicap for Indian students. 
For, apart from the expenses of journey to England which few 
could afford, the orthodox Hindu objection to sea-voyage, and the 
natural reluctance of Indian parents to send their children to such a 
distant place and strange social environment, created special diffi¬ 
culties. Liberal-minded Englishmen like John Bright fully shared 
the feeling of the Indians, When the British politicians argued in 
self-defence that no one was excluded from, the competitive exam¬ 
ination on racial considerations, Bright humorously retorted: “They 
might as well say that conditions were absolutely equal as between 
Englishmen and Indians, only the Indian competitors must be 8ft. 
6 inches in height.” Indeed the justice of the Indian case was so 
obvious that even the British House of Commons once passed the 
resolution of a private member in favour of introducing simultaneous 
examinations. But the Cabinet never gave effect to it. 1 

To the English-educated Indians who formed the chief pillars 
of support to the British rule, their virtual exclusion from the high¬ 
er branches of administration on purely racial grounds (as they 
conceived it), proved to be the rudest shock, particularly as they 
had nurtured the fond hope that the Englishmen would never hesit¬ 
ate to offer higher posts to qualified Indians. It is, therefore, not 
difficult to understand why this Civil Service question, for the first 
time, brought the whole of educated Indians on a common political 
platform against the English, as will be related in Ch. XIV. 

The British rulers showed the same mentality in their persis¬ 
tent refusal to admit suitable and representative Indians to the 
Legislative Councils, the demand for which was reiterated through¬ 
out the century. The principles laid down in Lord Durham’s Re¬ 
port in 1839, advocating Responsible Government in Canada, and 
the speeches of the liberal statesmen like Cobden when this mea¬ 
sure was under consideration of the House of Commons, had 
naturally roused expectation in the minds of the Indians that their 
case would receive an equally fair and favourable consideration. 
Similar liberal policy towards Australia in 1850 and South Africa 
in 1854 had further strengthened this belief. There is hardly any 
doubt that the hope of securing similar liberal treatment from the 
British Government induced the English-educated Indians to hold 
aloof from the great outbreak of 1857. Their hopes were not be¬ 
lied. Even after the dark days of the Mutiny the gracious English 
Queen, while taking over the reins of Indian Government in her 
own hands, made a solemn promise to treat her Indian subjects on 
exactly the same footing as her other subjects. In particular she 
declared that all her subjects, irrespective of race or creed, shall 
be freely and impartially admitted into Government service. 


420 



THE ATTITUDE OF INDIANS TOWARDS BRITISH RULE 

This was rightly regarded as the Magna Carta of political 
rights by the Indians. Unfortunately, as years rolled by, the 
Indians felt that it was as deceptive as the Charter Act of 1833, and 
that their claims for political advancement would never be conced-. 
ed. There was a gradual change in the views of the authorities in 
England, and the Indians were not slow to recognise it. 

Some concessions were made by the Acts of 1861 and 1892, 
but, as noted above, they fell far short, not only of Indian demand, 
but also of what the island of Ceylon had been granted years before. 
The Moderate party in Indian politics had pinned their faith on the 
British sense of justice and fondly entertained the hope that once 
the British people were convinced of the justice of Indian cause 
they would not hesitate to grant the necessary reforms. But hope 
deferred maketh the heart sick. The fate of the Congress resolu¬ 
tions passed year after year chilled even the most robust optimism. 
Though some incurable optimists still continued to hope, a section 
of Indians, gradually increasing in number towards the end of the 
nineteenth century, ceased to hope any longer and looked for other 
ways of fulfilling their political aspirations. The British tardiness 
in granting political reforms gave a death-blow to that school of 
Indian politics which was genuinely attached to the British, and 
never lost faith in ultimately gaining self-government for India 
with their consent and co-operation. A new school took its place, 
guided by a firm conviction that the British must be forced to grant 
what they denied to simple justice, and this view was shared by a 
steadily increasing number of Indians. 

Besides racial arrogance and the deliberate policy to keep out 
the Indians from a legitimate share in the administration of their 
own country, there were other factors at work to alienate them 
from their rulers. That India was administered for the interest 
of England alone was nowhere more clearly manifest than in the 
British economic policy. 

The grinding poverty of the Indians was a cause of grave con¬ 
cern and profound discontentment to the educated Indians. Re¬ 
ference has been made in earlier chapters to the ruin of flourishing 
Indian trade and industry brought about by the unfair use of poli¬ 
tical authority by the East India Company and their servants, the 
misery of the cultivators on account of the oppressive land-rent, 
the huge drain of wealth from India caused by the cost of main¬ 
taining English civil and military officials, and various other factors, 
the effect of which was the impoverishment of the country more and 
more. It assumed serious proportions and drew the attention of 
English-educated Indians. Dadabhai Naoroji was the first eminent 

421 





THE BRITISH PAKAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

Indian leader to devote his attention to this subject, and bring 
home to the people, both in India and England, the abject poverty 
of the Indians by quoting facts and figures. At the same time he 
traced the poverty to its root causes, boldly exposed the evil effects 
of the administration of India by foreigners, and suggested re¬ 
medial measures. Dadabhai made a scientific study of the econo¬ 
mic aspect of foreign rule and carried on a vigorous propaganda, 
throughout his life, against the economic exploitation of India by 
England. He patiently collected the relevant data, and his form¬ 
idable array of facts and unassailable arguments created a pro¬ 
found impression among his own countrymen, and even among a 
section of Englishmen. To him belongs the credit of rousing the 
political consciousness of India to this great menace of foreign 
rule, and henceforth it formed a chief plank in the constitutional 
agitation of India against British rule. The economic question was 
later taken up by other eminent men, notably William Digby and 
R. C. Dutt, and has always loomed large in the political relations 
between England and India. 

In a paper read before the East India Association on July 27, 
1870, Dadabhai concluded, after an elaborate calculation of all 
available data, that the average annual income of the population of 
British India was 40 shillings per head. It was merely the first step in 
his memorable investigation and exposition of the difficult problem. In 
this paper, and in subsequent writings, he drew prominent atten¬ 
tion to several important facts. The lack of proper supervision 
over expenditure by the Indian Government was a crying evil. As 
a prominent English official complained, “they care no more about 
spending a crore of Rupees than we do a lac.” Part of the difficulty 
in the financial administration of India was also due to the fact 
that the Indian Chancellor of the Exchequer had to serve two 
masters, the Local Government and the Home Government, and 
as the latter had the last word in the matter, the interest of India 
had on many occasions to be sacrificed to the interest of England. 
Another serious evil was the costliness of the administration caused 
by “lavishness in respect of salaries and leave-allowances, immense 
gathering of civil and military officers from all parts of India at the 
hill-stations during nearly half the year, and the ever-growing 
military expenditure which nearly absorbed a third of the gross 
revenue.” The military expenditure of India “was more than the 
ordinary military expenditure of the great military monarchies of 
Europe, more even than the expenditure by which England main¬ 
tained the security not only of the country, but also of the whole 
of the British colonies, including Canada. Even the Controller- 
General of military expenditure had remarked that military history 


422 


THE ATTITUDE OF INDIANS TOWARDS BRITISH RULE 

presented ‘no instance of any army so constituted, or of one so 
costly.” 1 * 

The inevitable result of the costly administration and ineffi¬ 
cient financial supervision was heavy taxation which specially fell 
upon the poorer classes. Dadabhai maintained that the burden of 
taxation on the cultivator was not equitable when compared with 
the burden borne by other classes. Nor was he satisfied that the 
machinery for the collection of the land revenue was economical. 

Dadabhai pointed out that “the total production of the country 
is admitted to be 40s. per head.... so that living from hand to 
mouth, and that on ‘scanty subsistence’ (in the words of Lord 
Lawrence), the very touch of famine carries away hundreds of 
thousands.” “Is not this in itself,” asked he, “as ‘crushing’ to any 
people as it can possibly be? And yet out of this wretched income 
they have to pay taxation as well.” Then he introduced his theory 
of ‘drain.’ / 

“Whatever revenue is raised by the other countries, for in¬ 
stance, the £70,000,000 by England, the whole of it returns back 
to the people and remains in the country; and therefore the nation¬ 
al capital, upon which the production of a country depends, does 
not suffer diminution; while, on account of India being subject to 
a foreign rule, out of £50,000,000 of revenue raised every year, 
some £12,000,000 or more are carried away to England, and the 
national capital—or, in other words, its capability of production—is 
continually diminished year after year.” 2 

In 1876 Dadabhai read a paper on the poverty of India before 
a crowded meeting held under the auspices of the Bombay Branch 
of the East India Association. Two years later, the paper was 
published in London in the form of a pamphlet—a prelude to the 
bulky volume that was to follow a quarter of a century later under 
the title. Poverty and Un-British Rule in India. 

Dadabhai produced facts and figures and cited authorities for 
his statement that India was sinking more and more in poverty, 
and that the system of administration of the country was largely 
responsible for her misery. 

“After elaborate calculations, Dadabhai said he had clearly esta¬ 
blished that the value of the production of one of the best provinces 
in India was Rs. 20 per head per annum. The conclusion was that 
even for such food and clothing as a criminal (in jail) obtains, there 
was hardly enough production even in a good season, ‘leaving alone 
all little luxuries, all social and religious wants, all expenses on 
occasions of joy and sorrow, and provision for a bad season.” 3 


423 


THE BRITISH FARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

Next came under review statistics of imports and exports. From 
1835 to 1872 India imported goods worth only about £ 943,000,000 
against exports valued at £ 1,430,000,000, leaving a balance of 
about £ 500,000,000, as the total tribute which India annually paid 
to England. Had interest been calculated, the drain would have 
amounted to a higher figure. Dadabhai then quoted statements 
made by British officials to establish his main contention that most 
of the ills of India were due to the heavy tribute which she had to 
pay to England. For example, one of the Commissioners of Revenue 
in the Deccan, “who afterwards became a member of Council, Saville 
Harriot, had stated in a letter written in the year 1836 that India 
had been ‘verging to the lowest ebb of pauperism’, and that it 
would be ‘difficult to satisfy the mind that any country could bear 
such a drain upon its resources without sustaining very serious 
injury.” 4 

Another important question raised was that of protection. In¬ 
structions had been then issued by the Secretary of State for the 
abolition of the duties on cotton. 6 The real object, said Dadabhai, 
was to smother the infant factories in India, the ostensible reason 
being free trade. He then added: 

“Now I do not want to say anything about the real selfish ob¬ 
jects of the Manchesterians, or what the political necessities of a 
Conservative Government may be under Manchester pressure. I 
give credit to the Secretary of State for honesty of purpose, and 
take the reason itself that is given on this question, viz., free trade. 
I like free trade, but after what I have said to-night, you will easily 
see that free trade between England and India in a matter like this 
is something like a race between a starving, exhausted invalid, and 
a strong man with a horse to ride on. Free trade between countries 
which have equal command over their own resources is one thing; 
but even then the colonies snapped their fingers at all such talk. But 
what can India do? Before powerful English interests, India must 
and does go to the wall. Young colonies, says Mill, need protection. 
India needs it in a far larger degree, independent of the needs of 
revenue which alone have compelled the retention of the present 
duties. Let India have its present drain brought within reasonable 
limits, and India will be quite prepared for free trade. With a pres¬ 
sure of taxation nearly double in proportion to that of England, 
from an income of one fifteenth, and an exhaustive drain besides, we 
are asked to compete with England in free trade.” 6 

It is not necessary to discuss at length the accuracy of Dadabhai’s 
facts and figures and the soundness of his views on economic ques¬ 
tions mentioned above. They have been substantially corroborated 


424 


/ 


THE ATTITUDE OF INDIANS TOWARDS BRITISH RULE 

by R. C. Dutt, Digby and other distinguished writers on the subject 
at a later date, and have not been seriously upset even by hostile 
critics. But the real importance of Dadabbai’s contribution lies in 
the deep impression it made upon the educated Indians about the 
seriousness of the economic condition in India and its close relation 
to politics. The contemporary periodical literature in India leaves 
no doubt that Dadabhai’s views found an echo in the hearts of 
Indians of all classes and shades of opinion. 

Lord George Hamilton, Secretary of State for India in Lord 
Salisbury’s Cabinet, referred in his Budget speech to “a small school 
in this country as well as in India who are perpetually asserting that 
our rule is bleeding India to death.” “I admit at once”, said he, 
“that if it could be shown that India has retrograded in material 
prosperity under our rule we stand self-condemned, and we ought 
no longer to be entrusted with the control of that country.” But, he 
added, that in spite of the most careful study of facts and figures he 
could not find any justification for the view. It was pointed out 
by Digby in reply, that one of the earliest members of the “small 
school” was no other than the Prime Minister Lord Salisbury him¬ 
self under whom Lord George Hamilton served. In 1875 Salisbury, 
as Secretary of State for India, urged that “as India must be bled, 
the bleeding should be done judiciously.” He also admitted that 
“much of the revenue of India is exported without a direct 
equivalent.” 7 

Digby held, after an elaborate calculation, based wholly on 
official data, that the drain of capital from India during the nineteenth 
century amounted to £6,080,172,021. He pointed out that “about five 
weeks* average maintenance of each Indian outside the one million 
well-to-do folks is annually disbursed in Great Britain, one of the 
wealthiest of lands, while the disbursing country is, omitting none, 
the poorest realm in all the world!” 8 The views of R. C. Dutt have 
been quoted above. 81 Sir George Campbell, by no means a friend 
of India, also calculated that the annual remittances, both public 
and private, from India to England amounted to more than 32 mil¬ 
lion sterling. 9 Digby also pointed out that the non-official estimated 
average national income of an Indian was 2d. per head per day in 
1850. The official estimate in 1882 was IJd. per day. According 
to his analysis of all sources the income was less than fd. per day 
in 1900. 

In reply to the criticism of some Englishmen that Dadabhai’s 
statements had “a possible seditious and mischievous tendency,” 
Dadabhai said that “no native from one end of India to the other 
could be found more loyal than I am to the British rule; because it 


425 


THE BRITISH PAKAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


is my sincere conviction, which I have expressed often, that the 
salvation of India, its future prosperity, its civilization, and its poli¬ 
tical elevation, all depend on the continuance of the British rule. It 
is because I wish that the British rule should be long continued in 
India, and that it is good that the rulers should know native feeling 
and opinions, that I come forward and speak my mind freely and 
boldly.” 10 

There was a wave of discontent and indignation all over the 
country when, early in 1879, the import duties on cotton goods were 
abolished. Though discussed above 11 in some detail, it is necessary, to 
recapitulate it briefly. The import duty which stood at 10% in 1860, 
was gradually reduced to 5% in 1875. Even this was resented by 
cotton manufacturers of Lancashire. Strong pressure was brought 
to bear upon Lord Northbrook by the ministry at home, but he stout¬ 
ly refused to do away with the import duty. He rightly pointed out 
that the duty was levied not for protection of Indian industry, but for 
revenue purposes, that its abolition would mean new taxation, and 
that it was politically unwise to have the appearance of sacrificing 
the interests of India to those of Manchester. Northbrook won the 
day. But the continuous agitation of Lancashire induced the House 
of Commons to pass a resolution in 1877 that the duties ought to be 
repealed without delay as soon as the financial condition of India 
would permit. In 1878 and 1879 the duties were abolished on all 
cotton goods except those manufactured from finer counts of 30s. and 
upwards. 

The majority of the members of Lord Lytton’s Executive Council 
were opposed to this repeal. Lord Lytton passed the measure under 
the power given by law to the Governor-General to act on his own 
opinion alone, “whenever the safety, tranquillity or interests of the 
British possessions in India may in his judgment be essentially affect¬ 
ed.” Lord Lytton’s use of the prerogative on this occasion was high¬ 
ly unconstitutional and was severely criticised even in the House of 
Commons. 

Lord Lytton’s action aroused bitter opposition among the Indians, 
and indignant protests were made all over the country. A public 
meeting, held in Bombay on May 3, 1879, decided to send a petition to 
the House of Commons. The memorial, ably drawn up, was forwarded 
to Mr. Fawcett, the indefatigable ‘member for India’, for submission 
to the House of Commons. The result was, of course, a foregone con¬ 
clusion. It was unceremoniously rejected by the House. “Thus did 
British statesmen discharge their ‘sacred trust’, and thus were 
£ 200,000 of India’s revenue shamelessly bartered away to win over 
the Lancashire votes for party purposes at Home.” 


426 


THE ATTITUDE OF INDIANS TOWARDS BRITISH RULE 

This incident demonstrated, as nothing else could, that India 
was governed in the interest of Britain, and provoked, beyond 
measure, Indians of all shades of opinion. The press denounced the 
action of Lord Lytton in the most vigorous language, and hundreds 
of public meetings and newspaper articles brought home to the minds 
of the Indians two important lessons, namely, that the British were 
out to plunder India without let or hindrance, and kill the infant 
cotton industry in India in order to remove a possible rival in future. 
These two lessons were never lost upon the Indians. They never 
forgot that these formed the basic policy of the English, nor forgave 
those who were responsible for it. Unable to devise any other 
means to give vent to their rage, and in an exasperated mood of frus¬ 
tration, some papers urged upon the Indians to make a firm resolve 
not to use Manchester piece-goods, thus forestalling by a quarter of 
a century the boycott movement in Bengal in 1905. 

The masses did not seriously concern themselves with questions 
of high policy, political or economic, and were not very much affect¬ 
ed by the newly bom urge of nationalism or patriotism, which 
moved the English-educated classes. Nevertheless, they were gra¬ 
dually alienated from the British rule by the terrible miseries 
which they had to suffer from one end of the year to the other. As 
the large majority of the people were cultivators or labourers, it is 
necessary to refer briefly to them in order to understand the Indian 
attitude towards the British rule. 

The condition of the cultivators grew from bad to worse, and 
famine became a periodically recurring disaster. R. C. Dutt, a retired 
Indian Civilian, ruthlessly exposed the real causes of the repeated 
occurrence of this calamity all over India. These were mainly 
the heavy land revenue and the oppressive manner in which it 
was realized, the ruin of trade and industry, and the huge drain of 
wealth to England, to which reference has been made above. “The 
great famines of 1837, 1857, 1877 and 1897 are sad landmarks in the 
modem history of India—landmarks not of progress and prosperity 
but of desolation and disasters.” The growing character of this 
great evil will be apparent from the fact that while there were seven 
famines with an estimated total of one and a half million deaths in 
the first half of the nineteenth century, there were twenty-four fa¬ 
mines with an estimated total of over twenty million deaths in the 
second half. 12 

As mentioned above, there were serious agrarian disturbances 
in Bengal in 1872-73 where the tenants openly called themselves 
‘rebclc* and launched something like a no-rent campaign. The ad¬ 
ministration reports of the Bengal Government during 1872-75 


427 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

admitted that the “ryots of Eastern Bengal have learnt to unite for 
common action”, “that there seems to be a disposition among the 
ryots to combine in something like leagues and unions,” and regard¬ 
ed the consequences as ‘serious 5 . 

Agrarian discontent reached its climax in Western India about 
the time when the Prince of Wales (later, Edward VII) visited India 
in 1875. It assumed serious proportions and produced violent anti- 
British feeling and national sentiment. Two Zaxnindars in a village 
were sentenced to capital punishment for brutally killing a revenue 
officer. One of them, just before going to the scaffold, requested the 
officer that a volley of muskets should be fired over his dead body. He 
held that by killing the oppressive revenue officer he had done a pub¬ 
lic duty and patriotic deed. He therefore wished that there should 
be some recognition of the fact that he sacrificed his life for the cause 
of his country. 13 

The cruelties perpetrated by European indigo- and tea-planters 
have become almost a by-word for iniquity of British rule during the 
period under review. The harrowing tales of misery and oppression, 
committed with impunity, and with the connivance, if not active sup¬ 
port, of the officials, have been told above. 14 Nearly throughout the 
nineteenth century these woeful stories were spread from mouth to 
mouth, and through periodical literature, and created a strong hatred 
against the British in popular minds. Unable to bear their oppression 
the cultivators of indigo were forced to launch a Satyagrdha or civil 
resistance, anticipating Mahatma Gandhi’s action by sixty years. 
The Coolies in the tea-garden bore in silence the kicks and blows of 
the white planters till ‘the bursting up of their spleens’ relieved them 
of their earthly miseries. But the stories of the ‘Indian Negro-slaves’ 
kindled fire of indigination in every Indian heart. 16 

The Indians also smarted under other grievances which, they 
believed, were due to errors of omission or commission on the part 
of the foreign Government. The imposition of new taxes, particu¬ 
larly on necessaries of life, was strongly resented, as the people be¬ 
lieved, rightly or wrongly, that these could be largely avoided by cur¬ 
tailing unnecessary and wasteful expenditure. To saddle the poor 
Indian exchequer with the heavy expenses of imperial wars in Burma, 
Afghanistan and Abyssinia was particularly assailed in this context. 
Steady rise in the prices of foodstuffs hit the people hard, and fre¬ 
quent famines decimated the land; the people attributed them 
solely to the selfish economic policy deliberately pursued by the 
British. The favouritism shown to the Englishmen as against 
Indians in all walks of life was another sore point with the Indians. 
Particularly galling were the supersession of the claims of Indians in 



THE ATTITUDE OF INDIANS TOWARDS BRITISH RULE 

favour of Englishmen of distinctly lower qualification in Govern¬ 
ment services; virtual exclusion of Indians from the higher Civil 
and Military services, and such other superior services as Police, 
Education, and Medical; undue advantages extended to English busi-. 
ness men even to the detriment of Indian interest; and, above all, 
the almost criminal partiality of English officers—magistrates, jud¬ 
ges, policemen—and jurors to Englishmen. 

The neglect of primary education causing appalling illiteracy, 
failure to provide for higher technical education in order to fit In¬ 
dians for industry and business, prompted by the ignoble motive 
of keeping India as a perpetual market for English trade, restric¬ 
tions imposed on Indians by the Arms Act and the Vernacular Press 
Act, the corruption and inefficiency of the police,—all these were 
heavy counts in popular minds against the British Government. 

It is irrelevant to discuss in this context whether some of these 
charges were not either imaginary or unduly exaggerated. There 
is no doubt whatsoever about the fact that they were believed, al¬ 
most universally, by all classes of Indians. For, when the people 
are perpetually deprived of all share and responsibility in the admi¬ 
nistration, they are prone to believe that all the ills they suffer are 
due to the faults of the Government* They may even be excused 
for highly exaggerating these faults, for those who have no oppor¬ 
tunity or even expectation of shouldering the responsibility of Gov¬ 
ernment are hardly likely to consider, in a calm and dispassionate 
spirit, the difficulties with which the Government had to grapple or 
to realize that some of the evils are inherent in the system and in¬ 
evitable under any Government. 

Thus when the nineteenth century was drawing to its close, the 
British almost entirely forfeited the large fund of goodwill with 
which they had started at the beginning of the century. Discontent 
and disaffection pervaded all classes and ranks. Constant brooding 
over the various grievances and grounds of complaint mentioned 
above, accompanied by a feeling of utter helplessness to stem the tide 
of repression and injustice, against Englishmen and their administra¬ 
tion in India highly exacerbated the Indian feeling. Quickened 
by the newly awakened spirit of nationalism, the Indians 
gradually developed a mentality which was decidedly anti-British and 
differed fundamentally from that which spurred on the older genera¬ 
tion with a buoyant faith in English sense of justice. The Moderate 
party, representing the older generation, was still at the helm of Indian 
politics, but as they failed to deliver the goods, their leadership 
was fast slipping away into the grasp of others, who more faithfully 
reflected the new temperament of the people. These had no faith 


429 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


in the British justice or generosity and were not in a mood to regard 
the policy of mendicancy, hitherto pursued, as either fruitful or in 
keeping with the national dignity. Thus a new school of politics 
silently took the place of the old, and backed by the nation at large, 
was destined ere long gradually to oust it altogether. But as yet 
neither the Government nor the people fully realized the great trans¬ 
formation that was silently taking place in India at the turn of the 
century. At the close of the period under review Surendra-nath 
Banerji, Pherozeshah Mehta, and G. K. Gokhale were still the ack¬ 
nowledged political leaders of the country; B. G. Tilak, B. C. Pal and 
Lajpat Rai did not yet count for much in active politics, and Ara- 
binda Ghosh was almost an unknown figure. But those who had 
ears could hear the cry rising from the heart of the nation, “ring 
out the old and ring in the new”. In less than two years’ time the 
table was turned, and before the first decade of this century was 
over, ‘the old order had changed yielding place to the new.’ That 
story will be told in the next volume. 


1. Vol. IX, pp. 790-1. 

la. Masani, Dadabhai, pp. 123 ff. 

2. Ibid, 128-9. 

3. Ibid, 189-90. 

4. Ibid. 

5. Vol. IX, pp. 800 ff. 

6. Masani, p. 192. 

7. Digby, p. 2. The exact words used by Lord Salisbury in a Minute recorded in 
1875 are as follows: “It is not in itself a thrifty policy to draw the mass of re¬ 
venue from rural districts, where capital is scarce, sparing the towns where it is 
often redundant and runs to waste in luxury. Hie injury is exaggerated in the 
case of India where so much of the revenue is exported without a direct equi¬ 
valent. As India must be bled, the lancet should be directed to the parts where 
the blood is congested, or at least sufficient, not to those which are already fee¬ 
ble from the want of it.” (quoted in Dutt-II, pp. xii-xlii). 

8. Digby, p. 220. 

8a. Cf. Vol. IX, pp. 1150 ff. 

9. Digby, p. 231. 

10. Masani, pp. 124-25. 

11. Vol. IX, pp. 802 ff. 

12. Vol, IX, pp. 836-7. 

13. The Times of India , 17 August, 1876. 

14. Vol. IX, pp. 914-37. 

15. This has been discussed in detail in Chapter XVII, Section 1 


430 



CHAPTER XII (L) 


GROWTH OF POLITICAL IDEAS AND POLITICAL 
ORGANIZATIONS (UP TO 1858) 

I. INTRODUCTION 

• . » 

The most outstanding effect of the introduction of Western cul¬ 
ture in- India was the growth of modern political concepts, such as 
nationalism, nationality, patriotism, political rights, etc., which are 
usually associated with western countries in modern age. Whether 
and how far these ideas existed in India in ancient and medieval 
times need not be discussed here. The history of these times in the 
preceding volumes contains fruitful materials for such a discussion. 
But certain it is that at the beginning of the period under review 
these ideas were almost conspicuous by their absence. The political 
theories of the Hindus did not extend beyond the stage which it 
reached in A.D. 1200-1300, and the stereotyped ideas of the Muslim 
rulers, based on the Qur'an , had no prospect of being developed to 
any extent. Such natural instincts as not unoften take the place of 
formulated ideas of patriotism and nationalism perhaps existed, to 
a certain degree, in certain localities. But by the beginning of the 
nineteenth century even these rudimentary ideas almost totally 
♦ disappeared from India. 

It is idle to expect the growth of patriotism or nationalism in 
the true sense of the word in those parts of India where the rulers 
were Muslims but a vast majority of the people were Hindus. The 
ruling clan might have a sort of national feeling, based on the com¬ 
munity of religion, particularly the brotherhood of Islam. But in 
actual history no such instances are known. Neither in Delhi nor in 
Bengal, where the Muslims were numerically strong, we come across 
any evidence of political solidarity among the Muslims strong 
enough to induce them to make a common stand against the outside 
invaders. The only example of an organised unity among them is 
afforded by the Wahabis, but its outlook was strictly communal and 
religious, and it never played any important role in the general poli¬ 
tical development of India. Among the Hindus, the Rajputs and the 
Marathas were noted for their ardent patriotism, but it was too 
narrow and local in the first case, and merely centred round persona¬ 
lities in the second. Each petty Rajput State constituted a world 
by itself to its people, and whatever patriotic and national feelings 

431 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

they possessed in the nineteenth century never extended beyond its 
boundary. The Marathas lost their wider outlook, if ever they had 
any, and their allegiance was now to the Peshwa and the Bhonsle, 
and to a lesser degree to Sindhia, Holkar, and Gaekwar (whose sub¬ 
jects were mostly non-Maratha), rather than to any common country 
or to any common political ideal. 

The process by which a body of British merchants gradually 
made themselves masters of India affords the best evidence, if such 
evidence were needed, of the utter lack of any sense of patriotism 
and nationalism in India. The Indian ruling chiefs, even those be¬ 
longing to the same community, helped the British against one ano¬ 
ther. The Nizam and the Marathas joined the British against Hyder 
Ali and Tipu Sultan of Mysore. The Peshwa joined the British 
against the other Maratha leaders. The Marathas felt no scruple in 
crushing -the Rajputs, and fighting the Sikhs; the Muslim rulers and 
chiefs fought among themselves; the Marathas were fighting among 
themselves and against Muslim rulers; and all these went on when 
the British were consolidating their power and were well on the way 
to conquer the whole of the country. So it is hardly any exaggera¬ 
tion to say that, politically speaking, there was no India at the be¬ 
ginning of the nineteenth century—it was a mere congeries of States. 

Analogy is usually drawn between India on the one hand, and 
such contemporary European States as Germany and Italy on the 
other. But this is only partially true. Like India both these coun¬ 
tries lacked political unity, and were more or less mere geographical 
expressions. But as Seeley has rightly pointed out, India’s condition 
was still more degrading in one respect. 1 Napoleon was able to 
set one German State against another, but he did not make the at¬ 
tempt to raise an army of Germans simply by offering pay, and then 
use them in the conquest of Germany. It is very doubtful if such 
an attempt would have been successful. But this is precisely what 
the British did in India, and with conspicuous success. They con¬ 
quered the south with the Tilings troops and the whole of North India 
with the sepoys recruited from all over that country. They defeated 
the Sikhs and the Gurkhas with the help of the sepoys, and suppres¬ 
sed the sepoy revolt in 1857 with the help of the Sikhs, Gurkhas 
and sepoys. Referring to the conquest of India by the East India 
Company an eminent English historian has aptly remarked that 
“India can hardly be said to have been conquered at all by foreigners. 
She has rather conquered herself.” 

The facts stated above leave no doubt that at the beginning 
of the nineteenth century, and for at least a century before that, 
there was no India in the political sense. Neither the chiefs nor the 


432 



GROWTH OF POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 

common man had any sense of national unity or even a national 
feeling in a narrow regional sense. Because there was no India, 
therefore, properly speaking, there was no foreigner, and people of 
India entertained no hostile feelings against the English merely as 
foreigners. 

* • 

Confirmation and illustration of what has been stated above 
meet us at almost every step in the early history of the British in 
Madras and Bengal, the two provinces where they first established a 
complete political authority. It must therefore strike one as very 
strange that it was in Bengal that the modern idea of nationalism 
had its birth in the nineteenth century. The fact is that it germi¬ 
nated in the soil of Bengal, was fertilized by Western education, and 
then spread rapidly to other parts of India. 

It is unnecessary for our present purpose to discuss at length 
what constitutes the essential elements of nationality, and how far 
these were present in India or even in its separate provinces in the 
eighteenth century. The basis of nationality is usually regarded to 
be one or more of the following: the community of race, language, 
religion or culture; geographical position; identity of present politi¬ 
cal interests or past historical traditions, etc. How far all or any of 
these should be regarded as essential ingredients of nationality, and 
the extent to which they were present in India are subjects of keen 
dispute. But there is one element which seems to be a sine qua non 
for constituting a nationality. This has been explained by Mill in 
the following words: 

“A portion of mankind may be said to constitute a nationality 
if they are united among themselves by common sympathies which 
do not exist between them and any others—which make them co¬ 
operate with each other more willingly than with other people, de¬ 
sire to be under the same government, and desire that it should be 
governed by themselves or a portion of themselves exclusively.” 2 

Such a feeling may be due to a variety of reasons, particularly 
those that have been referred to above as the basic factors of nationa¬ 
lity. But, so long as this feeling does not inspire a considerable body 
of men, they can hardly be said to form a nation even though they 
may possess many other essential elements of nationality. Judged 
by this standard it can be at once said that there was no sense of 
nationality in Bengal, and far less in India as a whole. 

The ideas of nationality and patriotism, on an all-India basis, 
and political consciousness, leading to struggle for freedom or an 
urge towards political advancement of the people, cannot be traced 
before the British period. Even in Europe these ideas were not 

433 


B.P.I.R.—28 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


fully developed, save in England, before the eighteenth century. The 
American War of Independence and the French Revolution, both 
in the latter half of that century, gave these ideas a prominence which 
they have maintained ever since, and shaped the destinies of man¬ 
kind all over the world. It is a happy coincidence that India's first 
contact with the West dated precisely from the period when the 
ideas of nationality, freedom, and democracy exercised the greatest 
influence in that part of the world and permeated the English lite¬ 
rature through which that contact was mainly established. The re¬ 
sult was remarkable. Indians with English education were im¬ 
bued with the most advanced political and social ideas of the West, 
and though their number was few, their influence was considerable 
and far-reaching. 


II. BENGAL 

As in many other fields, so in the demand for political rights also, 
Raja Rammohan Roy took a leading part and set an example to others. 
He had a passionate love of liberty which “made him take interest 
in and deeply sympathise with all political movements all over the 
world that had for their object the advancement of popular free¬ 
dom." 3 His cosmopolitan sympathy in the domain of politics is well 
illustrated by several incidents. When the political aspirations of 
the people of Naples were crushed by the Holy Alliance in 1821, the 
Raja was so depressed by the news that he cancelled an engagement 
for the evening with Mr. Buckingham and wrote to him: “From the 
late unhappy news I am obliged to conclude that I shall not live to 
see liberty universally restored to the nations of Europe, and Asiatic 
nations, especially those that are European colonies, possessed of a 
greater degree of the same blessing than what they now enjoy”. The 
letter concludes with the remarkable sentence: “Enemies to liberty 
and friends of despotism have never been and never will be ultimately 
successful”. 4 The Raja also gave a public dinner at the Town Hall 
in Calcutta on the establishment of constitutional Government in 
Spain. During his voyage to England, though suffering from some 
injuries in his leg, he insisted on visiting two French frigates which 
were flying the tri-colour flag. 0 

A passionate yearning for liberty .and an ardent sense of patrio¬ 
tism were instilled into the minds of the students of Hindu Col¬ 
lege, Calcutta, by its young and gifted teacher, Henry Louis Vivian 
Derozio, an East Indian (equivalent to Eurasian or Anglo-Indian of 
the present day) of Portuguese-Indian ancestry. Born in 1808, he 
was educated in a private school in Calcutta by the Scotsman, Drum¬ 
mond, a ‘notorious* free-thinker and an exile from his native land, 


434 


GROWTH OF POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 

and was inspired by him with those radical ideas about politics, so¬ 
ciety, and religion which he communicated to his own students. De- 
rozio was appointed a teacher to the senior classes in the Hindu 
College shortly before 13 May, 1826, before probably he had even 
completed his eighteenth year. The biographer of Derozio has justly 
observed that “neither before, nor since his day, has any teacher, 
within the walls of any native educational establishment in India, 
ever exercised such an influence over his pupils”. Derozio had un¬ 
flinching faith in the French Revolution and English Radicalism, and 
drew the senior boys “like a magnet” around him. Through the 
medium of academic Associations and College Magazines, Derozio and 
his pupils discussed such topics as freewill and fate, virtue and vice, 
patriotism, idolatry, priestcraft, superstitions, and even the existence 
of God, not to speak of subjects of lesser importance like female educa¬ 
tion, cheap justice etc. The practical effect of the political teachings 
of Derozio may be illustrated by two incidents. “On 10 December, 
1830, 200 persons attended the July Revolution celebration in the 
Town Hall. On Christmas day of the same year the tricolour flag 
of the French Revolution was hoisted on the monument, and it is 
not difficult to guess, by whom.” 

Derozio regarded himself as an Indian and wrote patriotic ver¬ 
ses, a specimen of which is given below: 

“My country! in the days of glory past 
A beauteous halo circled round thy brow. 

And worshipped as a deity thou wast, 

Where is that glory, where that reverence now?” 

Derozio’s personality ushered in a new era in the annals of the 
Hindu College, but for that very reason the orthodox Hindu com¬ 
munity strongly disliked him, and at last brought about his dis¬ 
missal in 1831. Undaunted in any way, Derozio established a daily 
paper—the East Indian —and carried on his activities. But death 
put an end to his career on December 26, 1831, at the age of 23 
years and 8 months. 6 

The dismissal and premature death of Derozio at the age of 
twenty-three struck a heavy blow at the growth of Young Bengal, for 
he left behind him ideas but no organization. Many of his pupils che¬ 
rished to the last days of their lives the rational spirit and radical 
views in politics which they had imbibed from him, but being 
scattered about in various professions and pre-occupations, their 
activities did not lead to any permanent school of thought in politics. 
Nevertheless, it was no small gain that a large number of distinguish¬ 
ed students of the Hindu College carried on the spirit of Derozio for 
many years to come, and, generally speaking, the Hindu College 

435 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


students became familiar with the most radical political ideas then 
prevalent in Europe. 6 * They carefully studied the history and revo¬ 
lutionary philosophy of ^France and were deeply stirred by the wave 
of Revolutions in Europe in 1830. That some of them even looked for¬ 
ward to the outbreak of a similar revolution in India may be gathered 
from a series of essays on the grievances of India published in the 
Bengal Harkaru of 1843. A deep patriotic feeling inspired a number 
of poems written about 1830 by Kashi-prasad Ghosh, a student of the 
Hindu College. In one of these he sang the glory of the motherland 
as follows: 

“Land of the gods and lofty name; 

Land of the fair and beauty’s spell; 

Land of the bards of mighty fame, 

My native land! for e’er farewell!” 

It has been justly remarked that “this song might be taken as 
the first cry of patriotic fervour, which was roused in Bengal by the 
introduction of Western culture.” 

But while the students of the Hindu College dreamt of inde¬ 
pendence, they were the first to recognize that it would take long in 
coming. This sentiment is beautifully expressed in the following 
verse by Kashi-prasad: 

“But woe me! I shall never live to behold, 

That day of thy triumph, when firmly and bold, 

Thou shalt mount on the wings of an eagle on high 
To the region of knowledge and blest liberty.” 

This truth was so obvious to one and all that all practical efforts 
were mainly directed to demands for political reforms. The stu¬ 
dents of the Hindu College propagated the ideas through their as¬ 
sociations and periodical publications, as already noted above. But 
more active efforts were made b> the new leaders by demanding 
specific reforms. 

The general attitude of the educated classes towards the British 
Government is reflected in the following observations of Raja Ram- 
mohan Roy in his ‘Appeal to the King in Council’ against the Press 
Regulation: 

“Your Majesty is aware, that under their former Muhammadan 
Rulers, the natives of this country enjoyed every political privilege 
in common with Mussulmans, being eligible to the highest offices in 

the state.Although under the British Rule, the natives of 

India have entirely lost this political consequence, your Majesty’s 
faithful subjects were consoled by the more secure enjoyment of 


436 



GROWTH OF POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 

those civil and religious rights which had been so often violated by 
the rapacity and intolerance of the Mussulmans; and notwithstanding 
the loss of political rank and power, they considered themselves much 
happier in the enjoyment of civil and religious liberty than were 
their ancestors; but if these rights that remain are allowed to be 
unceremoniously invaded .... the basis on which they have founded 
their hopes of comfort and happiness under the British Power will 
be destroyed”. 7 

This spirited protest was evoked by the new Press Ordinance 
of 1823, noted above, which prescribed that no one should publish 
a newspaper or other periodical without having obtained a license 
from the Governor-General in Council. 8 

The next measure which strongly agitated the public was the 
Jury Act of 1827 by which the Christians, including native converts, 
could not be tried by a Hindu or Musalman juror, but any Hindu 
or Musalman could be tried by Europeans or native Christians. 
The Act also denied both to Hindus and Musalmans the honour 
of a seat in the Grand Jury even in the trial of fellow-Hindus or 
Musalmans. Petitions against the Act for presentation to both 
Houses of Parliament were signed by Hindus and Musalmans. 
Raja Rammohan Roy, who drew up the petition, made some ob¬ 
servations about the future of India, which may be quoted as a 
remarkable testimony to the advanced political ideas of educated 
Bengal in 1829. 

“Supposing that 100 years hence the Native character becomes 
elevated from constant intercourse with Europeans and the acquire¬ 
ment of general and political knowledge as well as of modem arts 
and sciences, is it possible that they will not have the spirit as well 
as the inclination to resist effectually any unjust and oppressive 
measures serving to degrade them in the scale of society? It should 
not be lost sight of that the position of India is very different from 
that of Ireland, to any quarter of which an English fleet may suddenly 
convey a body of troops that may force its way in the requisite 
direction and succeed in suppressing every effort of a refractory 
spirit. Were India to share one-fourth of the knowledge and energy 
of that country, she would prove from her remote situation, her 
riches and her vast population, either useful and profitable as a 
willing province, an ally of the British empire, or troublesome and 
annoying as a determined enemy.” 9 

An idea of the other measures of reform which were demanded 
at the time may be gathered from the several communications made 
by Rammohan to the Board of Control in 1831. These included 
the fixation of maximum rents to be paid by the cultivator; the 


437 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


substitution of English for Persian as the official language of the 
courts of law; the appointment of native assessors in the civil courts; 
trial by jury; Habeas Corpus Act; separation of the offices of judge 
and revenue commissioners; separation of the offices of judge and ma¬ 
gistrate; codification of the criminal law and also of the civil law 
of India; independence of judges; legal responsibility of officials; con¬ 
sultation with the local magnates before enacting laws; and last, but 
not the least, the appointment of Indians to higher posts, which were 
practically reserved for the British. 10 

Some of these measures were advocated by others even before 
Raja Rammohan Roy. 11 Nevertheless, he may certainly be re¬ 
garded as the great pioneer of political movement in India. 

Rammohan was also the first Indian to voice the grievances of 
his country before the British authorities. His activities were not 
altogether unsuccessful. It was generally believed that some of 
the beneficent provisions in the Charter Act of 1833 were mainly 
due to his influence. 12 In a memorial meeting for the Raja, held in 
the Town Hall, Calcutta, on April 5, 1834, Rasik-krishna Mallik said: 

“To his going there (England) we are in a great measure in¬ 
debted for the best clauses in the new Charter; bad and wretched 

as the Charter is.the few provisions that it contains for the 

good of our countrymen we owe to Rammohan Roy”. 13 

As an important indication of the political advance of the Ben¬ 
gali public it may be noted that the Charter Act of 1833 evoked 
strong protest both from Indians and Englishmen. At the request of 
the leading citizens of Calcutta, both Indians and Europeans, the 
Sheriff called a public meeting at the Town Hall on 5 January, 1835, 
to protest against the Act. Theodore Dickens, Thomas E. M. Turton, 
and Rasik-krishna Mallik made eloquent speeches to show that the 
Act put a burden of insupportable magnitude upon the people of 
India for the sole benefit of the East India Stock, and was extremely 
unsatisfactory as it was not likely to improve the administration of 
the country to any appreciable extent. The meeting urged the re¬ 
peal of Press Regulations of 1823, and the removal of the restraint 
upon public meetings. The meeting also took steps to communicate 
its proceedings to the Government and the British Parliament. 

Reference may be made, in connection with political reforms, to 
a pet idea of Raja Rammohan and his associates which provoked 
angry discussions in those days. It is the plan of having a European 
colony in India. The idea was to induce Europeans of upper classes, 
including capitalists and captains of industry, to settle permanently 
in India in large numbers. It was advocated mainly on two grounds. 


438 


GROWTH OF POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 


The huge annual flow of money from India to England was discussed 
in the newspapers and Eammohan calculated the total amount with¬ 
drawn from India to England between 1765 and 1820 to be 110 mil¬ 
lion sterling. With a view to checking such a huge drain of Indian 
wealth he suggested that the Europeans accumulating capital in 
India should be encouraged to settle in India so that the wealth 
might not go out of the country. 14 The second reason was the Raja's 
firm conviction that these Europeans would, by their superior know- 
ledge and public spirit, bring about the industrial regeneration of 
India, effect improvement in mechanical arts, teach the people how 
to secure political rights, and would themselves secure better ad¬ 
ministration of the country by representing the grievances of India 
to the authorities in England. “The greater our intercourse with 
European gentlemen”, said the Raja in a public meeting in 1829, 
“the greater will be our improvement in literary, social and politi¬ 
cal affairs.” The idea was supported by men like Dwaraka-nath 
Tagore and a petition signed by a number of persons was sent to 
Parliament in favour of the colonization. It is only fair to add that 
Rammohan was fully alive to the probable dangers and disadvantages 
of the scheme. 16 

There was, however, considerable opposition to the idea. A 
letter published in the Bengali periodical Samachdra-ddrpania (Octo¬ 
ber 15, 1831) said that “it is not the wish of the great body of the 
Hindus that the English should come and cultivate the ground and 
become landlords.” 16 

The students of the Hindu College, who supported many of the 
measures of reform, referred to above, were divided in their opinion 
on the subject of European colonisation in India. Some supported the 
scheme, w T hile others vigorously opposed it. A paper containing a 
very comprehensive review of the whole question was read before 
the Hindu Literary Society and published in the India Gazette (Febru¬ 
ary 12, 1830). The writer traces the history of colonization from the 
most ancient times, and describes the oppressive character and the ad¬ 
verse effect on the native population of the Greek, Roman, and Phoe¬ 
nician colonies of the ancient, and the English, Dutch, and Spanish 
colonies of modern times. In a tone of brilliant satire the author 
observes: “No sooner did the benevolent inhabitants of Europe be¬ 
hold their sad condition, than they immediately go to work to ameli¬ 
orate and improve it. They introduced among them, rum, gin, 
brandy and other comforts of life, and it is astonishing to read how 
soon the poor savages learnt to estimate these blessings .” 17 

This splendid review is remarkable in many ways. It shows the 
depth of learning, power of expression, capacity of acute judgement, 


439 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


and a spirit of true national feeling, on the part of a youth, which 
would do credit to any public leader of repute. What is more im¬ 
portant, it proves that the teaching in Hindu College did not neces¬ 
sarily denationalize or anglicize the Hindus of Bengal, as is generally 
supposed. Above all, it shows that the inordinate flow of love for 
the British which swept the country during the first quarter of the 
nineteenth century was slowly ebbing away. Rammohan Roy tells 
us that the enlightened people looked upon the English as deliverers 
rather than as conquerors, and that the citizens of Calcutta offered 
prayers for the victory of the British during the third Maratha and 
the Nepal wars. 18 But while the older generation still retained 
this spirit of goodwill towards the British, a new generation was 
slowly growing up with less confidence in the benevolent character 
of the foreign rule. This is amply proved by the opinions freely ex¬ 
pressed by some political writers of the time most of whom were 
students or ex-students of the College. A few may be quoted as 
specimens. 

Rasik-krishna Mallik (1810-1858), a brilliant student of the 
Hindu College, and editor of the Gyananneshun, severely condemn¬ 
ed the Calcutta Police and the administration of justice, which, in 
his opinion, was characterised by everything that is opposed to the 
just principles of government. “The primary function of govern¬ 
ment/’ said he, “was to administer justice fairly and impartially. 
But this function can be properly discharged only by such a govern¬ 
ment as has thoroughly identified itself with the welfare and in¬ 
terest of the governed.” According to him this was not the case 
in India which was governed by a body of merchants whose princi¬ 
pal aim as such would be to promote their own interests and who 
naturally “will try to make their government subservient to the 
one ignoble principle of gain.” 19 

Dakshina-ranj an Mukhopadhyay advocated the doctrine of 
equality of men and held that God “in his impartial wisdom created 
all men alike equal to one another in their birth rights.” 20 He re¬ 
iterated the maxim that “governments are for the good of the many, 
and not the few”. 21 As a corollary to all this, he emphasised the 
evils of subjection to foreigners. In his opinion the foreign rulers 
were guided by their own interests and were seldom actuated by the 
philanthropic desire of promoting the welfare of the native races. 
He attributed the poverty of India to foreign subjection. 22 

As against such radical views, many political leaders, mostly 
associates of Raja Rammohan Roy, had unflinching faith in 
the British Government. Thus Prasanna-kumar Tagore wrote: “If 
we were to be asked, what Government we would prefer, English or 


440 


GROWTH OF POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 


any other, we would one and all reply, English by all means, ay, 
even in preference to a Hindu Government”. 23 Dwaraka-nath Ta¬ 
gore also expressed ‘his conviction that the happiness of India is 
best secured by her connection with England.’ 24 Girish-chandra 
Ghosh, the founder and first editor of the Hindoo Patriot and the 
Bengalee, held that the educated Indians had not yet become fit 
for taking the responsibility of their country’s administration on 
their own shoulders, “and that by subverting the British rule,— 
even if it were in their power so to do,-—they would only prepare 
their necks for another and, perhaps, a heavier foreign yoke.” 26 

But in spite of theoretical differences between the younger and 
older sections about the character and desirability of the British 
rule, there was a general agreement of views among the political 
thinkers of the time that there were serious defects in the system 
of administration. While the younger section vigorously denounced 
the abuses, mainly taking their stand on the abstract principles of 
government derived from the radical writers of Europe, the older 
section believed that they could be remedied by constitutional agi¬ 
tation. They had implicit faith in “the pure and benevolent inten¬ 
tions of the British Government whose noble solicitude for the wel¬ 
fare and improvement of millions committed by Providence to its 
- charge, may challenge the admiration of the wide world”. 

The main object of these political leaders was to rouse the poli¬ 
tical consciousness of the people of Bengal in order to bring the 
pressure of public opinion to bear upon the Government. The apathy 
of the general people to political affairs constituted their main diffi¬ 
culty. Dwaraka-nath Tagore remarked in a public meeting held on 
18 June, 1836: “The majority of my countrymen say, ‘If I have 
lost one eye, let me take care of the other,’ and thus they keep them¬ 
selves back from public meetings and are tardy in the assertion of 
their jrights.” But he had great faith that English education would 
cure this evil. “Let the Hindu College go on,” said he, “for three 
or four years more and you will have a meeting like this attended by 
four times the number of natives.” 26 

Undeterred by the general public apathy, the leaders carried on 
regular agitation in the press and on the platform. It is not possible 
to give an adequate account of the specific demands for political re¬ 
form or the different views on which they were based, and only a 
brief reference to the important topics must suffice. 

The spread of education among the masses was urged as a 
fundamental duty of the Government. Tara-chand Chakravarty, the 
leader of Young Bengal, regarded it as an essential function of go¬ 
vernment which is not only to maintain peace and order but also 

441 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


to lead the citizens to live a better life. “The general elightenment 
of the people”, said he, “is undoubtedly the best guarantee of a good 
government”. “According to Tarachand, power has been delegated 
to government by the people with a view to ‘the protection of rights, 
the prevention of wrongs and the consequent promotion of happi¬ 
ness’. Such being the origin of government, it is bound ‘to consider 
the education of the people, whom they govern, a part of their 
duty”. He further maintained that this education should not be mere¬ 
ly theoretical, but include sound vocational training through govern¬ 
ment institutions built up on the model pf the Polytechnic schools of 
Paris. 27 Akshay-kumar Datta also wrote in the same strain. He 
believed that a proper system of education alone could remove all 
the social, political and economic evils from which Bengal was 
suffering. As early as 1855 he advocated free and compulsory edu¬ 
cation for all children up to the age of fifteen, the funds to be pro¬ 
vided by curtailing military expenditure. He prepared a detailed 
scheme for different stages* of education, in which provision was 
made for teaching sciences and humanities as well as technical and 
vocational education, including agriculture, engineering, ship-build¬ 
ing, etc. He also suggested that vernacular should be the medium of 
the higher, secondary and primary education. 28 Akshay-kumar 
stressed the need of representative character of the government and 
elaborated the well-known principle that the right to impose taxes 
involved the duty of improving the conditions of the people. 

Amelioration of the condition of the ryots was another in¬ 
sistent demand. Rasik-krishna Mallik and Akshay-kumar Datta 
vigorously championed their cause and blamed the Government for 
their miserable lot. Though Dwaraka-nath Tagore, Prasanna-kumar 
Tagore and others were champions of the rights of the Zamindars, 
they also supported the cause of the ryots. 

Indianisation of Services was an insistent demand from all quar¬ 
ters. On April 18, 1843, the Hindu College students held a public 
meeting in the Town Hall to send a memorial to the Court of Pro¬ 
prietors ‘praying for the bestowal of more offices on Indians’. Tara¬ 
chand Chakravarty, who moved the resolution, vigorously attacked 
the maintenance of the Civil Service as a monopoly of English¬ 
men. He argued that it “represses the expansion of talent and 
genius among the Indians” and “promotes a sort of clanship which 
usually blinds the sense of justice to members of its own fraternity 
and thus thwarts the efforts of natives to seek redress from the grie¬ 
vances to which they may contribute”. So he pleaded for opening 
it to public competition. 29 In another public meeting held in 1853, 
Ram-gopal Ghosh urged the necessity of throwing open the Civil 
Service, without any reservation, to the Indians. 30 

442 


GROWTH OF POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 

While there was a general desire that the Indians should be 
vested with more powers in regard to legislation, opinions differed 
widely regarding the concrete measures to be adopted to give effect 
to it. Raja Rammohan Roy demanded that the laws for India 
should be made by the King-in-Parliament and not by the Indian 
Government. 21 The other view was that there should be a Legisla¬ 
tive Council for India. The Raja was opposed to it on the ground 
“that if any legislative council were established in India, the exe¬ 
cutive and the judicial officers would have the preponderant voice 
in it, and the inclusion of one or two Indian nominated members 
would not obviate the danger of uniting the executive, judicial, and 
legislative power in one body.” He, therefore, suggested that the 
legislative measures should be initiated by the Government of India, 
then subjected to the criticism of leading citizens of India, and finally 
passed by the Parliament. 32 

As a corollary to the above, it was suggested that some repre¬ 
sentatives of Indians should be included in the British Parliament. 
Though the Raja himself did not make this demand, Dwaraka-nath 
Tagore suggested that each Presidency should be allowed to send 
two representatives to Parliament. 33 This was, however, opposed 
by a section of younger politicians. They held that in view of the 
long distance and difficulty of communication, it would be diffi¬ 
cult to find proper Indian representatives who would be willing to 
stay in England, and the Indian public would have no control over 
them. 34 

The agitation for political reform on these lines was chiefly 
carried on by the friends and associates of Raja Rammohan Roy. One 
of them, Prasanna-kumar Tagore, started a paper called the Re¬ 
former. It was the first English newspaper conducted by an Indian 
and discussed all questions connected with local politics, political 
economy, literature, religion, metaphysics, jurisprudence, etc. Dr. 
Duff remarked about this .paper that “it represented the sentiments 
of a party not large in number but potent in rank and wealth, the 
party of the celebrated Raja Rammohun Roy”. In 1833 the paper 
had a circulation of 400 copies, which was more than that of any 
other paper of those days with the exception of Bengal Hurkaru which 
had a circulation of 934 copies. 36 

Dwaraka-nath Tagore, another associate of Raja Rammohan, fol¬ 
lowed a different policy in this respect. Instead of starting inde¬ 
pendent newspapers of his own he purchased large shares of the in¬ 
fluential Anglo-Indian papers. He purchased the India Gazette and 
amalgamated it, first with the Bengal Chronicle, and then with Ben¬ 
gal Hurkaru . As noted above, the last-named paper had large cir- 


443 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

culation and Dwaraka-nath purchased considerable share of it, in 
order, we are told, to counteract the savage and unscrupulous attacks 
of the John Bull upon the natives. 06 

Among other periodicals, dealing with political topics, during 
this period may be mentioned the Parthenon (1830), the Gyananne- 
shun (1831), the Bengal Spectator (1842), and the Hindu Pioneer, 
all started by the students of the Hindu College. As a specimen of 
the political views preached through these papers, the following pas¬ 
sage may be quoted from an article entitled ‘‘India under Foreigners” 
published in the Hindu Pioneer: 

“The Government of India (under the English) is purely aris¬ 
tocrat ical; the people have no voice in the council of legislature; 
they have no hand in framing the laws which regulate their civil 
conduct. We need not expatiate on the monopoly of the State Ser¬ 
vice, the law’s delay, the insolence of office, the heavy expenses of 
Government, the retirement from India of all those who acquire 
wealth, and the enormous taxation to which the country is subjected 
—evils too well known in India. The Muhammedans patronised 
merit wherever it was to be found; the English, like the primitive 
Hindus, have one caste of men to govern the general body. The violent 
means by which foreign supremacy has been established, and the en¬ 
tire alienation of the people of the soil from any share in the Govern¬ 
ment, nay, even from all offices of trust and power, are circumstances 
which no commercial, no political benefits can authorise or justify.” 37 

But the political leaders of Bengal did not rely on the press and 
platform alone for carrying on agitation for political reforms. They 
also realized the necessity of organizing political associations. The 
first to be established in Bengal was an association called “Bahga- 
bhasha-Prakasika Sabha”, founded in 1836. As the name and activi¬ 
ties of this association are now little known, we give a somewhat de¬ 
tailed account of it on the basis of reports and correspondence pub¬ 
lished in contemporary periodicals. 38 The first reference to it oc¬ 
curs in an anonymous letter published in the Gyananneshun on 
December 17, 1836. We learn from it that the association held a 
weekly meeting on Thursday evenings. The writer says that in the 
meeting on the previous Thursday, which he attended, the people as¬ 
sembled were ten times the usual number. The Chairman announc¬ 
ed that the subject for discussion fixed in the last weekly meeting 
was ‘whether pleasure proceeds from sorrow or arises from plea¬ 
sure*. Thereupon it was pointed out by Ram-lochan Ghosh that de¬ 
bates on such a subject would inevitably involve religious discussion 
which is strictly forbidden by the tenth rule of the Association. So 
he proposed that the meeting should rather serve the interest of the 


444 


GROWTH OF POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 

country by discussing such topics connected with the policy and 
administration of the Government which concerned the welfare of the 
people. This being accepted with acclamation it was proposed and 
resolved that the meeting would formulate, after discussion, the 
principal abuses in the system of administration which adversely 
affected the interest of the people, and then try to remove them by 
sending petition to the Government or by other means. 

Ram-lochan Ghosh then pointed out that the Englishmen, as¬ 
sembled in a meeting, sat on chairs with a table in the centre, and 
each member rose from his seat when addressing the meeting. He 
proposed, and the meeting agreed, that the same procedure should 
be followed in future. 

The Chairman then pointed out that the Association had just 
been started and had no funds of its own. The members were also 
mostly poor. How would they meet the expenses for their politi¬ 
cal activities? After some discussion it was settled that the rich 
members would bear the expenses of costly undertakings. 

It was then resolved that the next meeting would discuss the 
recent measure of the Government by which rent was imposed upon 
lands which were hitherto rent-free. Four persons were selected 
for drafting a memorandum upon the subject. 

Ram-lochan Ghosh wrote a long letter to the Secretary, sup¬ 
porting the measure of the Government on several grounds. The 
letter was published in the Bengali periodical PrabMkar (December 
31, 1836) with a detailed criticism by the editor, who held that as 
Ram-lochan was a Government Official, he had shown a partisan 
spirit in supporting the measure. The editor, however, added that 
he did not blame Shri Ghosh, for, being maintained by the Govern¬ 
ment, he might have incurred sin by writing anything against it. 

The arguments and counter-arguments throw interesting light 
on the political thoughts of the day. Ghosh supported the resump¬ 
tion of rent-free lands on the ground that, as the Government had 
abolished the duties, there was no other means to pay off the debts 
of the country as the Company had already spent a lot of money out 
of its own funds for defending it. In reply it was pointed out that 
the Government was spending on Christian missions in this country 
about ten to twelve lakhs of Rupees per annum and this sum could 
be utilised for paying off the debt. 

The huge cost of administration on account of the high salary 
paid to English officials was put forward against the Government. 
To this Ghosh replied by saying that if the people of the country were 
fit for high administrative duties there would have been no necessity 

445 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

of employing English officials at a high cost. Two of the argu¬ 
ments of Ghosh are very interesting. He maintained that all peo¬ 
ple had equal rights in the land and the king had no power to grant 
rent-free lands to a person except on the ground that he had spent 
his fortune for public good or fought for the country. He further 
held that as the Muslim kings were no better than robbers, grants of 
lands made by them could not. be regarded as valid. As to the stipu¬ 
lations made in the Diwani Grant to respect such grants, Ghosh ar¬ 
gued that the Emperor of Delhi, who gave it, was an exile, and 
though the English, for the sake of expediency, agreed to receive 
the Diwani from him, in reality they became masters of the country 
by their own skill and efforts. 

\ The special pleadings of Ram-lochan Ghosh evidently represent 
the official views on the subject. But the “Bahgabhasha Prakasika 
Sabha” regarded the Government measure as highly injurious to the 
country and decided to summon a public meeting to discuss the pro¬ 
posal of sending a petition to the Government signed by five thou¬ 
sand persons. A circular was accordingly widely distributed among 
the people in Calcutta and its immediate neighbourhood. 39 

The above news was published on January 7, 1837. We next 
find a news item, dated October 14, 1837, that Ram-kamal Sen has 
decided to start a new association with a view to sending a petition 
to England on behalf of the owners of rent-free lands and with a 
prayer to introduce Bengali as the court language. 40 

On November 12, 1837, the landholders of Calcutta and its 
neighbourhood met at the Hindu College to establish an association 
in order to safeguard their interests as the Chamber of Commerce 
did in regard to traders.* 1 It was inaugurated in July 1838, and 
called “Zamindary Association”, but the name was soon changed 
to “Landholders’ Society”. It was open to all persons having any 
stake in the land, irrespective of caste, creed, or country, and its 
activities would not be confined to Calcutta, as it would keep in 
touch with all the districts. Referring to the genesis of the Society, 
Rama-nath Tagore said in 1870: “Dwarakanath Tagore was one of 
the first native gentlemen who understood and appreciated constitu¬ 
tional agitation. Estimating rightly the influence of the landed aris¬ 
tocracy..., he established in July, 1838, the Landholders' Society 
(which took up) several questions of vital importance to the Zamin- 
dars... . At the instance of the Landholders' Society a monstrous meet¬ 
ing was convened at the Town Hall for memorialising the Government 
against resumption measure.... Babu Dwarakanath Tagore said (on 
the occasion) that the time would soon come when his young friends, 
the Hindu Collegians, would organise themselves into a compact band 


446 


GROWTH OF POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 

of patriots for the assertion or preservation of their political rights 
and the redress of their grievances.” 4 ^ Although the object and 
achievements of this political association were very limited in cha¬ 
racter, it deserves notice for three reasons. In the first place, it set 
the example of an organized constitutional agitation for redress of 
grievances by a public body. Secondly, it was the avowed object 
of the organizers to establish “branch societies in every district of 
the British Indian empire with the view of establishing regular com¬ 
munications on all subjects connected with the object of the society.” 
Thirdly, it enlisted the co-operation of Englishmen who sympathised 
with the political aspirations of the people. This, as well as the poli¬ 
tical character of the society, will be evident from Mr. Turton’s 
speech in a meeting of the Society on November 30, 1839, as reported 
in the Bengal Hurkaru of December 14, and 16, 1839: “It was not as 
a conquered nation that he desired to retain the inhabitants of India 
as British subjects, but as brethren in every respect; as constituting 
a part of the Kingdom of Britain, as fellow subjects—with the same 
feelings, the same interests and objects, and the same rights as the 
British-born inhabitants of England. He admired the principle ado¬ 
pted of old by the Romans, of incorporating their conquests with 
Rome, and granting to the conquered the privileges of Roman citi¬ 
zens.” 43 If we remember that this speech was delivered before the 
publication of Durham’s Report containing the idea of the Dominion 
Status, it must be regarded as a remarkable example of political 
insight. 

While the Indian associates of Raja Rammohan were carrying 
on his work in India, his friend, William Adam, was continuing 
the political agitation in England on behalf of India which the Raja 
had initiated. In order to rouse the interests of the English public 
in Indian affairs, Mr. Adam established the “British India Society” 
in England in July 1839, and was the editor of a journal called the 
British India Advocate , published by the Society early in 1841. The 
“Landholders’ Society” of Calcutta decided to co-operate with the 
“British India Society” in London, and appointed a Committee to 
supply regular information to the latter about the Indians’ grievances 
and demands. 

The Landholders’ Society was not content with this. Fully cog¬ 
nisant of the beneficent effects of political agitation in England, 
such as was carried on by Rammohan, and after him by Adam, it 
decided, at the instance of Dwaraka-nath Tagore, to appoint paid 
agents in England for the same purpose. This novel procedure con¬ 
tinued for some time, and had important consequences for the future. 

In a meeting of the Landholders’ Society held on July 17, 1843, 

447 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


Thompson 43 * was appointed such an agent. He was a well-known 
public man in England and had accompanied Dwaraka-nath Tagore 
when he returned from London in January, 1843. He aroused un¬ 
paralleled enthusiasm among the young Bengalis by a series of lec¬ 
tures and was mainly instrumental in founding the ‘Bengal British 
India Society’ on April 20, 1843. Five resolutions were passed in 
the inaugural meeting explaining the scope and object of the So¬ 
ciety. The third, moved by Tara-chand Chakravarty, defined the 
object of the Society to be “the collection and dissemination of in¬ 
formation relating to the actual condition of the people of British 
India... and to employ such other means of a peaceable and lawful 
character, as may appear calculated to secure the welfare, extend 
the just rights, and advance the interests of all classes of our fellow- 
subjects”. 44 

There were thus, since 1843, two political associations in Bengal, 
viz., the ‘Landholders’ Society’ and the ‘Bengal British India Society.’ 
As a contemporary remarked, the first represented aristocracy of 
wealth, and the other, aristocracy of intelligence. None of these can 
be* said to have achieved great popularity, but there can be hardly any 
doubt that they served to rouse the political consciousness of the 
people. 45 This became evident in 1849 when four Bills were drafted 
by Bethune, the Law Member of the Government, with a view, 
among others, to extend the jurisdiction of the East India Company’s 
Criminal Courts over the British-born subjects. Hitherto, these were 
subject only to the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in Calcutta, with 
the result that the people in mofussil had practically no judicial 
remedy against their oppression by the British, as it was hardly 
possible for them to carry on litigation in the Supreme Court in Cal¬ 
cutta. 46 But though the Bills were eminently just, and the Indians 
strongly supported them, the European community in Bengal charac¬ 
terized them as “Black Acts” and carried on such a violent agitation 
that the Government was forced to withdraw them in spite of strong 
protests of the Bengali leaders. The educated community of Bengal 
was profoundly shocked, and felt the need of a strong political asso¬ 
ciation, not only to safeguard Indian interests against the organized 
attacks of the European community, but also to represent Indian 
views to the Parliament on the eve of the renewal of the Charter Act. 
The result was that the two existing political associations in Bengal 
silently merged themselves into a new one named the “British Indian 
Association”. 47 


The British Indian Association was founded on October 29, 
1851. 47 » From the very beginning it had an all-India outlook. We 
learn from its first Annual Report that the Committee of the Associa- 


448 


GROWTH OF POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 

tion carried on correspondence with leading political figures of 
other Provinces. It also notes with satisfaction the establishment 
of associations of a similar character at Poona, Madras and Bombay. 
According to the second Annual Report, the Committee of the British 
Indian Association kept up a friendly correspondence with the asso¬ 
ciations of the sister Presidencies. 

The political association started at Madras was originally a 
branch of the British Indian Association of Calcutta. A petition 48 
submitted by the Madras Association to the British Parliament sup¬ 
plies very interesting information on the niethod of work and general 
political outlook of the British Indian Association, As the facts and 
views stated in this petition are not generally known it may be 
quoted in extenso. 

% 

“1. That your petitioners, being desirous to avail themselves of 
the opportunity afforded by the approaching expiration of the Charter 
granted to the Honourable East India Company for going before Par¬ 
liament with an exposition of various circumstances connected with 
Government of this country, which, as acknowledged subjects of Her 
Majesty, they feel to be serious grievances urgently demanding re¬ 
dress, formed an association at Madras, on the 26th of February, 1852, 
for the purpose of co-operating in this great object with a similar asso¬ 
ciation established at Calcutta, under the name of the British Indian 
Association, with whom they immediately entered into correspon¬ 
dence, intending, as a branch society, to place themselves under the 
guidance of that body, to whose superintendence the work of 
petitioning the Imperial Parliament, on points involving the joint 
interests of both Presidencies, should be committed. That for this 
purpose they had previously been collecting the requisite information 
from various quarters, collecting a large amount of manuscript 
statements, together with printed documents, in order to ensure the 
utmost correctness regarding the subjects to be laid before your 
Right Honourable House. 

“2. That in the course of the above-mentioned correspondence, 
the Calcutta Association transmitted to your Petitioners the sketch 
of a petition, to which the consent of your Petitioners, with 
such suggestions thereon as they might deem requisite, was requested: 
but that the said sketch related almost wholly to plans and 
recommendations of change in the Government of this country for 
the exaltation of the highest classes of the Hindus, while it left almost 
untouched the pitiable condition of the middling and lower classes, 
and was in various respects unsuitable to the circumstances of the 
inhabitants of this Presidency; your Petitioners, thence perceiving 
that there were many important points in which a joint interest could 


449 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

not be taken, and others in which there could not be joint concurrence, 
deemed it expedient to withdraw from their connection as a branch 
association , subordinate to that of the metropolis, and to constitute 
from among themselves an independent society, under the denomi¬ 
nation of the Madras Native Association, with the view of bringing 
before Parliament the immediate grievances of their own Presi¬ 
dency/’ These grievances have been noted above. 49 

The British Indian Association had great faith in the British 
goodwill and sense of justice, and its Secretary, Devendra-nath Tagore 
wrote in his report that “there can be no doubt that when the real 
state of things is understood, the British Parliament will not long delay 
justice to India.” Accordingly, as mentioned above, in 1852, when the 
new Charter Act was under consideration, a petition was sent to the 
Parliament, in the name of the British Indian Association and other 
native inhabitants of the Bengal Presidency, complaining against 
grievances and praying for relief. It dwelt at great length upon the 
evils of the union of political or executive power with the legislative, 
and prayed for the establishment of a separate Legislature, possess¬ 
ing a popular character. Among other prayers in the petition 
may be mentioned the reduction of the salaries of the higher officers, 
separation of the functions of magistrates and judges, abolition of 
salt duty, abkari duty, and the stamp duties; and discontinuance of 
the payment for ecclesiastical establishment. 60 

That the Association, and the Indian political leaders in general, 
laid great stress on the inclusion of Indians in the Legislative Coun¬ 
cil, would appear from the pamphlet written by Peary-chand Mitra 
on behalf of the British Indian Association about the same time as 
the above petition was sent. In this-pamphlet, entitled Notes on the 
evidence on Indian Affairs, he urged for the inclusion of Indians in 
the Legislative Council and discussed the evidence given by many 
Englishmen, including high officials, on the subject before the Com¬ 
mittee of the two Houses in 1852. 61 In this connection, we meet foi 
the first time with the idea of communal representation which playec 
such an important role in the evolution of Indian Constitution in the 
twentieth century. F. G. Halliday observed, in course of his evi¬ 
dence, that as the Hindus and the Musalmans were divided, the re¬ 
presentation of Indians would be difficult. Lord Ellenborough, in his 
evidence, even suggested the creation of two Chambers of Legislature 
in India—one for the Hindus and another for the Muhammadans. It 
may be noted in passing that Ellenborough was not actuated by any 
love for Muslims in making this proposal. As Governor-General he 
wrote in 1843: “I cannot close my eyes to the belief that that race 
(Muhammadans) is fundamentally hostile to us and our true policy is 


450 


GROWTH OF POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 

to reconciliate the Hindus”. This is one of the earliest pronounce¬ 
ments of the Divide and Rule policy adopted by the British Govern¬ 
ment, as mentioned above. 62 Against Hailiday’s remark Peaiy- 
chand Mitra wrote as follows: 

“This remark (of Halliday) as to divisions applies to the social 
and religious state of the country, and the matters on which differen¬ 
ces exist have little connection with legislation, and do not require 
separate representation. That body wants generally information on 
subjects connected with the internal administration of the country, 
on which the people think and feel substantially in the same man¬ 
ner; and even supposing that the community is divided in opinion, 
on subjects coming within the cognizance of legislature, who but a 
native can be competent to report the sentiments of the people at 
large?” 53 

The Association noted with satisfaction that the Charter Act of 
1853 gave effect to some of their demands. But though the Associa¬ 
tion’s prayer for the separation of the Legislature from the Executive 
was partially granted by the addition of six members to the Governor- 
General’s Council for legislative purposes, its demand for the inclusion 
of some Indians in the Legislature was not conceded. The additional 
members were all Europeans, and the Association pointed out 
that it was utterly vain to expect that “the Europeans who do not mix 
with the people and cannot therefore know their sentiments and 
feelings on the different questions connected with the framework 
of native society and the internal administration of the country, should 
* rightly represent them”. The Association therefore continued the 
agitation for the inclusion of Indians in the Legislative Council, and 
demanded the recognition of the principle of equality of all classes 
of citizens in the eye of the law. It also prayed for increasing the 
Government grant for education and the holding of the Civil Service 
examination in India. Two petitions were sent to Parliament in 
1856 and 1860 incorporating these demands. 

The Association brought to the notice of the Local Government 
the manifold grievances of'the people, and suggested various mea¬ 
sures of reform. It established local branches and tried to rouse 
the interest of the masses in political questions. For this purpose 
it translated various Bills into Bengali and circulated them exten¬ 
sively all over the Province for eliciting public opinion. It also 
framed questionnaire on important current topics like indigo¬ 
planting and similarly circulated them. 

Advanced political ideas such as those advocated by the British 
Indian Association were also preached by distinguished Bengalis. 


451 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

Anyone who goes through the political literature of the period is 
sure to be struck by the fact that many of the thoughts and ideas ex¬ 
pressed by them formed the basis of live political issues even in the 
first quarter of the twentieth century. A few may be noted as 
specimens. Both Peary-chand Mitra and Ram-gopal Ghosh urged 
the necessity of throwing open all offices, including the Civil Service, 
without any reservation, to Indians on the grounds of equity, eco¬ 
nomy and the good of India. 54 Dwaraka-nath Tagore advocated the 
introduction of trial by jury both in the Supreme Court and mofussil 
Courts. 65 Prasanna-kumar Tagore showed from the Mitakshard that 
the jury system was not unknown in India and regarded it as the 
best guarantee for fair and impartial justice. 56 Kishori-chand Mitra 
strongly condemned the exemption of British-born subjects from the 
jurisdiction of the ordinary courts in the mofussil, and regarded it as 
unconstitutional and unjust in principle and often oppressive in 
practice. 57 Govinda-chandra Dutt, who was the first to denounce 
such inequality in the eye of the law, as early as 1846, also strongly 
advocated the separation of executive and judicial powers and rais¬ 
ed his voice of protest against imprisonment, even of bad characters, 
on mere suspicion without adequate proof. In this connection he 
referred to the laws and practice prevailing in France and England. 58 
Dakshina-ranjan Mukhopadhyay proposed that each Province should 
have a council consisting of Government nominees and representa¬ 
tives of the people in equal number, the latter being elected by 
people of each district possessing a reasonable property qualification. 
There should also be a Supreme Council, half of whose members 
would be nominated by Government and the other half by the Pro¬ 
vincial Councils. 69 

The British Indian Association was somewhat aristocratic in its 
composition, and in the light of later political evolution in this coun¬ 
try, undoubtedly appears as conservative in character; yet consider¬ 
ing* the political consciousness of the Indians at that period it is only 
fair to admit that it played a very important role in the political 
evolution of India. This is all the more necessary as even eminent 
Indian politicians have done scant justice to this body. Bipin-chandra 
Pal, for example, has stated that neither the British Indian Associa¬ 
tion, nor any political association in any other province started be¬ 
fore the Indian Association of Calcutta, had an all-India outlook. 60 
This is certainly an unmerited and unfair comment, so far at least 
as the British Indian Association is concerned. It is apparent from 
the petition of the Madras Native Association, quoted above, that 
the British Indian Association had a close and intimate touch with 
other parts of India and that it circulated the draft memorial to 
Parliament in 1852 to the political associations of other Provinces 


452 


GROWTH OF POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 

inviting their suggestions upon it. If we remember the state of com¬ 
munication between different parts of India about this time, we must 
give credit to the British Indian Association for an all-India outlook, 
but for which they would not have taken troubles to keep in touch 
with such remote parts of India as Madras, Bombay and Poona. 

Similarly, there has been a change of opinion regarding the 
nature and activities of the British Indian Association. A young 
writer, who has recently made a study of the old proceedings of the 
Association, sums up her views in the following lines: 

“Many, indeed, would be surprised to know that the British 
Indian Association was founded not as a Zemindars’ Association but 
as a national political organisation, with the object of urging consti¬ 
tutional and administrative reforms and representing the views of 
the enlightened Indian community on these matters to the autho¬ 
rities in India and England. Its rules and its actual deliberations 
were those of a national political organisation and not of a close cor¬ 
poration of landlords”. 61 The object of the Association was de¬ 
fined to be to “promote the improvement and efficiency of the Bri¬ 
tish Indian Government by every legitimate means in its power and 
thereby to advance the common interests of Great Britain and India 
and to ameliorate the condition of the native inhabitants of the sub¬ 
ject territory”. 62 

Though the “original members were drawn almost wholly from 
one particular class, representing landed interests (not at all sur¬ 
prising in the context of the social and political conditions of the 
time), it was never intended to keep the Association a close corpora¬ 
tion of landlords. Within a few years men belonging to other classes 
were admitted as members, and particularly from the ‘seventies 
there was an increasing number of merchants, industrialists, law¬ 
yers, doctors and journalists in the membership of the Association. 
Thus, within two decades the body became fairly broad-based, and 
it represented the- upper layer of society no more than the Indian 
Association or the Indian National Congress at the time”. 63 

This view is supported by copious references to the activities 
of the Association. The following extract would prove interesting 
in the light of later events: 

“ImJL869 Surendranath Banerjee, disqualified for the Indian 
Civil Service, sought the intervention of the British Indian Associa¬ 
tion, and in 1895 M. K. Gandhi, described at the time as the agent 
of the Indfah^ommunity in South Africa, sought the assistance of 
the British Indhm Association to urge upon the Government of India 
the necessity of taking measures for the amelioration of the lot of 


453 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-II 


the Indians in South Africa. The position of the British Indian As¬ 
sociation as the most influential public body in India was so well- 
recognised that whether it was a Zemindar insulted and wrongly 
arrested by the District Magistrate, or a dismissed Police Clerk, or 
Hindu pilgrims ill-treated at a religious fair at Hardwar or a des¬ 
cendant of the Nawab of the Carnatic claiming back his patrimony, 
everyone turned to the British Indian Association for a redress of 
grievances. Similarly the authorities also sought the views of the 
British Indian Association, as representing Indian public opinion 
and not merely that of the Zemindar clfiss, on every possible issue,— 
a draft Bill or postal re-organization, Famine policy or Judicial 
reforms, construction of Railways or building a second port near 
Calcutta, Hooghly Bridge or Municipal administration, Finance or 
Epidemic, private latrines or burning ghats, education or public 
works. Suttee or Charak Puja*’. 64 

It is interesting to note, however, that the British Indian Associa¬ 
tion failed to satisfy the advanced democratic views of the country. 
As noted above, the Madras Branch seceded from it on the ground 
that it looked to the interests only of the upper classes and not of 
‘middling and lower classes*. The same idea was prevalent even 
among a section of the Bengalis. 

A somewhat humorous review of a political association, named 
‘The National Association*, was published in the Sarnachara-darpana 
in its issue of December 13, 1851. While commending the good 
intentions of the Association it remarks that this body only looks to 
the interests of the Zamindars (landholders), and concludes as 
follows: “No cultivator attends the meeting of the association nor is 
likely to do so. If the peasant Gopal expresses his own view in its 
meeting he is sure to be put to ridicule.** 66 The National Association 
was founded on September 14, 1851, at the house of Paikpara Raj, 
but was superseded by the British Indian Association established 
a month and a half later. 65 * The remarks are therefore fully applic¬ 
able to it and prove that political views in the country were moving 
far in advance of the political organisations. But it must be noted that 
all these criticisms were levelled at the early stages, and, as shown 
above, the British Indian Association outlived its unpopularity. 

Other indications were not wanting to prove the increasing in¬ 
terest taken by the people in political questions. Dwaraka-nath Tagore 
lamented in the forties that public meetings did not attract 
large audience, and prophesied that things would change with the 
spread of English education. His prophecy was fulfilled. We have 
the record of a public meeting in connection with the renewal of 


454 


GROWTH OF POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 

the East India Company’s Charter in 1853. On 3 June, 1853, Wood 
introduced in the British House of Commons the new scheme for the 
Government of India. On 29 July, Bam-gopal Ghosh addressed a 
public meeting in the Town Hall, Calcutta. The number of people 
present in the Hall and its immediate neighbourhood was variously 
estimated between three to ten thousand, and hundreds had to 
return for want of space. Almost every native .gentleman of dis¬ 
tinction, resident in or near Calcutta, attended the meeting. The 
exclusion of Indians from the higher services and other grievances 
formed the theme of the speech delivered by Ram-gopal Ghosh. It 
was eulogized by the London Times as a masterpiece of oratory. 66 

The British Indian Association continued the policy initiated 
by Dwaraka-nath Tagore of appointing paid agents from amongst 
the public men of England to carry on agitation for Indian reform 
in that country. During the first three years of its existence it 
spent not less than Rs. 20,000 for this purpose. 

The petition sent by the political associations of India to the 
Parliament in 1852 created a stir in England. Several friends of 
India, including John Bright and Joseph Hume, raised their powerful 
voice in favour of the petitioners. Cobden even went so far as to 
suggest that India should be ruled by the Indians themselves. On 
March 13, 1853, there was a meeting of ‘The friends of India* and 
it constituted itself an “India Reform Society”. This was highly 
appreciated by Indian leaders. The Charter of the East India Com¬ 
pany was to expire soon, and the main object of the Society was to 
ensure that the customary Parliamentary inquiry before the renewal 
of the Charter should be full and impartial. The facts collected by 
the Society were supplied by John Dickinson to Bright who 
made several impassioned speeches on India in the House of Com¬ 
mons. How far these influenced that august body at the time is 
difficult to determine. It is, however, claimed by some that Bright’s 
speeches on India “led to the issue of Queen Victoria’s memorable 
Proclamation of 1858 and did much to determine the wise and hu¬ 
mane policy under Lord Canning, which followed the Indian 
Mutiny.” Bright worked consistently to advance the political in¬ 
terests of India during his whole political career from 1847 to 1880. 

Reference may be made in this connection to Karl Marx who 
made England his home. On the eve of the renewal of the Company’s 
Charter in 1853 he wrote a series of letters to the New York Daily 
Tribune explaining the conditions of the Indian masses and the ruth¬ 
less spoliation of India by the British. 

455 


/ 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

III. POLITICAL IDEAS AND 
ASSOCIATIONS OUTSIDE BENGAL. 

A. Bombay 

Next to Bengal, we may trace the growth of political conscious¬ 
ness more clearly in Bombay than in any other part of India. In cer¬ 
tain respects the people of Maharashtra were more national-minded 
than the political thinkers of Bengal referred to above. This was due 
to the historical background of Maharashtra as distinguished from 
that of Bengal. The Bengali Hindus fait the establishment of the 
British rule as a providential dispensation to make them free from the 
tyrannical rule of the Muslims. This was not the feeling of the 
Maharashtra people, because they had freed themselves from the 
Muslim rule long ago, and looked upon the Britishers as foreign 
enemies who defeated them and baulked them of their ambition 
to establish their own supremacy in India. This difference in the 
historical background of the two provinces explains the difference 
in the attitudes of the liberal political thinkers in Bengal and 
Maharashtra. 

This difference is most prominently brought out by the writ¬ 
ings of Shri Bhaskar Pandurang Tarkhadkar in the Bombay Gazette . 
He regularly contributed to this paper for about six years, and a 
fair idea of the extreme views, bordering on hatred against the 
British rule, preached by him as early as 1841, may be formed from 
the following extracts: 

“If I were to give you credit for your having saved us from the 
Pindaris and Ramosis, your trading system stands in the way 
which has indeed more effectually emptied our purses in a few 
years than the predatory excursions of these tribes could do in some 
five or six hundred years. In short it must be acknowledged that 
your progress in cunning and craftiness has kept pace with your 

advancement in knowledge and wisdom.” 

* * * 

“To say that the country taken possession of by a horde of 
foreign usurpers, whose sole aim is to enrich themselves at the ex¬ 
pense of its real masters, is prospering under them, is as absurd 
as to conclude that a town left at the tender mercies of a gang of 
robbers is enjoying all the advantages of peace and security in 

spite of their depredations and oppressions.” 

* * * 

“I shall now just ask you what could have induced your Go¬ 
vernment to harbour so much jealousy and hatred of so wise and 
eminent a Prince as Purtab Singh, as to sacrifice your good name 
and every consideration of national honour and good faith only to 

456 


GROWTH OF POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 


depose him....A weak and imbecile ruler better suits your pur¬ 
pose, you could exercise your control upon the latter in the same 
degree as a landlord in England does over his vassals, and hem him 
in on all sides so as to make him a mere pageant in your'hands 
while your political ingenuity cannot meet with equal success with 
the former. Among all the Native Princes in India the Ex-Raja of 
Sattara was the only one that could be said to have some know¬ 
ledge of politics and a better known Indian Prince we have never 
heard of; but the same thing which would have recommended him 

to the esteem of good people, has been the cause of his downfall.” 

* * * 

“We cannot look upon your Government in any other light 

than that of the most bitter curse India has ever been visited with. 

The whole wealth of India has now been transported to Great 

Britain and we have no employment left to us.” 

* * * 

“Oh unhappy fate! India has been got hold of by a race of 

demons who would never be satisfied until they have despoiled her 

of all her precious things and reduced her sons; and daughters to 

total beggary. I have heard the most pious of you say that a bare 

clothing and coarse fare is all that we require for our maintenance 

in the world. If such be your notions of our wants, excuse Mr. 

Editor, if my modesty gives way to resentment, could I not say 

with an equal degree of truth and sincerity that a piece of leather 

upon your shoulders and a carcass of hog or bullock for your food 

would be quite sufficient to answer all your necessary calls.” 

* * * 

“You not only withhold from us high appointments, but you 
would not permit us to have a voice in your administration of our 
country,—which latter circumstance weighs heavily upon us. 
Your Law Commission, composed of a few individuals who know 
little or nothing of India, have absolute power to construct regula¬ 
tions and laws for our Government! Is it in union with the dictates 
cf sound principle and common humanity that we, the proper per¬ 
sons who should be consulted on such occasions, we, who know a 
thousand times much better how to promote our own interests 
than others, should be excluded from concerting measures for our 
own good, while a body of foreigners who care for the welfare of 
the Natives no more than they do for a broken reed, much less 
than having any regard for our comfort and happiness, be invested 
with full authority to rule the destinies of a population so vast and 
extensive as that of India?” 

Similar views about Indian rights and British usurpations 
have been expressed by Gopal Hari Deshmukh, better known as 

457 


THU BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


Lokahitawadi, a Government employee in the Judicial Service. 
During 1848-9 he wrote a series of letters to the weekly Marathi 
paper, the Prabhakar of Bombay, in which he not only spoke very 
frankly about the faults of the British regime but even issued a 
solemn warning to the British administrators in the following 
words: “If you try to impose any legislation on us, against our 
wish, we will unite and ask you to quit. Please therefore be care¬ 
ful and administer the law considerately.” Such was the burthen 
of his writings. He also pleaded for swadeshi or the use of indige¬ 
nous goods in preference to articles of foreign manufacture, and 
suggested that a regular movement should be started with this ob¬ 
ject in order to help the Indian industries and to counteract the 
spread of poverty and unemployment in the country. He also 
suggested that Parliamentary institutions should be established in 
India and that the Indians should have a right to sit in the British 
Parliament. In his Marathi publication, entitled History of Gujarat, 
he appended a comparative statement of the benefits and evils 
of the British rule and of the old Peshwa regime. Even as early 
as 1848, he visualised the distant prospect of India becoming com¬ 
pletely independent like the United States of America after having 
learnt the lesson of parliamentary government under the guidance 
of the British people. 67 

Reference may be made in this connection to Vishnubuwa 
Brahmachari, a pioneer of the revivalist attitude of mind towards 
the social and religious movement. He had full faith in the super¬ 
iority of the Indian culture over the Western civilization and he 
preached that Indians should look back to the Vedic times when, 
according to him, Indian culture had attained perfection. His 
mind was very original, and it is curious to find that he preached 
certain ideas in the economic field which are similar to those of 
modem socialism. He advocated collective ownership of land, socia¬ 
lisation of factories, and equal distribution of their produce among 
the masses. His social ideal was that of human brotherhood and a 
welfare state. He may well be described as a utopian socialist who 
based his social ideals on Vedic religion, and may be compared to 
the Christian socialists of Europe. 

Vishnubuwa’s solicitude for the masses led him to create a poli¬ 
tical party to represent the interests and ideas of the village folk in 
Maharashtra. But his defiant challenge to Brahmin leadership of 
his time created'Sn undesirable split between the upper classes and 
the masses which ultimately led to some unfortunate developments 
in the public life of the province. 


458 


GROWTH OF POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 

Ihe next stage in the development of political ideas and poli¬ 
tical associations in Bombay is closely bound up with the name of 
Dadabhai Naoroji. Shortly after graduating from the Elphinstone 
College, Bombay, he devoted himself to social reform, particularly 
education of women. In a meeting held under his Presidency was 
founded the “Students’ Literary and Scientific Society”, which 
undertook the cause of national regeneration. He was the heart and 
soul of all the political organizations in Bombay, and when his pro¬ 
fessional career required his residence in London, he organized 
several associations there to work for the pause of India. It was 
due in no small measure to his unwearied efforts that the Indian 
cause got such a good hearing in England. 

Soon after the British Indian Association was founded in Cal¬ 
cutta, Bombay followed suit. On August 26, 1852, a public meet¬ 
ing of the Indian citizens of Bombay was held in the rooms of the 
Elphinstone Institute, and it inaugurated the first political association 
in the Bombay Presidency, named ‘The Bombay Association.’ 68 The 
meeting was presided over by Shri Jagannath Shankershet and the 
object of the Association was defined in the first resolution to be ‘to 
ascertain the wants of the natives of India in the Bombay Presidency 
and to represent to the authorities from time to time the measures 
calculated to advance the welfare and improvement of the country’. 
This was further elaborated in the fourth resolution which ran as 
follows: 

“That this Association shall from time to time, on occasions 
arising, memorialize the Government authorities in India, or in 
England, for the removal of existing evils, and for the prevention 
of proposed measures which may be deemed injurious, or for the 
introduction of enactments which may tend to promote the general 
interests of all connected with this country.’’ Save that the sphere 
of its activity was strictly limited to the Presidency of Bombay, the 
Association followed the British Indian Association of Calcutta, 
and they set the general pattern of constitutional agitation which 
was to dominate Indian politics for the rest of the nineteenth 
century. ' 

The third resolution directed the Association to take advant¬ 
age of the discussion, then going on in Britain for the renewal of 
the Charter of the East India Company, “to represent to the Im¬ 
perial Parliament of Great Britain such reforms and improvements 
in the existing system of government as are calculated to procure 
the most efficient administration of public affairs, and secure the 
general welfare and interests of the people of India.” With this 
object in view the Association was directed “to open communica- 


459 


THE BRITISH PAR AMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


tion with, and seek the co-operation of, the Societies formed for the 
same purposes at Calcutta and Madras.” It is thus quite clear that 
the political consciousiness, so far at least as Madras and Bombay 
were concerned, was galvanized into activities, for the first time, 
by the prospect of improving the administration of India through 
the renewal of the Charter of the Company, and they followed the 
lead given by Bengal. 

Like the tw Associations of Calcutta and Madras, the Bombay 
Association also sent ;a petition to the British Parliament in 1853, 
criticizing the system of administration and suggesting remedial 
measures 69 more or less on the same line. Some of its observa¬ 
tions are, however, worth quoting. The Government, both of 
Bombay and other Presidencies, it is said, “is quite unequal to the 
efficient discharge of its duties and that nothing but the impenetr¬ 
able veil of secrecy with which even its most trivial acts are 
covered protects it from universal condemnation.” The members 
of the Council, selected by patronage rather than on grounds of 
merit, “ have no specific duties to discharge and little or no re¬ 
sponsibility as things may always be outvoted by the Governor.” 
“The practical effect of a Government so constituted is that for the 
most part each Secretary in his own Department is the Governor 
in Council.” The* system of secrecy which shuts out all healthy 
public scrutiny and public criticism bearing on the administration 
is “the ruling principle or vice in Indian administration.” “Its 
obvious tendency- is to engender and perpetuate amongst the young 
servants of Government an illiberal and despotic tone, to give full 
scope to the prejudices, the ignorance and the self-sufficiency of all; 
to discourage progress; to discountenance all schemes of improve¬ 
ment emanating from independent and disinterested sources, and 
not within the vie w of the officer to whose department they are 
referred.” The Association therefore recommended the abolition 
of the existing Councils and creation of new ones “of which the 
judges of the Supreme Court in legislative matters and some of 
the European ancjl native citizens should form a part”—such 
councils having the power to call for the proceedings of Govern¬ 
ment and its local officers. As regards the Executive Govern¬ 
ment the Associati on observed that “it would be highly desirable 
that there should always be among the more prominent members 
some persons trained and experienced in the public offices of 
England, who can bring to the consideration of public affairs a 
more extended knowledge and wider views than are to be expected 
from these European gentlemen who have passed all their days 
from boyhood in the bad system of the country and know no other 
by which to compare and improve them.” The Association 

460 


GROWTH OF POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 

strongly condemned the recruitment through the Haileybury Col¬ 
lege and the exclusion of Indians from all higher services. The 
Association also protested against the ‘exorbitant salaries of many 
highly paid officers whose duties are so trifling or involve, compara¬ 
tively, so little labour or responsibility that they might with ad¬ 
vantage be amalgamated with other offices or remunerated in a 
manner commensurate with the nature of the duties to be per¬ 
formed.’ Finally, the Association prayed for the separation of the 
Executive and Judicial branches and the establishment of Univer¬ 
sity or College as proposed by Mr. Cameron for the purpose of 
qualifying the Natives for Government employ. 

The petition as well as the speeches made at the inaugural 
meeting clearly express the buoyant faith of the leaders in the 
British Government. The President of the meeting assured his 
audience “that efforts on the part of natives to improve their own 
condition cannot but be looked on with pleasure by the paternal 
and enlightened Government that rules over this country, and 
meet with encouragement in proportion to their reasonableness 
and justice.” Naoroji Furdunji observed: “The British Govern¬ 
ment, which is an enlightened and liberal Government, and 
professes to govern India for its own sake, will, I feel confident, be 
always ready and willing to hear the respectful appeals, the reason¬ 
able remonstrances, and the earnest representations which the 
native subjects may consider it proper to make for the ameliora¬ 
tion of the conditions of this country and the welfare of its people.” 
Although Dadabhai Naoroji was a Government servant, he address¬ 
ed the meeting, and his speech contains the basic principles of his 
political philosophy. A deep faith in the benefits of the British 
rule and a wish for the permanence of that rule were the starting 
points. All the errors of the British Government were believed to have 
been due to ignorance and the remedy lay in agitation. Although 
efforts to obtain redress from the local authorities repeatedly 
received a rude rebuff, a belief grew that the liberty-loving people 
of England with their traditional love for justice and freedom would 
extend a helping hand to their Indian fellow-subjects, even though 
the local officials might not be sympathetic. These principles were 
held by Dadabhai throughout his life. He believed with his British 
colleagues, Hume and Wedderburn, that the interests of the Indian 
people and the British people were essentially the same, and the 
continuance of the British connection could be made to conform to 
the best interests of India. 

Dadabhai Naoroji may be said to be the founder of the Moderate 
School of politicians in India whose principles he summed up as 


461 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

follows: “If the British people were true to themselves, true to their 
inbred sense and traditions of equality, justice and fair play, they 
would help India to obtain freedom. The Government of India 
may be unsympathetic or even hostile, but the real masters are the 
people of England.” “We Indian people believe,” he used to say, 
“that although John Bull is a little thick-headed, once we can 
penetrate through his head into his brain that a certain thing is 
right and proper to be done, you may be quite sure that it will be 
done.” 70 

It may be noted that the Bombay Association represented the 
advanced section of political thinkers in Bombay. The demands 
made in the petition and its general tone were objected to by several 
Indians who seceded from the movement. The Anglo-Indian news¬ 
papers also violently attacked the Association with the exception of 
the Spectator which sought to win over the affection of the natives. 71 


B. Madras 

i 

The origin of the Madras Native Association, first as a branch 
of the British Indian Association, Calcutta, and then as an inde¬ 
pendent political organization, has been narrated above. 72 The 
Madras Native Association sent two petitions to the House of Com¬ 
mons in 1853, and copious extracts from these have been given 
above. 73 These petitions, enumerating the grievances most keenly 
felt by the people, throw a great deal of light on the progress of 
political ideas in the Madras Presidency. They are specially valu¬ 
able, as we have very little information on this subject from any 
other source. 

Unfortunately, we have no record of the later activities of the 
Association. A. C. Mazumdar has observed that it was “chiefly 
worked by some officials, possessed very little vitality, and had 
practically little or no hold upon the public mind in Madras.” 74 
We have no means to determine how far this view is correct. 


1. Seeley, Expansion of England, p. 203. 

2. Mill, Representative Government Griffiths, 237. 

3. Works, xix-xx. 

4. Ibid, xx. 

5. Ibid. 

6. This categorical statement, published in the issue of the Calcutta Gazette of the 
same evening, shows that Derozio was born in 1808, and not 1809, as is generally 
supposed. The mention of his appointment to the Hindu College in the Samd - 
chdxa-chandrxkd of 13 May, 1826 (Banerji, B.N., I. 32) shows that the proposed 
dates, 1827 and 1828 for this event are wrong. The account of Derozio and his 
students is based upon (1) B. Majumdar, 82-6; (2) Bengal Renaissance, 16-32* 
and (3) Selections from Calcutta Gazette (1824-32), pp. 420, 700. The state¬ 
ment on p. 38, line 33, above, should be amended accordingly. 

462 




GROWTH OF POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 


6a. See above, pp. 39-40. 

7. Works, p. 462. 

8. See p. 232. 

9. Works, p. xxiii. 

10. Ibid, xxiv ff. 

11. It may be noted here that as early as June 27, 1818, the utility and importance 
of trial by jury were explained in the Samachdra-darpcina. . The same paper, in 
its issue of 16th June, 1827, exhorted the people to try to secure greater share in 
the work of administration. To the argument that this would induce corrup¬ 
tion, the paper replied: “This fact does not prove that the natives ought for 
ever to be excluded from responsible situations in the land of their birth.” 
(B. Majumdar, 158). 

12. B. Majumdar, 96. 

13. Bangasrl (Bengali Periodical), Ashadh, 1340 B.S. p. 708. The Bengal Spectator 
expressed the same view (Bengal Renaissance, 146). 

14. B. Majumdar, 71-2. 

15. Works, 315-20; B. Majumdar, 72-4. 

16. B. Majumdar, 74. 

17. Ibid, 95. 

18. Works, 439. 

l!>. B. Majumdar, 100-1. 

20. Ibid, 117. 

21. Ibid, 120. 

22. Ibid. 

23. Ibid, 186-7. 

24. Ibid, 194. 

25. Selections from the Writings, 117. 

26. Mitra, K., Memoir, 55. 

27. B. Majumdar, 112-3. 

28. Ibid, 139-46. 

29. Ibid, 113-4. 

30. Ibid, 207. 

31. Ibid, 33. 

32. Ibid, 34, 41, 44-5. 

33. Ibid, 199. 

34. Ibid, 104. 

35. Ibid, 161. 

36. Ibid, 162. 

37. Ibid, 90-1. 

38. The account that follows is based on B.N. Banerji, II. 289 ff., III. 313 ff. 

39. Ibid, II. 290. 

40. Ibid, 292. 

41. Ibid, 292; B. Majumdar, 163. 

42. Sujata Ghosh in the Report of the Regional Records Survey Committee for 
West Bengal (1957-8), p. 19. 

43. B. Majumdar, 164. 

43a. For Thompson’s speeches on India, cf. Vol. IX, p. 398. 

44. B. Majumdar, 170-2. 

45. Referring to the Landholders’ Society, Rajendra-la! Mitra said that he looked 
upon it as the pioneer of freedom in this country. It gave to the people the 
first lesson in the art of fighting constitutionally to assert their claims and give 
expression to their opinions. Ostensibly, it advocated the rights of the Zamin- 
dars, but as their rights were intimately bound up with those of the ryots, the 
one cannot be separated from the other (Raja Rajendralal Mitra’s Speeches, 
edited by Rai Jogeshur Mitter, p. 25; quoted in B. Majumdar, p. 165 f.n.). 

46. See Vol. IX, pp. 345-6. 

47. It appears that a new political organization, known as the “National Associa¬ 
tion” was founded by the Zamindars on September 14, 1851, its chief pro¬ 
moters being Prasanna-kumar Tagore and Devendra-nath Tagore. As the latter 
was the first Secretary of both this as well as the British Indian Association, 
founded about a month and a half later, it may be presumed that the first was 
merged into the second, particularly as nothing more was heard about the 
“National Association”. For a short account of this Association cf. J. C. Bagal, 
Devendranath Tagore (in Bengali), pp. 58-59. 

463 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


47a. Sujata Ghosh, op. cit., 20. B. Majumdar (p. 177) gives the date as 31 October, 
Jaut the former is the correct view as it is given in the Citizen of 8 November, 
1851. (Bagal, J. C., Devendranath Tagore , p. 60). 

48. There is a copy of it in the Madras Archives. 

49. Vol. IX, pp. 389-93. The italics in the petition are mine. For reference, cf. ibid. 

50. For details, cf. Vol. IX, pp. ,393-5. 

51. B. Majumdar, 211 ff. 

52. See pp. 320 ff. 

53. B. Majumdar, 213. 

54. Ibid, 214. 

. 55. Ibid, 195. 

56. Ibid, 189. 

57. Ibid, 218. 

58. Ibid, 222-4. 

59. Ibid, 123. 

60. Ibid, 178 f.n. 

61. Sujata Ghosh, op. cit., 16. 

62. Ibid, 20. 

63. Ibid, 21. 

64. Ibid, 17. 

65. Prabasi (Bengali Periodical), 1347 BJ5. Phalgun, p. 613. 

65a. cf. f.n. 47 above. 

66. Calcutta Review, 1867, Vol. 46, p. 517. 

67. The writer is indebted to Shri S. R. Tikekar for information about Lokahitawadi. 

68. Masani, Dadabha i, pp. 52 ff. cf. Freedom — Bombay, 133. 

69. For the petition, cf. Freedom — Bombay, 139; also Griffiths, 255. 

70. Masani, Dadabhai, p. 96. 

71. Ibid, 52 ff. 

72. See pp. 449-50. 

73. Vol. IX, pp. 389-93. 

74. Indian National Evolution, p. 6. 


464 


CHAPTER XIII (LI) 

BIRTH OF NATIONALISM 

Reference has been made in Chapter III to the impact of Eng¬ 
lish education ana, through it, of Western ideas, on the Indians, spe¬ 
cially in Bengal. It produced both good and bad effects. Among 
the former prominence must be given to the growth of rationalism, 
leading to freedom of thought, and liberalism, three of the great cha¬ 
racteristics of Modem Age, that replaced blind faith and inveterate 
habit of following traditional ways which marked the Medieval 
Age. But during the process of transformation a strong reaction 
set in, producing a very undesirable effect. For, as has been men¬ 
tioned above, a section of the English-educated Bengali youths was 
carried away by a strong current of Western culture. They became 
very much anglicised and had inordinate fondness for everything 
English. They adopted Western ideas and habits, dresses and man¬ 
nerisms, customs and usages, and openly indicated their repugnance 
to everything Indian. They spoke in English, thought in English, 
and, as humorously remarked by Bhudeb Mukherji, probably even 
dreamed in English. They had a sneering contempt for almost 
everything Indian. The evils grew with the spread of English edu¬ 
cation, and, in the course of time, a small group of Westernised people 
formed a distinct section within the Indian community. 

But, fortunately, a reaction against the sweeping current of 
Western influence was not long in coming. It manifested itself in 
the growth of an intense nationalism during the third quarter of the 
nineteenth century. It may be truly said that if rationalism was 
the watchword of the first generation of English-educated Bengalis, 
that of the second generation was nationalism. 

Among the factors contributing to it an important place must 
be given to the growing knowledge of the glory and greatness of 
the ancient Hindus. When the Indians first began to learn English, 
little was known of their ancient history, and even the comprehen¬ 
sive and standard history of India like that written by James Mill 
about that time unhesitatingly expressed the view that the Hindus 
had ever been in the same abject condition in which the Englishmen 
found them in the eighteenth century. 1 The very poor knowledge 
that the Indians themselves possessed about their own past history 
is shown by the history of the Hindu kings written by Mrityunjav 
Vidyalankar, a Pandit of the Fort William College in Calcutta, in 

465 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE— II 

the year 1808 . 2 The works of early oriental scholars like Sir 
William Jones, Prinsep, Bohtlingk and other Europeans had not yet 
reached or impressed the general public. But the regular archaeo¬ 
logical explorations and excavations, commencing in A.D. 1881 
under the personal supervision of Alexander Cunningham, and the 
writings of Max Muller, Wilson, Fergusson, Rajendra Lai Mitra and 
others in -a more popular form, brought home to the educated Indians 
a very vivid picture of the past glory and greatness of ancient India 
which placed her on the same pedestal with Greece and Rome. This 
inspired the Hindus with a sense of their rich heritage from the past 
and the leading part they once played as a great nation in the history 
of the world. It necessarily generated in their minds a spirit of self- 
confidence and held out before them a bright vision of their future 
destiny. The views promulgated by European scholars that the fore¬ 
fathers of the Hindus belonged to the same group of mankind from 
which were .derived all the nations of Europe famous in ancient and 
modern times; that the Vedas, the sacred literature of the Hindus, 
were the oldest literary works in the world; that the Upanishads 
contained the most profound philosophical speculations that human 
mind has ever conceived; 3 that Emperor Asoka united the whole 
of India and Afghanistan under one rule, as testified to by his 
own records engraved on stone more than two thousand years ago; 
and that, thanks mainly to his efforts, Buddhism, originating in India, 
played a great role in civilising a large portion of the population of 
the world, so much so, that even today one-fifth of the human race 
still profess that faith;—all these could not fail to stir deeply the 
hearts of the Hindus with the result that they were imbued with a 
spirit of nationalism and ardent patriotism. The revelation of 
India's past was one of the strongest foundations on which Indian 
nationalism was built, and gave it that stamp of Hindu character 
which made its influence felt in many ways at different stages of 
political evolution in India. 

Another factor that must have stimulated the growth of nationa¬ 
lism in India was the strong current of nationalist ideas which passed 
over the whole of Europe and South America during the nineteenth 
century. The momentous revolutions in U.S.A. and France during 
the last quarter of the eighteenth century, which the English-educat¬ 
ed Indians read in their books, roused their patriotic feelings. But 
they were far more deeply stirred by the national revolts happening 
in their own times, reports of which were regularly received in India. 
It was a happy coincidence that the period during which the English 
education spread in India also witnessed that phase in the history of 
Europe and America of which the most distinctive feature was the 
development of the idea of nationality. About a dozen national 


466 


BERTH OF NATIONALISM 


States sprang into existence between 1822 and 1830, mostly out of 
the Turkish, Spanish and Portuguese empires. All these as well as 
the ideas and events culminating in the struggles for freedom in 
different regions of Europe in 1830 and 1848, and the stories of heroic 
resistance and untold sufferings associated with them, made a pro¬ 
found impression upon the English-educated Indians. In particular, 
the liberation from foreign yoke of Greece and Italy, two ancient 
centres of culture like India, and the fight for freedom by the Irish, 
subject to servitude under a common master, deeply stirred the 
emotion of the Indians, and evoked feelings of nationalism of the 
same type. The visit of Indians to Europe in increasing numbers 
contributed to the same end by making them familiar with the 
nationalist movements and the working of the free political insti¬ 
tutions of Europe. 

The introduction of printing press was another important 
factor. The growth of vernacular literature and the important role 
it played in the political education of the people has been mentioned 
in Chapter y. The printing press made the books accessible to a 
large number of people and stimulated their interest. The printing 
press also facilitated the growth of* periodical literature which was 
a powerful factor in the development of nationalistic ideas. 4 The 
opening up of communication between distant parts of India by the 
introduction of railways, post and telegraph also helped the cause 
of Indian nationalism by developing the sense of unity among the 
diverse peoples of the great sub-continent. 

Apart from these important factors, the spirit of nationalism 
was intensified by the growing volume of discontent and disaffection 
against the British rule due to a variety of causes mentioned above. 4 * 
The grinding poverty of the people, punctuated by periodical famines, 
was naturally ascribed to the British policy of destroying Indian 
trade, industry and manufacture by unfair means dictated by the 
interest of their own country. 5 The galling distinctions between 
Indians and Europeans in the eye of the law, and the united opposition 
offered by the latter to the so-called “Black Acts” which sought to 
remove them, were bitterly resented by the Indian intelligentsia, 
and they were further estranged by the failure of the Government to 
concede even the most moderate demands for administrative re¬ 
forms. The terrible tales of oppression by the indigo-planters, the 
haughty attitude of the English officials, the arrogant conduct of 
Englishmen towards Indians, not unoften resulting in brutal assaults 
and rupture of spleens of the latter, and the acquittal or very nomi¬ 
nal punishment of the criminals with white skin by British Judges, 
produced an intense anti-British feeling among all classes of people 
which fed the current of national feeling among Indians. 6 

467 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


There were many other contributory causes. Among these 
may be mentioned the effect of the outbreak of 1857-8. There is no 
doubt that the social and political relations between the Indians and 
the British, bad as they were before, grew much worse owing to that 
event, 7 and thus it indirectly helped the growth of national feeling. 
But it is a moot point to decide how far the mutiny or revolt of 1857-8 
directly stimulated the growth of such a feeling. For the nationa¬ 
listic feeling first appeared among the intellectuals who were, gene¬ 
rally speaking, indifferent and even unsympathetic, if not positively 
hostile, to the movement, and were not therefore likely to be affected 
by it. 8 

It is in Bengal, which was least affected by the incidents of 
1857-8, that we find the distinct growth of a truly nationalist move¬ 
ment during the sixties, i.e. almost immediately after the suppres¬ 
sion of the outbreak of 1857-8. It was not directed towards the ad¬ 
vancement of political status or the achievement of administrative 
reforms, but it had a higher aim, namely, the regeneration of Indians 
on the basis of a true conception of nationality. 

One of the important factors in the development of nationalism 
in Bengal was the new movement in Brahma Samaj, initiated by 
Keshab-chandra Sen, which carried one step further the ideal of 
freedom not only in respect of religious ideas—which was already 
developed by the older section—but also in social ideas and personal 
conduct. B. C. Pal, who was intimately connected with this move¬ 
ment, thus refers to it: 

“The Brahmo Samaj, under Keshub Chunder Sen, had proclaim¬ 
ed a new gospel of personal freedom and social equality, which re¬ 
acted very powerfully upon this infant national consciousness and 
the new political life and aspirations of young Bengal. Keshub’s 
controversies with the Christian missionaries were widely read and 
greatly enjoyed not only by his own followers and co-religionists 
but by the entire body of our English-educated countrymen. In his 
victories over the Christian missionaries in these controversies, 
Keshub’s countrymen, even outside his church and community, felt 
a genuine pride, which powerfully * fed their national conceit. 
Keshub’s English visit and the way he was lionised by the British 
public and the British press also reacted very powerfully upon the 
mind of his people in India. The old paralyzing sense of superiority 
of their new political masters over them was visibly replaced by a 
new self-confidence in our educated countrymen in consequence of 
Keshub’s successful missionary propaganda in England.” 9 

The all-India tour of Keshab also fostered the ideas of national 
unity by bringing together on a common platform diverse peoples 


468 


BIRTH OF NATIONALISM 


of India in different regions. He was the first great all-India figure 
symbolising the unity of Indian culture. This was proved beyond 
doubt by the high regard in which he was held all over India—a 
fact strikingly demonstrated after his death. Sir Henry Cotton 
justly remarks: ‘‘The death of Keshub Chunder in January, 1884, 
was one of the earliest occasions for the manifestation of a truly 
national sentiment in the country. The residents of all parts of India, 
irrespective of caste and creed, united with one voice in the expres¬ 
sion of sorrow at his loss and pride in him as member of one common 
nation”. 94 

But great as were the services of Keshab-chandra, his contribu¬ 
tion to the growth of nationalism was both limited and indirect. In , 
the first place, his appeal was “exclusively to the religious and moral 
sensibilities of the rising generations”, 10 and he deliberately eschew¬ 
ed politics. “If anything, Keshab’s politics accepted the British 
subjection of India as due to the intervention of God’s special Provi¬ 
dence for the salvation of India”, and he openly proclaimed “loyalty 
to the British Government” as an article of the creed of his church. 104 
Secondly, he derived his inspiration soley from the West, and his 
leanings towards Christianity were such that not only Christian 
missionaries hoped, but the Indians also feared, that he would ere 
long embrace Christianity. Whatever we might think of this popular 
impression, there is no doubt that Keshab’s theology was “built partly 
upon the Intuitionalist school of European philosophy and partly 
upon Carlyle’s Hero Worship and Emerson’s Representative Men. 11 
For these reasons as well as the new doctrinal developments and 
other personal affairs, Keshab and his church steadily lost popular 
sympathies. “In fact, Keshub Chunder had almost as many detrac¬ 
tors among young Bengal of his day as he had admirers.” 12 

At this crisis of our national life, “when Keshub and his pro¬ 
gressive Brahmos developed unmistakable tendencies towards the 
modern European or Christian ethics and rationalism,” 12 * the tide 
was turned by Rajnarain Bose, 13 himself a product of the Western 
education. He boldly proclaimed “the superiority of Hindu religion 
and culture over European and Christian theology and civilization.” 14 
The Hindus, said he, had forgotten their past to such an extent that 
they had no recollection of the fact that rational thinking and ideas 
of social and personal freedom were not wanting in the history of 
their own culture. Rajnarain Bose boldly asserted that “not only 
have we the most perfect system of theism or monotheism in our 
ancient theology and religion, but Hinduism presented also a much 
higher social idealism, all its outer distinctions of caste notwithstand¬ 
ing, than has as yet been reached by Christendom”. 15 How far his 

469 


THE BRITISH FARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 

views were historically correct, we need not discuss in the present 
context. It will suffice to state that these ideas were catching and 
his clarion call rallied round his banner a large number of Hindus 
who accepted his views with enthusiast, and probably without argu¬ 
ment or discussion. Rajnarain held before them a complete ideal 
of nationalism to be realised in every department of life. He gave 
a concrete picture of his ideas in a prospectus which he issued in 
1886 with a view to the establishment of a “Society for the Promotion 
of National Feeling among the Educated Natives of Bengal”. 

The following extracts from this Prospectus sufficiently illustrate 
his ideas, though the whole document deserves a careful study. 16 

“Now that European ideas have penetrated Bengal, the Ben¬ 
galee mind has been moved from the sleep of ages. A restless fer¬ 
mentation is going on in Bengalee Society. A desire for change 
and progress is everywhere visible. People discontented with old 
customs and institutions are panting for reform. Already a band of 
young men have expressed a desire to sever themselves at once 
from Hindu Society and to renounce even the Hindu name. It is to 
be feared that the tide of revolution may sweep away whatever 
good we have inherited from our ancestors. To prevent this catas¬ 
trophe and to give a national shape to reforms, it is proposed that a 
Society be established by the influential members of native society 
for the promotion of national feeling among the educated natives of 
Bengal. Without due cultivation of national feeling no nation can 
be eventually great. This is a fact testified to by all history. 

“The Nationality Promotion Society shall first of all use their best 
endeavours to revive the national gymnastic exercises... The Na¬ 
tionality Promotion Society shall establish a Model School for in¬ 
struction in Hindu Music... .The Nationality Promotion Society 
shall also establish a school of Hindu Medicine, where Hindu Materia 
Medica and practice of physic will be taught freed from the error 
and absurdities that disfigure them.. .Hie teacher of the proposed 
Hindu School of Medicine should be one who is acquainted with both 
English and Hindu Medical Sciences. 

“The Nationality Promotion Society will publish in Bengalee the 

results of the researches of the Sanskrit scholars of Europe in the 
department of Indian Antiquities, giving special prominence to their 
description of prosperity and glory of Ancient India, physical, in¬ 
tellectual, moral, social, political, literary and scientific.... 

“The Nationality Promotion Society shall afford every encour¬ 
agement in their power to the cultivation of Sanskrit. It shall pat¬ 
ronize the publication of important Sanskrit works, co-operating 


470 




BIRTH OF NATIONALISM 


with the Asiatic Society of Bengal in this respect, and shall offer pecu¬ 
niary reward or panegyrical addresses to the best Sanskrit scholars 
of Bengal. 

‘‘The Nationality Promotion Society shall make it binding upon 
its members to ground the knowledge of their sons in their mother- 
tongue before giving them an English education. Education both in 
Bengalee and English, if carried on simultaneously, does great in¬ 
jury to the Bengalee education of a student, as he pays greater at¬ 
tention to the English than to the Bengalee language... 

“The Nationality Promotion Society shall try its best to prevent 
daily increasing corruption of the colloquial language of the edu¬ 
cated natives who mix, in common conversation, English words 
with Bengalee in the most ridiculous manner imaginable.... 

“The Nationality Promotion Society shall endeavour to prevail 
upon their countrymen to hold in the Bengalee language the proceed¬ 
ings of such societies as do not require the co-operation of English¬ 
men, and are exclusively composed of Bengalees, or have not as 
their object the improvement of youth in English speaking or 
writing... 

“The Nationality Promotion Society shall publish tracts in Ben¬ 
galee containing proofs of the existence of liberal and enlightened 
customs in Ancient India, such as female education, personal liberty 
of females, marriage by election of the bride, marriage at adult age, 
widow-marriage, inter-marriage, and voyage to distant countries. 
It will try to introduce such foreign customs into educated society 
as have a tendency to infuse national feeling into the minds of its 
members such as that of holding festivities in honour of men of ge¬ 
nius as is done amongst European nations... The Nationality Pro¬ 
motion Society shall, in a few words, try, firstly, to prevent the in¬ 
troduction of evil foreign customs into educated native community; 
secondly, to introduce such foreign customs as have a tendency to 
infuse national feeling into the minds of its members; thirdly, to 
give, if possible, to foreign customs already introduced a national 
shape; fourthly, to aid social reformation by citing old precedents 
in its favour; and fifthly, to prevent the abolition of such old customs 
of the country as are beneficial in their nature. 

“The Nationality Promotion Society will not overlook even such 
trifling points as the regulation of etiquette, with a view to give a 
national shape to the same. It would be impossible to abolish all 
foreign modes of etiquette that have crept into educated native 
society, such as the hearty handshake, but the members of the Na¬ 
tionality Promotion Society shall give the preference to our national 


471 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


numuskar and pranam on all occasions on which it is practicable 
to do so... . 

“It would be the duty of the Nationality Promotion Society to 
reprobate the practice of frequenting European hotels so common 
among our educated- countrymen. This practice shows a greedy 
hankering after European food, and demeans us in the eyes of foreign¬ 
ers. It must appear ridiculous in the eyes of all Europeans except 
hotel-keepers.” 

The ideas preached by Rajnarain Bose in this remarkable 
document were enthusiastically taken up by a young man named 
Naba-gopal Mitra, editor of the National Paper founded by De- 
vendra-nath Tagore in 1865. He started an institution known as 
“Hindu Mela” to promote the national fbelings, sense of patriotism, 
and a spirit of self-help among the Hindus. It was an annual public 
gathering on the last day of the Bengali year. The special features 
of the annual gathering were patriotic songs, poems and lectures, 
a detailed review of the political, social, economic, and religious 
condition of India, an exhibition of indigenous arts and crafts, 
and performance of different forms of physical exercises and feats 
of physical strength. It had an all-India outlook and specimens of 
arts and crafts were collected from Banaras, Kashmir, Jaipur, Lakh- 
nau, and Patna. Rewards were also offered for good books written 
in Bengali and Sanskrit, which were calculated to promote the wel¬ 
fare of the country. Thus intellectual development through fine arts 
and literature, and economic progress by means of industrial deve¬ 
lopment formed the main planks of the Hindu Mela. 

The Hindu Mela met altogether fourteen times from 1867 to 
1880. Its importance gradually declined owing to the establishment 
of other associations more directly connected with the political and 
national movement in Bengal. But it is impossible to overestimate 
the importance of its contribution to the growth of national feeling 
in Bengal. The patriotic songs and poems, sung and recited in this 
Mela, including one or two by Rabindra-nath, then a boy of 18, are 
still regarded as treasures of Bengali literature. 

An association, called the ‘National Society*, was founded after 
the fourth session of the Mela. Its avowed object was the promo¬ 
tion of unity and national feeling among the Hindus. The National 
Society arranged a monthly discourse. In one of these monthly 
meetings, presided over by Devendra-nath Tagore, Rajnarain Bose 
delivered an address on the “Superiority of Hinduism** embodying 
his main views as mentioned above... It evoked a keen controversy, 
and meetings were held not only by Christians but also by advanced 
Brfilimas to oppose his views. As the Mel& was confined to the 


472 


BIRTH OF NATIONALISM 

Hindus, objection was taken to the use of the word ‘National’. Against 
this, the National Paper, the organ of the Mela, observed as follows* 

“We do not understand why our correspondent takes exception 
to the Hindus who certainly form a nation by themselves, and as 
such a society established by them can very properly be called a 
National Society.” 

This was not an isolated expression of views, casually formed, 
but rested on a deep-seated conviction which, at first confined to a 
small section, was gradually imbibed, consciously or unconsciously, 
by a large majority of educated people. 

Naba-gopal elaborated his view of Hindu nationalism through 
his writings. This has been summed up as follows: “Nabagopal holds 
that the chief criterion of nationalism is unity. This unity, according 
to him, is brought about, sustained and promoted in different peoples 
by different means and on different principles. The principle which 
promoted nationalism amongst the Greeks was love of country, 
amongst the Jews the Mosaic Law, amongst the Romans the love 
of liberty and renown, and amongst the English the love of liberty. 
He maintains that the basis of national unity in India has been the 
Hindu religion. ‘Hindu nationality is not confined to Bengal. It 
embraces all of Hindu name and Hindu faith throughout the length 
and breadth of Hindustan; neither geographical position, nor the 
language is counted a disability. The Hindus are destined to be a 
religious nation”. 17 

But, side by side with the idea of Hindu nationalism, there was 
a broader outlook which sought to embrace the whole of India in one 
nationality. Indeed, this was a dominant and characteristic feature 
of nationalism in Bengal even at the very beginning, and was never 
lost sight of throughout the chequered course of its evolution. The 
school represented by Naba-gopal Mitra was at first insignificant, but 
gradually gained, strength for reasons discussed later. 

The contribution of the Brahma Sarnaj to the development of 
nationalism, after Keshab-chandra Sen, cannot be regarded as very 
significant. Nevertheless, the founders of the third Samaj, notably 
Shiva-nath Sastri and Ananda-mohan Bose, in their personal capaci¬ 
ties did much to further its cause. Reference will be made to A. M. 
Bose in connection with the growth of political organization discus¬ 
sed in the next chapter. B. C. Pal, an eminent political leader of 
Bengal at a later date, has preserved an interesting reminiscence 
of his close personal contact with Shiva-nath Sastri and the influence 
exercised upon him by the latter. Shiva-nath held that “freedom is 
one and indivisible”, “political emancipation is impossible without 


473 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

social emancipation and personal purity”. In all this he agreed 
with the current Brahmaism. But he proceeded further and main¬ 
tained that the realization of a man's spiritual destiny or his sal¬ 
vation was equally impossible unless the ideas of equality, liberty, 
and fraternity were fully organized in his personal life, his social 
relations, and in the constitution of his national State. To realize 
this completer ideal of freedom, a Society was organized by Shiva- 
nath in 1876. Its members were to take a pledge which was 
embodied in a formal document. The first article pledged the mem¬ 
bers to put up a strenuous fight against image-worship and caste- 
domination. The next article started with the declaration that 
“self-government is the only form of political government ordained 
by God.” Logically interpreted, it meant that the British Govern¬ 
ment had no moral title to the allegiance of the people. But it 
was not a practical declaration of revolt, for the removal of social 
and religious evils must be the condition precedent to the reconstitu¬ 
tion of the national State upon a truly democratic basis. Till then 
they should obey the laws of the present Government, but would not 
“take service under this Government.” The next article discussed 
ways and means for advancing the country to the goal of self-govern¬ 
ment. This comprised education, including that of women and the 
masses, introduction of widow-remarriage, abolition of purdah, and 
other social reforms. Lastly, emphasis was laid on the development 
of physique and ability to defend the country. The signatories 
therefore pledged themselves to learn how to ride and shoot, and 
preach the duties of acquiring these military trainings and aptitudes 
to their fellow-countrymen. 18 

In spite of the fact that the actual achievement of this Society 
was very little or nothing, its idealism commands our attention. 
While the Brahma Samaj confined its activities to the religious and 
ethical life to the exclusion of political life, and political leaders 
ignored or belittled the ethical and social aspects, Shiva-nath com¬ 
bined all of them in his ideal of complete freedom. To him belongs 
the credit of viewing religion as a formative force in worldly life in 
all its aspects, and also of bringing to our new patriotism and politics 
the inspiration of a lofty ethical ideal. Probably such an ideal was 
never preached again till we come to the days of SvamI Vivekfi- 
nanda and Mahatma Gandhi. 

Reference may be made to an innovation of Shiva-nath Sastri 
which signifies the change of spirit introduced by him. In the li¬ 
turgy of Keshab-chandra Sen there was a prayer for universal 
humantiy. Shiva-nath, as a minister of Sadhftran Brahma Samaj. 
replaced it by a special prayer, offered every week, for the uplift 
and emancipation of his own country and his people. 19 


474 


BIRTH OF NATIONALISM 


The other religious movements also directly or indirectly help¬ 
ed the growth of nationalism. The Arya Samaj founded by Daya- 
nanda gave a great impetus to nationalism in the Punjab. It im¬ 
bued the people with a spirit of self-confidence. B. C. Pal. who 
witnessed the early stages of its development, has described it as 
follows: 

“The fact of the matter is that the new generation of Hindus in 
the Punjab felt a keen humiliation in their inability to meet the 
attacks of Moslem and Christian propagandists, who condemned their 
religion as idolatry and polytheism. In the message of Pandit Da- 
yananda they discovered, first, a powerful defensive weapon by 
which they could repudiate the claims to superiority of Christianity 
and Islam over their national religion. Dayananda. in the second 
place, did not only find a weapon of defence to the Punjab Hindu 
in his Saty&rtha-Prakasa, he made a violent attack on Christian 
and Moslem propaganda showing up the unreason of both these alien 
systems and exposing what he believed to be their moral lapses also. 
All this helped to feed the pride of the race of the Punjabee Hindu, 
who had previously found himself in a completely helpless position 
under the attacks of Christian and Moslem propaganda .” 20 

As noted above, the Arya Samaj was a militant sect from the 
very beginning. Its “chef inspiration came from its intense patriotism. 
This patriotism has always carried with it a spirit of intolerance 
of, if not virulent antagonism to, other religious systems, particu¬ 
larly the Moslem. Its attitude towards Christianity is not less 
hostile, though certainly not so open as it is towards Islam ”. 21 Ere 
long it developed an anti-foreign sentiment which was particularly 
strong among the younger section. “The young Arya Samaj ists 
openly declared that they were waiting for the day when they Would 
settle their account both with Moslems and the Britishers .” 22 

But the Arya Samaj had also a positive approach to nationalism. 
“Political independence was one of the first objectives of Dayananda. 
Indeed, he was the first man to use the term Swaraj. He was the 
first to insist on people using only swadeshi things manufactured in 
India and to discard foreign things. He was the first to recognize 
Hindi as the national language of India ”. 23 Whatever one might 
think of these claims put forward by the biographer of Dayananda , 24 
there is no doubt that the Arya Samaj aimed at the creation of an 
Indian nation by establishing a common religion and culture all. 
over India. For this it adopted £uddhi or reconversion into Hindu¬ 
ism of all those who had once renounced it, either willingly or under 
duress. 


475 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 

Similarly, a great impetus was given to nationalism by the Theo- 
sophical Society as well as by the great spiritual leader R&makjishoa 
Paramahamsa and his disciple SvfimI Vivekananda, to which refe¬ 
rence will be made later. 

Though the spirit of nationalism was first evolved in Bengal it 
soon spread to other parts of India, but the positive evidence afford¬ 
ed by contemporary records is not as adequate or as easily available 
as in Bengal. In Bombay the writings and activities of Vishnu Kri¬ 
shna Chiplunkar, who died in 1882, Mahadev Govind Rana.de, 
Gopal Ganesh Agarkar and Bal Gangadhar Tilak, as well as the 
ideas preached by Gopal Hari Desmukh and Bhaskar Pandurang 
Tarkhadkar, to whom reference has been made in the preced¬ 
ing chapter, 26 definitely indicate the growth of a strong national 
feeling. This is only what could be normally expected. For the 
people of Maharashtra occupied a high and honourable position in 
Indian politics even v/ithin living memory. Less than a century 
ago they had made a bold bid for political supremacy such as the 
British then enjoyed in India, and the last descendant of the Peshwas, 
though in exile, continued as a living symbol of their political glory 
and greatness till 1853. 

For similar reasons the Muslims were also inspired by a national 
feeling from the very beginning of the British rule. But it was do¬ 
minated by class consciousness at the very outset, as it was based 
solely on the memory of their political greatness and historical tra¬ 
ditions, and not broadbased on those ideas of patriotism and nationa¬ 
list feeling which the Hindus of Bengal imbibed through Western 
education. The nationalism of Maharashtra was saved from this 
narrowness by the influence of Western ideas, and was gradually 
merged into the widely developing Indian nationalism. As this na¬ 
tionalism was a product of English education, and the Muslims as 
a class lagged far behind the Hindus in taking advantage of it, there 
was a marked divergence in the growth of nationalism among the 
Hindus and Muslims. The Wahabi movement in the first half of the 
nineteenth century was a genuine national movement, but it was 
exclusively Muslim in character. On account of this Muslim ex¬ 
clusiveness and the greater influence of English education and West¬ 
ern ideas upon the Hindus, the Western type of nationalism, which 
was a characteristic feature of the political growth in India during 
the latter half of the nineteenth century, gradually partook more 
and more of a Hindu character. This process was hastened by the 
fact, mentioned above, that the past glory and greatness of the Hin¬ 
dus came to form the solid basis of this nationalism. This was quite 
natural, for in every country the memory of past greatness binds the 


476 


BIRTH OF NATIONALISM 


people together into a national unity. But in India this historic con¬ 
sciousness operated upon the two major elements of the population, 
the Hindus and the Muslims, in diametrically opposite ways. Every 
historical incident in the past which reflected glory upon the one 
was a humiliating memory to the other. The triumphs of Muham¬ 
mad ibn Qasim, Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni, and Muhammad Ghurl 
which swelled the pride of the Muslims as a great conquering nation 
of the world, only evoked painful memories of national degrada¬ 
tion and humiliation in the minds of the Hindus. 

A very striking illustration of what has been stated above is 
afforded by the development of nationalism in Bombay. Here, too, 
as in Bengal, it was the English education that fostered the spirit 
of nationality as the people imbibed, along with Western culture, 
the love of freedom, the spirit of patriotism, the idea of self- 
government, the higher duty of self-sacrifice for the preservation of 
national honour and national liberty, and similar ideas which per¬ 
meated Western literature, but were comparatively strangers to our 
own. Bal Gangadhar Tilak, the great nationalist leader of Bombay, 
gave expression to these ideas through his paper, the Kesafi. As 
far back as 1885 he wrote: 

“We are, at present, gradually being inspired by the spirit of 
patriotism. The birth of patriotism among us is due to English 
rule and English education. English education has imparted to us 
knowledge of ancient and modern history; it has enabled iis to 
know what were the fruits of patriotism among the ancient Greeks 
and Homans. We have also learned from their histories how, when 
they lost their patriotism, they were subjected to foreign domination 
and became ignorant and superstitious! English rule has made us 
realise the necessity of cultivating patriotism in our national con¬ 
cerns.The spirit of patriotism has not as yet permeated all 

classes. It is only those who have corr.e under the influence of 
English education and begun to realise the defects of British admi¬ 
nistration that have been inspired by that spirit. Patriotism is not 
our national quality: it is the product of the influences to which we 
have been subjected after the introduction of British rule”. 

Tilak made it the great object of his life to diffuse the spirit of 
patriotism and nationalism among the masses. Two expedients ado¬ 
pted by him for this purpose were the inauguration of Shivaji festi¬ 
val and the transformation of the traditional worship of Gaijapati 
into an altogether new form. Thus he requisitioned to the national 
service two of the great forces which are calculated to deeply stir 
the national mind, namely, religion and history. But both the insti¬ 
tutions prqdueed diametrically opposite effects upon the Hindus and 

477 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

Muslims. The images of Hindu gods have always excited the Mus¬ 
lims with iconoclastic fury, and their traditional Yole in Indian his¬ 
tory has been to break them to pieces rather than make them serve 
any national purpose. Even though bereft of any power to do arty 
mischief, their religion forbade them to derive any good out of it. 
As Shivaji had founded the Maharashtra kingdom in the teeth of 
opposition from the most powerful Muslim Emperor in India, a 
festival in his honour was well calculated to inspire the masses in 
Maharashtra. But Shivaji and the Maratha power founded by him 
were rightly regarded by the Muslims as the main causes of the de¬ 
cline and downfall of the greatest Muslim Empire m India, and 
their national vanity was sure to be wounded by doing any honour 
to the great Maratha leader. As a matter of fact, though Tilak did 
yeoman’s service to the cause of Indian nationalism, he was never 
forgiven by the Muslims for instituting the Shivaji festival. In 
Bengal also the new spirit of nationalism was gradually assuming a 
Hindu character. This first came into prominence in connection with 
the Hindu Mela whose founder definitely asserted that the Hindus 
formed a nation by themselves. This view, of course, did not go un* 
challenged, as the criticism of the use of the title ‘national* by Hindu 
Mela, noted above, 26 clearly demonstrates. But the further pro¬ 
gress of nationalism in Bengal leaves no doubt that it did not, or 
rather could not, shed its Hindu character, as a genuine pride in the 
old history and culture of the Hindus formed its very basis. 

This is quite clear from the Bengali literature which made the 
greatest contribution to the development of national and patriotic 
feeling during the last quarter of the nineteenth century. The name 
of Bankim-chandra Chatterji stands foremost in this connection. His 
famous novel Anandamath contains the hymn Bande Mdtaram which 
had been the national anthem of India up to 1947. During the long 
and arduous struggle for freedom from 1905 to 1947 Bande Mdtaram 
was the rallying cry of the patriotic sons of India, and thousands of 
them succumbed to the lathi blow of the British police or mounted 
the scaffold with Bande Mdtaram on their lips. The main theme of 
the novel inspired the Bengali youths to supreme self-sacrifice during 
the hectic days of the Swadeshi movement. The central plot moves 
round a band of sannydsins, called santidnas or children, who left their 
hearth and home and dedicated their lives to the cause of their 
motherland. They woshipped their motherland as the Goddess 
Kali;—they knew no other deity save the land of their birth, and 
no other religion except the service of their motherland. That is 
why they called themselves santanas or children (of the mother). 
In their temple they placed three images of the Goddess Kali repre¬ 
senting the motherland,—Mother that was, great and glorious in 

478 


BIRTH OF NATIONALISM 


her majestic grandeur; Mother that is, wretched and grovelling in 
the dust; and the Mother that will be, in her pristine glory. No 
other Bengali book—or, for the matter of that, no book written in any 
language—so profoundly moved the Bengali youths save perhaps 
Sarat-chandra’s Pathe'r Ddbi, written half a century later. The later 
novel was an emotional protest against the British rule, as the earlier 
one was, at least ostensibly, against the Muslim rule. This aspect 
of the Anandamath and the imagery of Goddess Kali leave no doubt 
that Bankim-chandra’s nationalism was Hindu rather than Indian. 
This is made crystal clear from his other writings which contain 
passionate outbursts against the subjugation of India by the Muslims. 
From that day set the sun of our glory—that is the refrain of his 
essays and novels which not unoften contain adverse, and sometimes 
even irreverent, remarks against the Muslims. The plots of some 
of his novels are based on historical fights between Hindus and Mus¬ 
lims, such as Bakhtyar Khalji’s invasion of Bengal, Aurangzeb’s 
fight v/ith the Rajputs, etc., and his readers were never left in doubt 
as to where his sympathies lay. The following confession of the 
great Bengali leader, B. C. Pal, echoes the sentiment of every young 
Hindu reader of Bankim’s novels: 

“Durgesh-nandirii quickened my earliest patriotic sentiments. 
Our sympathies were all entirely with Birendra Singha, and the 
court-scene where the Moslem invader was stabbed through his 
heart by Vimala (widow of Birendra Singha) made a profound im¬ 
pression upon my youthful imagination.” 27 

Bengali lyric poems of the period gave a clarion call to patrio¬ 
tism. Rangalal’s famous Ode to Liberty is a notable instance. Its 
opening line, which has been in the mouth of every Bengali ever 
since, may be translated as follows: “Breathes there the man who 
would like to live, though shorn of liberty?” And this was put in 
the mouth of a Rajput fighting for his country against the Muslims. 
Nabin-chandra Sen, another famous poet of Bengal, wrote a long 
poem on the occasion of the visit of the Prince of Wales (future 
Edward VII) to India. He makes Mother India recount in stirring 
verses to her guest her lost glory of the past, and the heroic achieve¬ 
ments of the Marathas, Sikhs, and her other children; but no mention 
is made of the Muslims. But the broad Western type of nationa¬ 
lism which embraced India as a whole, irrespective of creeds and 
communities, was also faithfully reflected in Bengali literature. The 
greatest name in the field is that of Hem-chandra Banerji whose 
national lyrics, now become almost classic, drew a lurid picture of 
the Indians as contrasted with the Chinese and even the “uncivilized 
Japanese”, who were free nations while India was asleep. The burthen 


479 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

qf his poems was a passionate appeal to India to awake and 
arise. His brilliant satires on the Anglo-Indian agitation against the 
Ilbert Bill and the presentation of the ladies of his family to the 
Prince of Wales by a Bengali gentleman of Calcutta were really strong 
appeals to the national sentiments and feeling of self-respect of the 
Indians. 

* 

B. C. Pal describes as follows Hem-chandra’s influence upon 
him:— 

“Hem Chandra, however, was our special favourite. The in¬ 
tense patriotic passion that breathed through his poems captured our 
youthful minds in a way which no other Bengalee poems had done. 
The new generation of English-educated Bengalees had already com¬ 
menced to advance themselves to positions of trust and responsibility 
in the new Administration. In the learned professions of law and 
medicine, also, they were gradually asserting themselves as against 
the British members. A new spirit of independence and self-asser¬ 
tion was increasingly manifesting itself in the conduct and conver¬ 
sations of the English-educated Bengalee. All these had already 
commenced to provoke a racial conflict in the country. Hemchandra 
was, in a special sense, the poet of this new conflict and of the new 
racial self-respect and sensitive patriotism, born of it.” 28 

The new-born patriotism and national sentiments found expres¬ 
sion in, and were deeply stimulated by, a number of beautiful national 
songs which have survived to the present day. The Bengali dramas 
and the public stage also played a great part in fostering the national 
sentiments. There were social dramas written with the deliberate ob¬ 
ject of drawing pointed attention to the many social evils which 
were eating into vitals of the nation, for in those days “a new passion 
for freedom,—personal, social, and political—had possessed the 
Bengali mind.” 29 But there were also dramas with a distinctly 
national appeal. Reference may be made to the Bhdrata-mdtd 
(Mother India) which proclaimed the gospel of the religion of mother¬ 
land. The following specimen of songs in this drama illustrates the 
anguish of a patriot's heart which it was the deliberate design of the 
author to evoke: 

“O India, gloomy is thy face, 

Beautiful that was as the moon; 

Tears flow from thine eyes 

Throughout the day and night.” 30 

Some of the worst evils of the British rule which deeply stirred the 
feelings of the people formed the theme of dramas. The best illus¬ 
tration is the NXla-darpana by Dina-bandhu Mitra which depicted the 


480 


BIRTH OF NATIONALISM 

terrible oppression of the indigo-planters. 31 B. C. Pal writes in his 
autobiography: 

“When it was put upon the boaird of the new Bengalee theatres, 
the audience got wild with passion against the White Planters; and 
sometimes they so far forgot themselves that they threw their shoes 
at the poor actor on the stage.” 32 

In general, the Bengali dramas, umble, on account of press laws, 
to portray directly sentiments and actions against the British, took 
resort to a subterfuge. They either portrayed heroic historical fights 
by the Rajputs against the Muslims who invaded or conquered their 
motherland, or invented purely imaginary pictures of struggle against 
foreign rulers or conquerors. The scenes and speeches and actions 
were devised in such a manner that no spectator was under any illu 
sion as to the real objective. 

The glaring evils of the British rule were overtly or covertly 
emphasised in poems, dramas, novels, and songs. Reference may 
be made to one particular national song which was an “open condem¬ 
nation of foreign economic exploitation. The burthen of it was that 
India was becoming poorer and poorcir every day owing to the loss 
of her national freedom.” It was tak€?n from a novel by Manmohan 
Bose, Bangadhipa-parajaya, depicting the conquest of Bengal by 
a foreign people who came from a high island on the sea called Tuh- 
gadvlpa. “The weaver and the blacksmith are crying day and night. 
They cannot find their food by plying their trade. Even threads 
and needles come from distant shore*.?. Even match-sticks are not 
produced in the country. Whether in dressing themselves or pro¬ 
ducing their domestic utensils or even in lighting their oil-lamps,— 

in nothing are the people independent of their foreign masters. 

Swarms of locusts from Tuhgadvipa coming to these shores have 
eaten up all its solid grains leaving only the chaff for the starving 
children of the soil.” 33 

Among the important factors that contributed to the develop¬ 
ment of patriotic and national feelings must be reckoned the activities 
of some great personalities. The chief among these, during the 
period under review, was undoubtedly Surendra-nath Banerji. 

Dismissed from Indian Civil Service for what is now generally 
regarded as a very minor offence of technical character, Surendra- 
nath had proceeded to England to appeal to the higher authorities. 
He failed in his mission, but during his stay in England he had 
made a special study of the history of the national movements in 
Europe and realized the important role played by young men in 
these movements. In particular the “Young Italy” movement by 

481 

B.P.I.R.—81 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

Mazzini made a deep impression upon him. Surendra-nath joined 
the Calcutta Students’ Association founded by Ananda-mohan Basu, 
and soon became the life and soul of it. B. C. Pal, himself a student 
in those days, has recorded his impression as follows. “Surendra 
Nath’s eloquence and burning patriotism lent to it a new strength 
and inspiration. Surendra Nath’s first appearance on the platform 
of the Students’ Association at once established his claims to the 
leadership of a new youth movement.” 34 

The subject of Surendra-nath’s first lecture was the rise of the 
Sikh power in the Punjab. This and several other eloquent 
lectures that followed made Surendra-nath the leader of a new poli¬ 
tical movement, which practically supplanted the new religious 
movement of Keshab-chandra Sen which had hitherto caught 
the imagination of Young Bengal. The spirit of freedom which had 
been dominating the educated intelligentsia of Bengal was largely 
diverted from religious and social spheres and “Surendra Nath 
found a new and larger scope for its fulfilment in the political pro¬ 
paganda which he initiated.” 36 It was nothing short of a silent but 
powerful revolution in the intellectual atmosphere in Bengal which 
gave a great stimulus to the newly awakened sense of national and 
patriotic fervour. 

At this distance of time, with the situation so profoundly changed, 
it is difficult to assay properly the value of the inspiring addresses 
of Surendra-nath. For what really matters is not so much the logic 
of arguments, or the accuracy of facts in the light of what we know 
today, but the effect it produced on the impressionable minds of 
the young men who listened to them, and the activities which 
they stirred up. Fortunately, there is a first-hand record of these 
impressions by one who was a student in, those days but later be¬ 
came a distinguished nationalist leader, viz. Bipin-chandra Pal. The 
following is an extract from his autobiography. 

“The materials for his lecture on the ‘Rise of the Sikh Power* 
were, no doubt, drawn from English sources, particularly from 
Malcolm’s History of the Sikhs. But the Sikh movement was practi* 
cally unknown to us. Gur school text-books on Indian History did, 
no doubt, notice the story of the Sikhs in connection with Ran jit 
Singh. But these references had no inspiration for us. Surendra 
Nath for the first time presented the Sikh movement as really a 
movement of freedom, first, against the current ceremonialism and 
Brahminical domination of the Hindu community; second, against 
the oppression of the Moguls, who tried to crush a movement of re¬ 
ligious and spiritual freedom by the organised brute force of an 
alien Government; and lastly, against British aggression. British 


482 


BIRTH OF NATIONALISM 


historians of the Sikhs had glossed over the wonderful military 
skill and valour of the Sikh army, describing signal defeats of the 
British as draws, and what were really draws as defeats of the 
Sikhs. Surendra Nath in his address on the ‘Rise of the British 
Power in the Punjab' exposed the unreliable character of British 
historians and painted in burning words the justice of the Sikh 
cause, the deathless devotion of the Sikh people to their Khalsa or 
Commonwealth, and the signal defeats which they inflicted on the 
British at Chilianwala and Gujerat, Our school histories never 
confessed, frankly these defeats. This revelation of the history of 
the Sikhs made a very powerful appeal to our infant patriotism and 
lent new strength and even bitterness to the anti-British feeling 
that had already commenced to possess our youthful minds. I was 
not present at this first lecture of Surendra Nath's, but those who 
were, carried with them from this meeting a new patriotic fervour. 
A friend characterised this lecture of Surendra Nath's as creating, 
by deafening rounds of applause that followed in quick succession 

;; ■ r* 

his rapidly flowing periods, almost a literal storm about College 
Square. Surendra Nath's position as the most powerful orator of 
his generation was at once established by this performance." 36 

“But the greatest and the most inspiring message of Surendra 
Nath’s early propaganda was delivered through his lectures on 
Joseph Mazzini and the Young Italy movement organised by him. 
Mazzini’s life and particularly his extremely sensitive patriotism 

which so worked upon his youthful imagination that even as a school 

* 

boy he refused to join in any form of gaiety of his family and his 
community, in the face of the bondage in which his country lay 
under Austrian domination, drew out all the latent passion for na¬ 
tional freedom in us. The tyrannies of the Austrian army of occu¬ 
pation in Italy, who showed scant regard for the ordinary rights and 
liberties of the Italian people and treated even the Italian intellec¬ 
tuals of the middle class as membra of an inferior race, indeed liter¬ 
ally as helots and slaves, made a profound impression upon our 
sensitive minds. Neither the person, nor the property of the Italian, in 
the neighbourhood of the Austrian military camps, nor even the 
honour of their women, were safe from the wanton insults and out¬ 
rages of Austrian officers and soldiers. We saw or imagined a great 
similitude between the position of the Italians under Austrian do¬ 
mination and our own position under British.rule. In the outlying 
districts in cases between Europeans and Indians the latter could 
hope to receive practically no justice. The differential treatment 
accorded to Indians and Europeans even when they happened to be 
members of the same Covenanted Civil Service rankled in our 


483 


THE BRITISH PARAM01LTNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

heart. The plight of the indentured labourers in the tea gardens of 
Assam had already commenced to be agitated in our vernacular 
press. The Amrita Bazar Patrika was circulating broadcast tales 
of magisterial high-handedness all over the province. All these 
things working upon our youthful imagination created a profound 
sympathy in us with the struggle for national freedom in Italy led 
by Mazzini, when the story was presented to us by Surendra Nath.” 37 

Another effect of Su rendra-nath’s lecture on Mazzini, although 
little noticed at the time, and less known in later days, was big with 
future consequences. The familiarity of young Bengalis with the 
Young Italy movement led to the growth of secret political societies. 
Here also let Bipin-chandra Pal speak of his own youthful days: 

“We commenced to read the writings of Mazzini and 
the history of the Young Italy movement. Here we saw also the 
earlier organisations for Italian freedom, particularly those of the 
Carbonari, with which Mazzini had himself been associated at the 
beginning of his patriotiic career. The Carbonari were secret 
societies. They hoped to win their national freedom by covering 
the whole country with a network of secret revolutionary organisa¬ 
tions, whose idea was to free their fatherland from the Austrian 
yoke by striking at the Austrian rulers. Secret assassinations were 
the main objective of these Carbonari organisations... But though 
without any real revolutionary motive or any plan of secret assassi¬ 
nations as the way to national emancipation, the new inspiration im¬ 
parted to Young Bengal by Surendra Nath’s presentation of the life 
of Mazzini and the Italian freedom movement led many of us to 
form secret organisations. Calcutta student community was at that 
time almost honeycombed with these organisations. Secrecy has a 
strange fascination for youthful minds. And this was the real psy¬ 
chology of our penchant for these secret societies. Surendra Nath 
was himself, I think, the President of quite a number of these secret 

societies.Surendra Nath’s connection with quite a number of 

the new secret societies among the youthful intellectuals of Calcutta 
proved the unique confidence which he enjoyed of his young 
followers. Though without any serious plan or policy of political 
action aiming at the liberation of their people from the British yoke, 
these societies were, however, not lacking in seriousness. Their 
patriotism was serious, and how seriously they took it was seen in 
the vows and rituals of many of these societies. I knew of one 
such society, though I was not myself a member of it, whose initia¬ 
tory rites were almost Masonic in some aspects. Every member of 
this society had to sign the pledge of membership with his own 
blood drawn at the point of a sword from his breast.” 38 


484 



BIRTH OF NATIONALISM 


These societies did not achieve any practical result by way of 
organising revolution or political assassinations. But they left a 
rich legacy in this respect to the next generation. 

Surendra-nath’s nationality was of the Western type and it was 
predominantly political and free from any Hindu bias. In a speech 
he delivered in 1878 he urged the young men of India to dedicate 
their lives to the good of their country and laid special emphasis on 
the unity among different creeds. Here are a few passages: 

“Young men, your country expects great things from you. Now 
I ask, how many of you are prepared, when you have finished your 
studies at the College, to devote your lives, to consecrate your en¬ 
ergies to the good of your country? (cries of “all,” “all”).... 
There comes a time In the history of a nation’s progress, when every 
man may verily be said to have a mission of his own to accomplish. 
Such a time has now arrived for India. The fiat has gone forth. 
The celestial mandate has been issued that every Indian must now 
do this duty, or stand condemned before God and man. There was 
such a time of stirring activity in the glorious annals of England 

when_(refers to Hampden, Algernon Sidney, and the Seven 

Bishops). 

“It is not indeed necessary for us to have recourse to violence 
in order to obtain the redress of our grievances. Constitutional agi¬ 
tation will secure for us those rights and privileges which in less 
favoured countries are obtained by sterner means. But peaceful 
as are the means to be enforced, there is a stem duty to be perform¬ 
ed by every Indian. And he who fails in that duty is a traitor before 
God and man.... 

“Three hundred years ago, in the Punjab, the immortal founder 
of Sikhism, the meek, the gentle, the blessed Nanak preached the great 
doctrine of Indian unity and endeavoured to knit together Hindus 
and Musulmans under the banner of a common faith. That attempt 
was eminently successful. Nanak became the spiritual founder of 
the Sikh Empire. He preached the great doctrine of peace and 
good will between Hindus and Musulmans. And standing in the 
presence of his great example we too must preach the great doctrine 
of peace and good will between Hindus and Musulmans, Christians 
and Parsees, aye between all sections of the great Indian Community. 

.“In the name then of a common country, let us all, Hindus, 

Musulmans, Christians, Parsees, members of the great Indian Com¬ 
munity, throw the pall of oblivion over the jealousies and dissensions 
of bygone times and, embracing one another in fraternal love and 
affection, live and work for the benefit of a beloved fatherland”. 39 


485 




THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—JI 

The eloquence of Surendra-nath and the voice of many other 
leaders put this broad view of nationalism in the forefront of the 
young Indians, and it exercised great influence upon the political evo¬ 
lution of India. 

The great leaders of Bengal had hitherto laid stress on social 
religious, and personal freedom. The emphasis of Surendra-nath’s 
appeal was far more on political freedom. This constitutes his prin¬ 
cipal contribution to the regeneration of Bengal. He brought a new 
message and inspiration of political freedom and carried young 
Bengal with him. Bipin-chandra Pal, himself a Brahma, admits that 
“Surendra Nath’s political propaganda gathered a much larger follow¬ 
ing than that of the religious and social revolt of Keshub Chandra 
Sen and the Brahrao Samaj. ,,4 ° 

Surendra-nath was not insensible to social reform, but he was 
against violent changes. “We must*’, he said, “so far as practicable, 
take the community with us, by a process of steady and gradual up¬ 
lift, so that there may be no sudden disturbance or dislocation, the 
new being adapted to the old and the old assimilated to the new. 
That has been the normal path of progress in Hindu society through 
the long centuries.” 40 * 

Another great personality who advanced the cause of nationalism 
in India broadbased on the unity of all communities was Mahadev 
Govind Ranade (1842-1901). He held the office of a Subordi¬ 
nate Judge under the Government of Bombay and could not there¬ 
fore take any active part in politics. But he devoted himself to the 
social and economic uplift of the country. In respect of social re¬ 
form, as noted above, 41 he steered a middle course between the 
overzealous enthusiasts who would rather secede from the Hindu 
society than tolerate its evils, and the orthodox who would oppose 
any reform. Ranade made a deep study of the economic problems 
of India and advocated a vigorous policy of industrial and commerciar 
development. In 1890 he inaugurated the Industrial Association 
of Western India. His life and activities were not so spectacular as 
those of Surendra-nath Banerji, but like the latter he greatly ad¬ 
vanced the cause of nationalism in Bombay and inspired and initiated 
men like Gokhale to the service of the motherland. 

Indian nationalism proved to be a dynamic force and gathered 
momentum as years rolled on. In general it may be said that the 
further development of nationalism was mainly due to the rapid 
expansion of those very influences which gave birth to it. Among 
these specific mention may be made of the English education and 
the consequent impact of Western culture, religious and social re¬ 
forms, vernacular literature, press and periodical literature, and 


486 





BIRTH OF NATIONALISM 

political associations and organisations, which have been dealt with 
separately in different chapters. The phenomenal development of 
the Bengali literature and its reaction on the development of nationa- 
lism has been sketched above. In the same way the rapid expan¬ 
sion of English education through the Universities established in 
1857 served as a potent instrument for developing nationalist ideas 
on a very much wider scale than before. Bankim-chandra Chatterji, 
one of the earliest products of the Calcutta University, made a phi¬ 
losophical study of nationalism as an abstract idea. In his view 
nationalism consists of two essential elements: first, the identifica¬ 
tion of individual interest with that of a particular community, so 
that every individual regards the welfare of the community as his 
primary duty. The second is a grim determination on* the part of 
the individual to promote the interest of his own community even 
when it clashes with that of another and can be safeguarded only 
by doing harm to other nations. Such a spirit might be good or 
bad, but historical examples show that only the nations inspired 
by it achieve greatness. The unification of Italy and Germany was 
pointed by Bankim-chandra as the result of such a spirit of nationa¬ 
lism, and nobody can possibly fail to understand that in all this 
abstract discussion his main objective was to draw the public at ten 
tion to the case of India. This is rendered crystal clear when Bankim- 
chandra adds, that neither of the two elements of nationalism 
mentioned by him was ever present in India. This he seeks to 
prove by reference to the events of Indian history, and concludes 
that the ideas of independence and nationalism are new to India 
and have been taught to the Indians by the English. Tilak’s search¬ 
ing analysis of the profound effect of English education on the 
growth of patriotism and nationalism, even so late as the eighties 
of the nineteenth century, has been quoted above. The great poet 
Rabindra-nath has described, in his inimitable way, the inspiration 
he received from the English literature in his younger days, i.e. in 
the seventies and eighties. Indeed any one who studies the Indian 
books and periodicals of the period cannot fail to be struck with the 
powerful force exerted upon Indian minds by the passionate out¬ 
bursts for the ideals of human liberty and violent denunciations of 
desnotism in all shapes and forms by poets like Wordsworth and 
Shelley, and in general by the writings, speeches, and activities of 
celebrated Englishmen. A vernacular paper in Bengal felt almost 
a religious reverence for the Englishmen. “It is their Wilberforces, 
Hampdens, Mills, Brights, Metcalfes, Macaulays, and hundreds of 
other great men, whose liberal principles have captivated us, and 
we have regarded them as the very model of morality, and hold 
them in veneration.” 


487 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 


The last three decades of the nineteenth century also saw a re¬ 
markable growth of Indian-owned newspapers—daily and weekly, and 
both in English and vernacular—-whose role in developing nationa¬ 
lism was very great indeed, and detailed reference to it has been 
made in Chapter VL Growth of political associations, described 
in Chapter XII, and the development of nationalism acted and reacted 
upon each other. It is the growing sense of nationalism which led 
to the development of powerful political organizations, and these, 
in their turn, further stimulated the Indian nationalism and made it 
a political force which even the mighty British Government had 
soon to reckon with. 

In addition to these powerful forces which worked from within, 
there were others supplied by current events in the history of the 
world. The defeat of Italy in Abyssinian War, the rise of Japan 
as a great power, and the defeat it inflicted upon a mighty Euro¬ 
pean power like Russia, had a great repercussion upon Indians. All 
these shattered the myth of European invincibility in war against non- 
Europeans and infused in the heart of the Indians hope and faith 
in their own power. The early discomfitures of the British in the 
Boer War were hailed with delight in India, though the Boers were 
no friends of India, and probably hated the Indians even more than 
the British. Here, again, a minor power successfully defying the 
authority of Britain, served as an object-lesson to the Indians that 
they could also rely on their own strength. The Irish struggle for 
independence against the British also served as a great inspiration 
to the Indians. 

While nationalism in India was making rapid strides, it received 
a great momentum from two-special circumstances during the clos¬ 
ing decade of the nineteenth century. The first was the degraded 
status and the miserable lot of the Indians who migrated to the British 
Colonies in South Africa, Australia and elsewhere, and were sub¬ 
jected to great hardships and disabilities by the Colonial Govern¬ 
ments, to which a detailed reference will be made in Chapter XVII. 
Every Indian felt with bitter and poignant sorrow that such humiliat¬ 
ing treatment of the Indians was possible only because they were 
a subject people and not an independent nation. This idea 
quickened the consciousness of the Indians to the great value of 
nationalism and independence. 

The second circumstance, of far greater importance, was the 
meteor-like rise of SvamI Vivekananda as a great Messiah, Reference 
has been made above 42 to his religious career, but he shone no less 
brilliantly as a great nation-builder. It is not possible here to des¬ 
cribe in detail the manifold ways in which he contributed to the 


488 


BIRTH OF NATIONALISM 


development of Indian nationalism, and only a brief outline must 
suffice. As mentioned above, he championed the cause of Hindu¬ 
ism in the great Parliament of Religions, held at Chicago 
in U.S.A. in 1893 in connection with the celebration of the 
400th anniversary of the discovery of America by Columbus. 
There, in the presence of the representatives of all the religions 
from almost all the countries in the world, the young monk from 
India expounde . 1 the principles of Vedanta and the greatness of 
Hinduism with such persuasive eloquence that from the very first 
he captivated the hearts of the vast audience. It would be hardly 
an exaggeration to say that it was Svaml Vivekananda who made 
a place for Hinduism in the cultural map of the modem world. 
The civilized nations of the West had hitherto looked down upon 
Hinduism as a bundle of superstitions, evil institutions, and immoral 
customs, unworthy of serious consideration in the progressive world 
of today. Now, for the first time, they not only greeted, with hearty 
approval, the lofty principles of Hinduism as expounded by Vive¬ 
kananda, but accorded a very high place to it in the culture and 
civilization of the world. The repercussion of this on the vast 
Hindu community can be easily imagined. The Hindu intelligentsia 
were always very sensitive to the criticism of the Westerners, parti¬ 
cularly the Christian missionaries, regarding the many evils and 
shortcomings of the Hindu society and religion, as with their ra¬ 
tional outlook they could not but admit the force of much of this 
criticism. They had always to be on the defensive and their atti¬ 
tude was mostly apologetic, whenever there was a comparative 
estimate of the values of the Hindu and Western culture. They 
had almost taken for granted the inferiority of their culture vis A vis 
that of the West, which was so confidently asserted by the Western 
scholars. Now, all on a sudden, the table was turned, and the re¬ 
presentatives of the West joined in a chorus of applause at the 
hidden virtues of Hinduism which were hitherto unsuspected either 
by friends or foes. It not only restored the self-confidence of the 
Hindus in their own culture and civilisation, but quickened their 
sense of national pride and patriotism. This was evident from the 
sentiment echoed and re-echoed in the numerous public addresses 
which were presented to Svaml Vivekananda on his home-coming 
by the Hindus all over India, almost literally from Cape Comorin to 
the Himalayas. It was a great contribution to the growing Hindu 
nationalism. 

On his return to India, Svaml Vivekananda made it a mission 
of his life to preach the spiritual basis of Hindu civilization. He 
pointed out in his writings and speeches that the spirituality of India 


489 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

was neither less valuable, nor less important for the welfare of 
humanity, than the much vaunted material greatness of the West 
which has dazzled our eyes. He was never tired of asking the 
Indians to turn their eyes, dazed by the splendour of the West, to 
their own ideals and institutions. By careful comparison between 
the real values of the Hindu ideals and institutions and those of the 
West, he maintained the superiority of the former and asked his 
countrymen never to exchange gold for tinsels. Referring to the 
conflict between Westernized India and the true India of the old* he 
said: “On one side, New India is saying: ‘If we only adopt Western 
ideas, Western language, Western fqod, Western dress and 
Western manners, we shall be as strong and powerful as the West¬ 
ern nations/ On the other, Old India is saying, Tools! By imitation, 
other’s ideas never become one’s own—-nothing, unless earned, is 
your own. Does the ass in the lion’s skin become the lion?’ 

“On one side, New India is saying: ‘What the Western nations 
do are surely good, otherwise how did they become so great?’ On 
the other side, Old India is saying: ‘The flash of lightning is inten¬ 
sely bright, but only for a moment; look out, boys, it is dazzling 
your eyes. Beware!” 

But Vivekananda was not prejudiced against the West, nor in¬ 
sensible to the great value of her achievements. He frankly admitted 
that Indian ciilture was neither spotless nor perfect,—itr had to 
learn many things from the West, but without sacrificing its true 
character. 

Svaml Vivekananda combined in himself the role of a great 
saint and fervid nationalist. He placed Indian nationalism on the 
high pedestal of past glory, but it embraced the teeming millions of 
India, both high and low, rich and poor. He devoted his life to 
the awakening of national consciousness and many of his eloquent 
appeals would stir the national sentiments of India even today to 
their very depths. Here is one specimen: 

“India!... Wouldst thou attain, by means of thy disgraceful 
cowardice, that freedom deserved only by the brave and the heroic? 
O India! forget not that the ideal of thy womanhood is Sltfi, 
SSvitri, Damayanti; forget not that the God thou worshippest is the 
great ascetic of ascetics, the all-renouncing Safikara, the Lord of 
Um§; forget not that thy marriage, thy wealth, thy life are not for 
sense-pleasure, are not for thy individual personal happiness; for¬ 
get not that thou art born as a sacrifice to the Mother’s altar; forget 
not that thy social order is but the reflex of the Infinite Universal 
Motherhood; forget not that the lower classes, the ignorant, the 
poor, the illiterate, the cobbler, the sweeper are thy flesh and blood, 


490 



BIKTIJ OF NATIONALISM 

thy brothers. Thou brave one, be bold, take courage, be proud that 
thou art an Indian and • proudly proclaim, T am an Indian, every 
Indian is my brother.’ Say, ‘The ignorant Indian, the poor and de¬ 
stitute Indian, the Brahman Indian, the Pariah Indian, is my 
brother.’ Thou, too, clad with but a rag round thy loins proudly 
proclaim at the top of thy voice, ‘The Indian is my brother, the 
Indian is my life, India’s gods and goddesses are my God. India’s 
society is the cradle of my infancy, the pleasure-garden of my 
youth, the sacred heaven, the VaraajasI of my old age.’ Say, brother, 
‘The soil of India is my highest heaven, the good of India is my 
good,’ and repeat and pray day and night, ‘O Thou Lord of Gauri, 
O Thou Mother of the Universe, vouchsafe manliness unto me. O 
Thou Mother of Strength, take away my weakness, take away my 
rnmanliness, and —Make me a Man.” 43 

Though an ascetic, Vivekananda was a patriot of patriots. The 
thought of restoring the pristine glory of India by resuscitating 
among her people the spiritual vitality which was dormant, but not 
dead, was always the uppermost thought in his mind. His great 
disciple, Sister Nivedita (an Irish lady named Margaret Noble), 
who was his constant companion, has remarked: “Throughout 
those years, in which I saw him almost daily, the thought of India 
was to him like the air he breathed.” A saint and an ascetic have 
always exercised a profound influence upon- Indian minds. No 
wonder, therefore, that the prophecy of Vivekananda that India, 
with all her shortcomings, and in spite of the present dismal out¬ 
look, shall rise to the stature of a great nation in the modern world, 
went home and quickened the national impulses of the people of 
India. There seems to be a great deal of truth in the following 
tribute paid to him by a recent historian of India’s struggle for 
Swaraj : 

“SvamI Vivekananda might well be called the father of 
modern Indian Nationalism; he largely created it and also embodied 
in his own life its highest and noblest elements.” 44 

An important contribution to the growth of Indian nationalism, 
was also made by the Theosophical Society, to which reference 
has been made above 46 Its effect on Indian mind is thus described 
by B. C. Pal: 

“This Society told our people that instead of having any reason 
to be ashamed of their past or of the legacies left to them by it, they 
have every reason to feel justly proud of it all, because their ancient 
seers and saints had been the spokesmen of the highest truths and 
their old books, so woefully misunderstood today, had been the re¬ 
positories of the highest human illumination-and wisdom. Our 

491 


I 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-41 


people had hitherto felt perpetually humiliated at the sense of their 
degradation. This new message, coming from the representatives 
of the most advanced peoples of the modem world, the inheritors 
of the most advanced culture and civilisation the world has as yet 
known, at once raised us in our own estimation and created a self- 
confidence in us that commenced to find easy expression in a new 
propaganda which, instead of apologising for our current and 
mediaeval idens and institutions and seeking to reform and recons¬ 
truct these after modem European ideals, boldly stood up in defence 
of them.” 4 ® Elsewhere Pal says: “But the greatest contribution 
of Theosophy to the development of our national consciousness 
was in its new and strange gospel of Ancient Indian Wisdom and in 
its announcement of a great world purpose and world mission 
which India yet had for the races of the modem world .” 47 

The most talented representative of the Society in India was 
Mrs. Annie Besant. Apart from revealing the past glory and great¬ 
ness of the Hindus, she offered justification even for the many 
customs and institutions, which were generally tolerated by the 
educated Hindus though regarded by them as evil or superstitious 
and openly condemned as such. The justification of these customs 
and institutions by new interpretation of their significance and 
raison d’etre from the pen of a talented European lady, noted for 
profound learning and wisdom, naturally flattered the wounded 
vanity of the Hindus, the pride in their national glory being further 
enhanced by her dictum, repeatedly asserted, that the Hindu culture 
was essentially superior to the European. 

It has been pointed out above that the newly bom Indian 
nationalism was gradually assuming a decidedly Hindu character. 
This received further stimulus from the activities of Vivekananda 
and the teachings of the Theosophical Society. The latter, in 
particular, gave it a tinge of orthodoxy which was disapproved by 
Vivekananda himself. Referring to the Theosophical Society he 
said, “foolish depreciation is surely vicious, but fulsome praise is 
equally loathsome.” 47 * It was also disliked by a section of the nationa¬ 
lists. Nevertheless, towards the close of the nineteenth century, 
one could clearly distinguish a spirit of revivalism, i.e. an attempt 
to reconstruct Ihe Hindu society on the model of the old . 48 This, as 
noted above, was strongly opposed by Mahadev Govind Ranade . 49 

But whatever one may think of this drawback, there is no 
doubt that patriotism was lifted to a high spiritual level by SvamI 
Vivekananda. Although he was mainly a religious devotee, and a 
sanny&sin who had renounced the world, his speeches, writings and 
activities had a direct bearing on the devotion to motherland. He 


492 



BIRTH OF NATIONALISM 


emphasized the greatness of the spiritual idea enunciated in the 
Vedanta, and the important role it was destined to play in elevating 
the whole mankind. But, he said, this great mission of India would 
remain unfulfilled so long as India continued in her present state 
of slavery and abject poverty. The political and material greatness 
of India was, therefore, indissolubly bound up with the spiritual re¬ 
generation of India and mankind. Vivekananda restated the old 
ideas of Vedanta in a new form. The fundamental concept of 
Vedanta was the essential unity of God and man and the realiza¬ 
tion of this truth by man by removing his illusion or ignorance. In 
the past, such realization was sought through metaphysical abstract¬ 
ions and renunciation of social and civic life. It is against this 
prevailing view that Vivekananda raised his voice of protest. Re¬ 
alization of God is to be achieved, said he, not by retirement into 
hills and forests and negation of wordly life, but by the spirituali¬ 
zation of the normal contents and actualities of life. He put it in 
a more concrete form by laying emphasis on the fact that one 
should not run away from the world in order to seek God, but try 
to recognize Him in his fellow-beings, who were the images of God 
Himself, as taught by the Vedanta. The true worship of God was 
the service of the people whom we have hitherto neglected or trod¬ 
den under foot. He therefore asked every Indian to realize God in 
the nation and to dedicate himself to its service, in a spirit of 
religious reverence and without any pride or fear, irrespective of 
all earthly consequences. He gave a living touch to the idea by 
using the word Daridra-N&r&yana i.e. the God symbolised 
by the poor and the humble. Thi^ great sannyatfn, who 
had left his hearth and home at the call of his spiritual guru, gri 
Ramakpshoa, and delved deeply into spiritual mysticism, was 
never tired of preaching that 4 what India needs today is not so 
much religion or philosophy, of which she has enough, but food for 
her hungry millions, social justice for the low classes, strength and 
energy for her emasculated people, and a sense of pride and prestige 
as a great nation of the world.’ 

Vivekananda put Indian nationalism firmly on the five bed-rocks, 
viz, yearning for political independence, pride in the past giory and 
greatness of India, upity of Indians on the conception of brotherhood, 
awakening of the masses, and development of physical strength and 
vigour. To a group of young men who met him, seeking his guidance 
and blessings, he said: “Man-making is my mission of life. You try 
to translate this mission of mine into action and reality. Read Bankim- 
chandra and emulate his defcbhakti (patriotism) and sanatdna- 
dharma (activities of the band of patriots depicted in the Ananda - 


493 




THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-41 

mafha) Your duty should be service to motherland. India should 
be freed politically first.” “For the next fifty years”, he said else¬ 
where, “this alone shall be our key-note—this, our great Mother 
India. Let all other vain Gods disappear for that time from our 
minds”. 49 * 

Again and again Vivekananda asserted that weakness, real or 
fancied, has been the bane of Indian national life in the past. “What 
I want”, said he, “is muscles of iron and nerves of steel, inside which 
dwells a mind of the same material as that of which the thunderbolt 
is made.” Again, “First of all, our young men must be strong. Re¬ 
ligion will come afterwards. Be strong, my young friends; that is 
my advice to you. You will be nearer to Heaven through football 
than through the study of the Gita.” But he held out the Krishna 
of the Bhagavud-Gitd as our national ideal of dynamic energy based 
on true religion. 

The uplift of the masses seems to have been the key-note of his 
programme of national regeneration. “The only hope of India”, he 
said, “is from the masses. The upper classes are physically and 
morally dead.” 

Again, he said, “Keep the motto before you—‘Elevation of the 
masses’... Work among those young men who can devote heart 
and soul to this one duty—the duty of raising the masses of India.' 
Vivekananda put it in the forefront of his social programme. “Our 
modern reformers”, said he, “are very busy about widow remarriage. 
Of course, I am a sympathiser of every reform, but the fate of a 
nation does not depend upon the number of husbands their widows 
get, but upon the condition of the masses,” 

Vivekananda made a trumpet call to all Indians to shed fear of all 
kinds and stand forth as men by imbibing iakti (energy and strength), 
and reminded them that they were the particles of the Divine, 
according to the eternal truth preached by the Vedanta. 

As for himself, he was even prepared to forego his own salva¬ 
tion for the sake of the masses. “Who cares for your Bhakti and 
MuktiV ’, he once exclaimed, “I will go into a thousand hells cheer¬ 
fully, if I can rouse my countrymen, immersed in Tama$ t to stand on 
their own feet”. “What I now want”, he wrote in a letter in 1895, 
“is a band of fiery missionaries,” and he gave a practical shape to the 
idea a few years later. In the Rules which he had himself drawn up 
for the Belur Math, the centre of his organization, the last one runs 
as follows: “The root of all misery in India is the wide gulf between 
the lower and upper classes. Unless this difference is made up, 
there is no hope of any well-being for the people. Therefore we 
must send preachers to all places to give the masses education and 


494 



BIRTH OF NATIONALISM 


religious teaching”. In pursuance of this he engaged the monks re¬ 
cruited mostly from the educated middle class for social service 
under an allied, but “distinct, organization known as the Bimakrish^a 
Mission, whose activities extend throughout India. The precepts 
and example of this great sanny&sin galvanised the current of 
national life, infused new hopes and inspirations, and placed the 
service to the motherland on a religious level. His voice had a 
special appeal to the Indians as they are always attracted by a saintly 
life, more particularly as his teachings, inspired by Sri Rama- 
Iqrishija, were highly honoured even in Europe and America. 

Svami Vivekananda thus gave a spiritual basis to Indian 
nationalism. The lessons of Vedanta and the Bhagavad-Gita permeated 
the lives and activities of many a nationalist, and, as will be seen 
later, many a martyr, inspired by his teachings, endured extreme 
sufferings and sacrifices with a cheerful heart, fearlessly embraced 
death, and calmly bore the inhuman tortures, worse than death, 
which were sometimes inflicted upon them. 

Not only religion and philosophy but also history was enlisted 
in the cause of nationalism. As Bengal had no knowledge in those 
days of her own great heroes, the lives of Rajput, Mara^ha and Sikh 
heroes took their place. The patriotism of Rana Pratap and the 
heroic deeds of Shivaji were household words in Bengal. It would 
be difficult to find in any literature such stirring poems as Rabindra¬ 
nath wrote on Shivaji and the Sikh leaders Banda and Guru Govinda. 

The ground was thus prepared in Bengal for the emergence of 
a mighty wave of nationalism which soon revolutionised the poli¬ 
tical movement in India. But it was in Maharashtra where the 
new spirit of nationalism first manifested itself in a practical form. 
This is best illustrated by the career of Wasudeo Balwant Phadkc 
sketched above. 60 

Wasudeo Balwant Phadke set the example of militant nation¬ 
alism which took deep root in the soils of Maharashtra and Bengal 
a quarter of a century later, as will be described in another chapter. 
His activities, however, had no immediate effect on the progress of 
nationalism as an ideal and motive force in political and social life, 
such as has been described above. 

A review of the progress of nationalism in India was made by 
Gopal-krishna Gokhale in 1905, in the following passage: “The 
growth, during the last fifty years, of a feeling of common nationa¬ 
lity, based upon common tradition, common disabilities and common 
hopes and aspirations, has been most striking. The fact that we are 
Indians first, and Hindoos, Mahomedans, Parsees, or Christians 


495 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-^II 

afterwards, is being realised in a steadily increasing measure, and 
the idea of a united and renovated India, marching onwards to a 
place among the nations of the world worthy of her great past, is 
no longer a mere idle dream of a few imaginative minds, but is the 
definitely accepted creed of those who form the brain of the com¬ 
munity—the educated classes of the country.’* 51 

The most significant trait of the new nationalism was an intense 
love of the motherland, based on a conception of its past glory and 
future greatness. But it was often distinguished from patriotism 
of the Western type by being elevated to a religious level. This 
was clearly preached by Bankim-chandra in his famous novel 
Anandamath to which reference has been made above. He has 
depicted therein the lives of a band of patriots who had left their 
hearth and home, wives and children, and dedicated their lives to 
the service of their motherland, conceived as the goddess Kali, 
the source of all power and energy. The only form of worship 
acceptable to her was the selfless service to the motherland. They 
revered no other deity, and no other form of worship was known to 
them. 62 Thus Bankim-chandra converted patriotism into religion 
and religion into patriotism. 

Gokhale tried to give a practical shape to this high ideal by 
founding the ‘Servants of India Society’ in 1905. While inaugurat¬ 
ing it, he described the progress of nationalism in the extract quoted 
above, and then observed: “The results achieved so far are undoubted 
ly most gratifying, but they only mean that the jungle has been 
cleared, and the foundations laid. The great work of rearing the 
superstructure has yet to be taken in hand.... One' essential con¬ 
dition of success is that a sufficient number of our countrymen must 
now come forward to devote themselves to the cause in the spirit in 
which religious work is undertaken. Public life must be spiritua¬ 
lised. Love of country must so fill the heart that all else shall appear 
as of little moment by its side. A fervent patriotism which rejoices 
at every opportunity of sacrifice for the motherland, a dauntless heart 
which refuses to be turned back from its object by difficulty or danger, 
a deep faith in the purpose of Providence that nothing can shake,— 
equipped with these, the worker must start on his mission and 
reverently seek the joy which comes of spending oneself in the 
service of one’s country.” 

The object of the ‘Servants of India Society’ was to train such 
men—men who would be “prepared to devote their lives to the 
cause of the country in a religious spirit”, and, “as national mission¬ 
aries,” promote “by all constitutional means the national interests 


496 


BIRTH OF NATIONALISM 


of the Indian people/’ Every member of the Society had to take 
seven vows at the time of admission. The first four of these are: 
(1) That the country will always be the first in his thoughts and 
he will give to her service the best that is in him. (2) That in 
serving the country he will seek no personal advantage for himself. 
(3) That he will regard all Indians as brothers, and will work for 
the advancement of all, without distinction of caste or preed. (4) 
That he will be content with such provision for himself and his 
family, if he has any, as the Society may be able to make. He will 
devote no part of his energies to earning money for himself. 


1. See p. 338. 

2. Bengal Past and Present, LXVII (1948), pp. 40-5. 

3. “If I were asked under what sky the human mind has most fully developed 
some of its choicest gifts, has most deeply pondered on the greatest problems 
of life, and has found solutions of some of them which well deserve the atten¬ 
tion even of those who have studied Plato and Kant—I should point to India. 
And if I were to ask myself from what literature we, here in Europe, we who 
have been nurtured almost exclusively on the thoughts of Greeks and Romans, 
and of one Semitic race, the Jewish, may draw that corrective which is most 
wanted in order to make our inner life more perfect, more comprehensive, 
more universal, in fact more truly human, a life, not for this life only, but'’a 
transfigured and eternal life—again I should pointi to India.” F. Max Miiller, 
What Can India Teach Vs? 2nd Edn., Oxford, 1892, p. 6. 

4. Cf. Ch VI. 

4a. Cf. Ch. XT, and Vol. IX, Chs. XIII, XXIX. 

5. Cf. Vol. IX, pp. 412 ff. 

6. Ch. IX and tne Chs. mentioned in f.n., 4a. 

7. See pp. 349-51. 

8. Vol. IX, Ch. XX; Griffiths, p. 259. 

9. B.C. Pal-I, I. 229. 

9a. Cotton-II, 222. 

10. B.C. Pal-1, I. 233. 

10a. Ibid, I. 315; II. XV. 

11. Ibid, I. 237. 

12. Ibid. 234. 

12a.Ibid, 259-60. 

13. This is the popular form of the name of Raj-narayan Basu mentioned on p. 176. 

14. Ibid, 260. 

15. Ibid, 261-2. 

16. The text of the Document is reproduced in the Modem Review, June, 1944, 
pp. 444 ff. 

17. B. Majumdar, 293-4, 

18. B.C. Pal-I, I. 310-14. 

19. B. C. Pal-II, 66. 

20. B.C. Pal-I, II. 70-1. 

21. Ibid, 84. 

22. Ibid, 85. 

23. H.B. Sarda— Dayananda, p. cxxii. 

24. It may be noted that Keshab-chandra Sen and Bhudev Mukherji recommended 
Hindi as national language, and several others recommended Swadeshi, before 
Dayananda. 

25. See pp. 456 ff . 

26. See pp. 472-3. 

27. B.C. Pal-I, I. 227. 

28. Ibid, 228. 

29. Ibid, 252. 

30. Ibid, 256. 

31. Cf. Vol. IX, pp. 917, 922, 933. 


B.P.I.R.—32 


497 




THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


32. B.C. Pal-I, 1, 253. 

S3. Ibid, 256. I have »ubstited ‘Tungadvlpa’, the original word, for ‘a distant island* 

in Pal’s translation. 

34. Ibid, 233. 

35. Ibid, 237-8. 

36. Ibid, 242*3. 

37. Ibid, 245-6. 

38. Ibid, 246*48. 

38. Speech** and Writing*, 227-31. 

46. B.C. Pal-I, I. 235. 

40a. A Nation in Making , pp. 387-8. 

41. See p. 258. 

42. See pp. 123-31. 

43. For the extracts quoted from the writings and speeches of Vivekananda, and 
others of similar import, cf. Complete Work* of Vivekananda, TV (7th Ed.), 
pp.477-80; BhUpendranath Datta, Swami Vivekananda, pp. 314-42, 371-89; Eknath 
Ranade, Swami Vivekananda** Roueing Call to Nation (a compilation of select 
passages). 

44. Pradhan, 60. 

45. See pp. 131-4. 

46. B.C. Pal-I, I. 425. 

47. Ibid, II LV. 

47a. Complete Works of Vivekananda, Vol, IV (7th Ed.), p. 318. 

48. See pp. 115-6. 

49. See pp. 257-8. 

49a. Complete Works, HI (8th Ed.), 300-01. 

50. Cf. Vol. IX, pp. 908-14. 

51. Speeches of Gokhale, Appendix, pp. 182-4. 

52. See pp. 257-8. 


498 



CHAPTER XIV (LII) 

DEVELOPMENT OF POLITICAL IDEAS AND 
ORGANIZATIONS (1858-85) 

I. BENGAL 

As an inevitable consequence of the growth of nationalism, 
described in the preceding chapter, there was a forward movement 
in political ideas and organizations in the latter half of the nine¬ 
teenth century. Hitherto the political aspirations of the Indians 
did not go much beyond administrative reforms with a view to 
giving more powers to the Indians, but gradually they were inspired 
by higher ambitions to which expression has been given by 
Surendra-nath Banerji in the following passage: “It was not enough 
that we should have our full share of the higher offices, but we 
aspired to have a voice in the councils of the nation. There was the 
bureaucracy. For good or evil, it was there. We not only wanted 
to be members of the bureaucracy and to leaven it with the Indian 
element, but we looked forward to controlling it, and shaping and 
guiding its measures and eventually bringing the entire administra¬ 
tion under complete popular domination. It was a new departure 
hardly noticed at the time, but fraught with immense potentialities. 
Along with the development of struggle for place and power to be 
secured to our countrymen, there came gradually but steadily to 
the forefront the idea that this was not enough, that it was part, 
but not even the most vital part, of the programme for political 
elevation of our people. The demand for representative govern¬ 
ment was now definitely formulated, and it was but the natural and 
legitimate product of the public activities that had preceded it/* 1 

The idea of a representative government was not, however, 
a new thing in Bengal polities. On July 25, 1867, W. C. Bonnerjee, 
who afterwards became the President of the first Indian National 
Congress (1885), delivered in England a long speech on “representa- 
tive and responsible Government of India”. He made the concrete 
suggestion of setting up a representative Assembly and a Senate 
in India with the power to veto their decisions given to both the 
Governor-General and the Crown. 2 In a speech at Brighton in 
March, 1873, Ananda-mohan Bose advocated the establishment of re¬ 
presentative Government in India by gradual stages. 

499 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCES—II 

/ 

% _ » 

Next year, Krishta-das Pal, the veteran politician of Bengal, 

recommended a similar constitutional government for India. In 
1874, in a leading article in the Hindoo Patriot on the “Home Rule 
for India”, he observed: “Our attention should, therefore, be di¬ 
rected to Home Rule for India, to the introduction of constitutional 
government for India in India. Most of the British Colonies have 
been blessed with constitutional Government, but India is the only 
Dependency which, despite the vast ness of its area, its population and 
interests, is denied the privilege. If taxation and representation 
go hand in hand in all British Colonies, Why should this principle be 
ignored in British India?... Home Rule for India ought to be our 
cry, and it ought to be based upon the same constitutional basis that 
is recognised in the Colonies”. 3 

The existing political associations did not prove equal to the 
task of pursuing this higher ideal, and so a few advanced political 
thinkers of Bengal started a new association called “Indian League” 
on 23 September, 1875. Its object was defined to be “to stimulate the 
sense of nationalism amongst the people” and awaken political con¬ 
sciousness among them. The organizers rightly claimed that “this 
is the first instance of a political body formed by public announce¬ 
ment and a call upon the nation to attend it and mould it to their 
liking”. 4 Even the Anglo-Indian daily of Calcutta, the English• 
man, referred to this new political organization as “the first marked 
sign of the awakening of the people on this side of India to political 
life”. 5 The Indian League had a brief but useful career. It was 
shortly supplanted by another political organization which proved 
to be more durable. This new organization, promoted by several 
leaders of advanced political thought, headed by Surendra-nath, was 
inaugurated in a public meeting held at the Albert Hall, Calcutta, 
on 26 July, 1876, which was attended by about seven to eight hun¬ 
dred persons. The new organization was named ‘Indian Association* 
for reasons which Surendra-nath himself explains as follows: 

“The idea that was working in our minds was that the Associa¬ 
tion was to be the centre of an all-India movement. For even then, 
the conception of a united India, derived from the inspiration of 
Mazzini, or, at any rate, of bringing all India upon the same common 
political platform, had taken firm possession of the minds of the 
Indian leaders in Bengal. We accordingly resolved to call the new 
political body the Indian Association”. 6 Surendra-nath also defines 
the object of this Association in the following words: 

“(1) The creation of a strong body of public opinion in the 
country; (2) the unification of the Indian races and peoples upon the 
basis of common political interests and aspirations; (3) the promo- 


500 


POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 


tion of friendly feeling between Hindus and Mohamedans; and, 
lastly, the inclusion of the masses in the great public movements of 
the day”. 7 

f 

The Indian Association was welcomed by all shades of public 
opinion. The well-known Indian paper of Calcutta, the Hindoo 
Patriot , the organ of the British Indian Association, which was op¬ 
posed if o the ‘Indian League', welcomed it in words which show the 
new trend of political thought in the country. 

“If they be less a petitioning body, and more an agency for the 
education of the rising generation in political matters, and for the 
direction of their political thoughts and aspirations through right 
channels, they may prove useful co-operators of the existing Asso¬ 
ciations. They cannot have a better model than the East Indian As¬ 
sociation, which generally invites thoughtful men to discuss import¬ 
ant questions, publishes the discussions for general information, and 
thus helps in the moulding and maturing of public opinion on those 
questions, and petitions to Parliament or Her Majesty’s Govern¬ 
ment on exceptional occasions”. 8 

Surendra-nath very rightly observes: 

“The Indian Association supplied a real need. It soon focussed 
the public spirit of the middle class, and became the centre of the 
leading representatives of the educated community of Bengal”. 9 

One of the important topics which engaged the attention of the 
Indian Association was the new regulation of 1876 reducing the age- 
limit of the competitors for the Indian Civil Service examination 
from 21 to 19. It was bound to prove a great handicap to Indian 
candidates, and was no doubt deliberately devised to reduce their 
chance of success. The Indian Association took up this question 
in right earnest and held a public meeting in Calcutta on 24 March, 
1877, to enter an emphatic protest against it. In order to give an 
all-India character to the agitation, the Association had sent letters 
to the different provinces asking for their opinion, and letters and 
telegrams from the leaders of different regions of India, protesting 
against the reactionary measure, were read at the public meeting. 
Hits is the beginning of a novel feature in the political agitation of 
the country which soon became almost a normal procedure. Backed 
by the united voice of India, the Calcutta meeting decided to send a 
memorial to the British Parliament, protesting against the measure 
and praying that the maximum age-limit for the I. C. S. examina¬ 
tion be raised to twenty-two years as was recommended by Lord 
Northbrook, the then Governor-General of India, and other eminent 
authorities, and that the examination be simultaneously held in Lon¬ 
don and one or more centres in India. This is the beginning of that 


501 


THU BRITISH PAKAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RSNAJBSANCE-II 

demand for simultaneous I.C.S. examinations in India and England 
which continued throughout the nineteenth century. 

Apart from the great importance of this question, the organizers 
of the meeting had other ulterior motives. The meeting was held 
ostensibly to protest against the age-limit of the I.C.S. examina¬ 
tion, but as Surendra-nath puts it, “the underlying conception, and 
the true aim and purpose, of the Civil Service agitation was the awa¬ 
kening of a spirit of unity and solidarity among the people of India”. 10 
The meeting accordingly decided “to bring the various Indian pro¬ 
vinces upon the same common platform (a thing that had never been 
attempted before), and to unite them through a sense of a common 
grievance and the inspiration of a common resolve”. 11 Thus an 
ill-conceived administrative measure led to the organization of what 
may be justly regarded as the Erst political movement on an all- 
India basis. 

The task of carrying out this higher purpose was entrusted to 
Surendra-nath, and he was appointed a Special Delegate to visit the 
different parts of India. Surendra-nath discharged this onerous duty 
with great ability and industry. He left Calcutta on May 26, 1877, 
and made a prolonged tour in Upper India, visiting Banaras, Allaha¬ 
bad, Kanpur, Lakhnau, Aligarh, Delhi, Agra, Meerut, Amritsar and 
Lahore. Next year he made a similar tour in the Presidencies of 
Madras and Bombay. At all these places he addressed crowded 
public meetings which endorsed the resolutions passed at the public 
meeting in Calcutta. But he did something more. At Allahabad, Kan¬ 
pur, Lakhnau, Meerut and Lahore he organized new political asso¬ 
ciations to act in concert with the Indian Association of Calcutta. 
The existing political organizations in other places al|o agreed to 
make a common cause. The foundation for concerted political ac¬ 
tion was thus well and truly laid. 12 

The propaganda tour of Surendra-nath Banerji from one end 
of India to the other constitutes a definite landmark in the history 
of India’s political progress. It clearly demonstrated that in spite 
of differences in language, creed, and social institutions, the peoples 
of this great sub-continent were bound by a common tie of ideals 
and interest, creating a sense of underlying unity which enabled them 
to combine for a common political objective. For the first time 
within living memory, or even historical tradition, there emerged 
the idea of India over and above the congeries of States and Provinces 
into which it was divided. 

This inner meaning of the tour of Surendra-nath impressed even 
discerning Englishmen of those days. Henry Cotton, a member of 


502 



POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 

the I. C. S., but sympathetic to the political aspirations of India, thus 
describes his own impression at the time: 

“The educated classes are the voice and brain of the country. 
The Bengalee Babus now rule public opinion from Peshwar to Chitta¬ 
gong; and, although the natives of North-Western India are 
immeasurably behind those of Bengal in education and in their sense 
of political independence, they are gradually becoming as amenable 
as their brethren of the lower provinces to intellectual control and 
guidance. A quarter of a century ago there was no trace of this: the 
idea of any Bengalee influence in the Punjab would have been a con¬ 
ception incredible to Lord Lawrence, to a Montgomery, or a Macleod, 
yet it is the case that during the past year the tour of a Bengalee 
lecturer, lecturing in English in Upper India, assumed the character 
of a triumphal progress; and at the present moment the name of 
Surendra Nath Banerjee excites as much enthusiasm among the rising 
generation of Multan as in Dacca”. 13 

To the Indian community the successful tour of Surendra-nath 
brought a new message of hope and inspiration. It demonstrated, 
among other things, that politics might be a subject of as absorbing 
interest as religion had hitherto been, that there was a far greater 
degree of sympathy and community of interest between the peoples 
of different provinces than was generally taken for granted, and 
that it was quite feasible to bring them together upon a common 
political platform in a common endeavour to improve the political 
condition of India. The stage was thus set for a political organiza¬ 
tion embracing the whole of India, which came into being in less 
than a decade. It was foreshadowed by the return visit of political 
leaders of Poona and the Punjab to Calcutta early in 1878. 

The Indian Association found a new scope of activity in another 
reactionary measure of the Government. This was the Vernacular 
Press Act which was passed by Lord Lylton’s Government. 14 Its 
object was to muzzle the newspapers in Indian languages which 
spread the message of nationality and the newly awakened sense of 
political consciousness. The venom of Government’s wrath fell on 
Bengali papers, cuttings of which were sedulously collected to justify 
the new measure. It was generally believed at the time that the 
object of the Government was to stop the publication of the Amrita 
Bazar Patrika , an outspoken weekly edited by the famous Ghosh 
brothers, mentioned above. 16 The Vernacular Press Act was 
passed by the Supreme Council in one sitting on March 14, 1878. 
It was followed during the same year by other reactionary measures 
such as the Arms Act and the License Act. 


503 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

The Indian Association held public meetings to protest against 
all these obnoxious measures and, in particular, carried on a vigo¬ 
rous agitation against the Vernacular Press Act which sought to cut 
at the very root of the nascent spirit of nationalism and political 
activity in India* As on the previous occasion of protest against 
the new I. C. S. regulation, a public meeting was held in Calcutta, inti¬ 
mations of which were sent to the other Provinces. This meeting, 
held in the Town Hall on 17 April, 1878, was attended by about five 
thousand men, and this was an indication of the growth in the poli¬ 
tical consciousness of the people. The British Indian Association 
held aloof, but all other shades of opinion were represented. Letters 
and telegrams supporting the object of the meeting were received 
from leaders and political associations all over India. Those who had 
discerning eyes could see in this meeting the transfer of the political 
leadership to the middle class intelligentsia from the old landed 
aristocracy and other vested interests. 

The sequel of this meeting was of great political interest. A peti¬ 
tion against the Vernacular Press Act was approved by the meeting 
and sent to the famous British statesman, Gladstone, who was then the 
Leader of the Opposition in the House of Commons. Gladstone 
moved a Resolution in the House which was fully debated. Jt was 
bound to be lost, but the amazing thing was that out of 360 members 
present, 152 members voted in favour of it. 16 In other words, it 
was definitely accepted as a party question. The Indian Association 
might well congratulate itself on the success achieved. Once more 
the whole of political India was united in a common effort, and the 
Indian point of view was presented before the British Parliament 
in a manner which had no precedent. It may be added that the 
agitation carried on by the Indian Association was not altogether 
fruitless, for some sections of the Act were modified. 

The success thus achieved led the Indian Association to a still 
greater adventure. It had been proposed by them to send a memo¬ 
rial to Parliament on the Civil Service question, and a draft of the 
memorial was approved by the various public meetings in different 
provinces of India addressed by Surendra-nath. It was now decided 
that instead of sending the memorial by post it should be carried by 
a delegate in person, who would be in a position to explain the grie¬ 
vances of India to the British public. The expenses of this costly 
undertaking were met by a public-spirited lady, Mah&rfipi Swama- 
moyee of Bengal, and Lal-mohan Ghosh was chosen as the delegate. 
Ghosh addressed a public meeting at Willis’s Rooms, House of Com* 
mens, on 23 July, 1879, and his eloquent speech, followed by the 
sympathetic remarks of the Chairman, John Bright, created a 


504 


POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 

profound impression upon the English audience. As Surendra-nath re¬ 
marks: “The effect of that meeting was instantaneous. Within 
twenty-four hours of it, there were laid on the table of the House of 
Commons, the Rules creating what was subsequently known as the 
Statutory Civil Service”. 17 

The most interesting thing about the success of Lal-mohan Ghosh 
was the spirit in which it was received all over India. On his return 
to India he was accorded a public reception at Bombay. While 
welcoming him, the Chairman of the meeting observed that although 
Lal-mohan “went from Calcutta he no less represented other parts 
of India as well,—that he was returning not as a delegate, simply of 
Calcutta, but as a delegate of Western India as well”. The whole 
audience cheered this remark with loud applause,-—a Small but signi¬ 
ficant act which showed how rapidly germinated those seeds of an all- 
India political consciousness which Surendra-nath had sown in the 
course of his Indian tour. 

Lal-mohan Ghosh fully justified his choice as a delegate and was 
highly imbued with patriotic fervour. He tersely, but correctly, ex¬ 
pressed the ideals of the age when he said: “It is for us to transform 
the tiny brook of a feeble public opinion into the rushing torrent 
of a mighty national demonstration”. Lal-mohan himself and many 
others, both in Bengal and in other Provinces of India, made valuable 
contribution to the realization of this ideal during the decade 
1875-1885. 

The two reactionary measures which gave incentive to the acti¬ 
vities of the Indian Association thus proved a blessing in disguise, 
and helped the political progress of the country. The Indian Asso¬ 
ciation also focussed India’s attention upon other important ques¬ 
tions of public character. On 27 March, 1879, it convened a public 
meeting at the Town Hall, Calcutta, to discuss the financial impli¬ 
cations of the Afghan War and the reduction of import duties cm 
cotton goods by way of favouring Manchester against the indigenous 
industry. The meeting was attended by three thousand people, 
and, to quote the annual report of the Association, was the occasion 
of a great demonstration of national feeling; for, from all parts of 
India letters and telegrams had been received from associations 
and representative men, expressing deep sympathy with the objects 
of the meeting. 18 

The Indian Association was not merely concerned with details 
of administration. As early as 1680 it took up the question of re¬ 
presentative government for India. The idea was not altogether 
new. It was floating in the air and was occasionally given expres¬ 
sion to by eminent Indian leaders, as mentioned above. 19 But 

505 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

these ideas were not taken up seriously, nor systematically pursued, 
by any organized political body before the Indian Association took 
up the question. At its annual meeting on 15 May, 1880, a com¬ 
mittee was appointed to draft a scheme. Its importance was stres¬ 
sed in the Annual Report of 1880-1 as follows: “Above all there is 
the question of Representative Government to which the Associa¬ 
tion must soon direct its unremitting attention. It is the question 
of the hour and the quesion of the future”. 20 . 

The Indian Association rightly felt that the Representative 
Government must be broadbased on local self-government. An 
agitation was therefore carried on for election, in place of nomi¬ 
nation, of the chairman and members of the Local Boards and Muni¬ 
cipalities. The agitation followed the usual pattern. Circulars were 
sent from Calcutta to different localities explaining the necessity 
and importance of democratic method in the administration of local 
affairs; public meetings were held in various localities demanding 
election of members and chairmen; and lastly, there was a big meet¬ 
ing in Calcutta to demand the democratic constitution of the local 
bodies, with letters and telegrams from different Provinces of India 
supporting the demand and giving it an all-India character. Many 
oppressive measures of the Government, specific grievances of the 
cultivators and labourers in tea-gardens, and various other subjects 
of public interest engaged the attention of the Indian Association 
and became the subjects of popular agitation guided by it. 

The efforts of the Indian Association to stimulate political cons¬ 
ciousness of the people were aided by two notable events in 1883. 
The first was the great controversy over a legislative measure intro¬ 
duced by Mr. Ilbert, the Law Member of the Viceroy’s Council, and 
hence popularly known as the Ilbert Bill. In those days the Euro¬ 
pean British subjects enjoyed the privilege of trial by a judge of 
their own race; hence Indian Civilians, even though they might 
hold the rank of Magistrates or Sessions Judges, could not try any 
European criminal. The Ilbert Bill sought to withdraw this privi¬ 
lege in order to remove a galling and glaring instance of racial in¬ 
equality. 21 Reference has been made above to a similar attempt 
on the part of the Government in 1849, and the howling agitation 
of the Anglo-Indians against what they called the “Black Acts”, 
which eventually led to the withdrawal of the measures. 22 The 
same type of violent agitation, but far more intense and rowdy in 
character, was carried on in 1883 against the Ilbert Bill by the 
Englishmen in India. They organized a Defence Association with 
branches all over the country, and collected a lakh and a half of 
rupees to conduct a campaign of vilification against the Indians 


506 


POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 


Ail notions of decency were cast aside, and the abuses and filthy 
language uttered by the English speakers were most shocking. One 
Mr. Branson, Bar-at-Law, obtained unenviable .notoriety for his 
venomous attacks against the Indians. The Indian Association 
carried on a counter-agitation, and Lal-mohan Ghosh paid Branson 
back in his own coin. The Indian political associations of Bengal 
and Bombay fought hard for the Bill and a joint representation was 
made by them to the Viceroy. But nothing availed. The Govern¬ 
ment yielded to the violence of the Englishmen, and though the Bill 
was not withdrawn, it was changed beyond, recognition and served 
no useful purpose when passed into law. One sinister aspect of 
the Government attitude in this matter has been emphasized by 
Blunt. The Government, he said, “gave way before the clamour of 
an insignificant section of the public, abetted by the sworn enemies 
of all reform in India—the Anglo-Indian bureaucracy”. In support 
of the accusation he mentions the following: “Dr. Sandwal (Sanyal?) 
gave me particulars about the pressure which had been put lately 
on native officials about it (Ilbert Bill). A friend of his, holding a 
minor post under Government, had received a demi-official letter 
from his English superior warning him that if he attended meetings 
in favour of the Bill he should suffer for it.” 23 

The Ilbert Bill agitation left behind it a rankling sensation of 
defeat, disgrace, and humiliation in the hearts of the Indians, and 
an increased degree of racial arrogance in the minds of the English¬ 
men. But every cloud has a silver lining. The Ilbert Bill greatly 
helped the cause of Indian political advance. The method which 
was so successfully pursued by the Englishmen to defeat it was not 
lost upon the Indians. They learnt the value of combination and 
organization in political struggle, and their eyes were opened to the 
ignoble status of the Indians in their own country. In spite of humi¬ 
liation they learnt great lessons from the Anglo-Indians, and were not 
slow to profit by them. The Ilbert Bill agitation is thus another land¬ 
mark in the history of India’s political progress, and the following 
account given by Henry Cotton, a member of the I.C.S., may be 
taken as a fair and unbiassed review: 

“The readers of Trevelyan’s biography of Lord Macaulay will 
remember how the whole non-official world in India was banded to¬ 
gether to resist what it conceived to be the monstrous injustice of 
Macaulay’s ‘Black Act’, which authorised Indian Judges to\exercise 
Civil Jurisdiction over British-bom subjects. But this crisis was as 
nothing in comparison with that which occurred in Lord Ripon’s 
time when Sir Ashley Eden, shortly before his retirement, proposed 
an amendment in the Criminal Law to give Indian Magistrates 


507 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


jurisdiction to try European offenders. This is the measure known as 
the Ilbert Bill, because it was introduced into the Legislative Coun¬ 
cil by Sir Courtenay Ilbert, who was then Legal Member. A public 
meeting of protest by the European community was held at the 
Town Hall in Calcutta; members of the Bar abandoned the noble 
traditions of their profession, and speakers and audience, frenzied 
with excitement, were lost to all sense of moderation and propriety. 
The Viceroy was personally insulted at the gates of Government 
House. A gathering of tea-planters assembled and hooted him at a 
railway station as he was returning from Darjilling, when ‘Bill’ 
Beresford, then an A.D.C., was with difficulty restrained from leap¬ 
ing from the railway carriage into their midst to avenge the insult 
to his chief. The non-official European community almost to a 
man boycotted the entertainments at Government House. Matters 
had reached such a pitch that a conspiracy was formed by a num¬ 
ber of men in Calcutta, who bound themselves in the event of Gov¬ 
ernment adhering to the proposed legislation, to over-power the 
sentries at Government House, put the Viceroy on board a steamer 
at Chandpal Ghat, and deport him to England round the Cape. I 
heard this story at the time, and it would seem to be incredible, but 
the facts are understood to have been within the knowledge of the 
Lieutenant-Governor and the Commissioner of Police. 

“It is with a feeling of shame that I am bound to add that the 
opposition to the Ilbert Bill was headed by members of my own 
Service, and that the practical unanimity of opposition to that 
measure was as complete among civilian Magistrates and Judges as 
it was among planters, merchants, and members of the legal profes¬ 
sion. Lord Ripon was thus harassed and hampered in an incon¬ 
ceivable degree by the bigotry and race feeling of his own fellow- 
countrymen. He was paralysed from want of support, and neither 
he nor any man in his position, single-handed, could have overcome 
the dead wall of antagonism by which he was confronted. The re¬ 
sult was a sort of compromise which, according to Sir John Strachey, 
no mean authority, was the virtual though not avowed abandonment 
of the measure proposed by the Government. 

“That was the immediate result. The ultimate effect of the 
insane agitation was to give rise to a movement of the widest reach¬ 
ing character and scope which few at that time were able to foresee. 
It is one of the ironies of history that the very object which agita¬ 
tions are intended to serve or to suppress should so often be lost or 
gained by the counter irritation which agitation sets up in a com¬ 
munity. The. great Indian movement, of which we now hear so 
much and are assuredly destined to hear much more, is due to causes 


508 


POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 

intended to produce a very different effect. The germ of a national 
organization on the basis of English education had long existed, but 
it only sprang to life in the eighties. The Anglo-Indian agitation 
against Lord Ripon’s government, the protests which asserted that 
The only people who have any right to India are the British’, the 
whole attitude of Englishmen in regard to Indian interests—these 
things have succeeded far more in advancing the cause of Indian 
unity than any action or legislation on the lines contemplated by 
that Viceroy could have accomplished, 

“The Ilbert Bill, if it had been allowed to pass without opposi¬ 
tion, would have proved innocuous and comparatively ineffective in 
any direction, But the unreasonable clamour and rancour of its op¬ 
ponents and the unexpected success which attended their efforts 
suggested reprisals. Indignation found its voice; clamour was met 
by clamour; and a national agitation was carried on throughout the 
length and breadth of India. The very object was attained which, 
if the Anglo-Indian leaders had been wise in their generation, they 
would have spared no labour to prevent. The people of India were 
not slow to follow the example set to them by Englishmen; they 
learned their strength, the power of combination, the force of num¬ 
bers; and there was quickly kindled in all the provinces a national 
movement which is destined to develop and increase until it receives 
its fulfilment in the systematic regeneration of the whole country.” 24 

Along with the above may be read with interest the following 
views expressed by A. C. Mazumdar, an eminent political leader: 

“The Ilbert Bill agitation thus went a great way towards im¬ 
pressing the Indian races, that in the political world success did not 
depend so much upon men as on organized efforts and so paved the 
way to united and concerted action. It also proved an eye-opener 
to those talented and highly educated Indian gentlemen who, having 
returned from England and adopted English habits and manners, 
had lost nearly all touch with their countrymen and were apparently 
seeking to form a class by themselves in the vain hope of assimilating 
themselves, as far as practicable, with the Anglo-Indian community. 
Forces were thus at work driving the people from different 
points of the compass to a common fold and to concentrate their 
thoughts, ideas and activities to a common focus for the attainment 
of the political rights and privileges of the people who being under 
a common rule, it was understood, could have but a common goal 
and common destiny. All the time the Indian Press throughout the 
country was incessantly urging the people to unite under a common 
standard ”. 26 


309 


THE) BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

Mr. Mazumdar notes, however, that “the agitation stirred up 
the public mind only in Bengal and Bombay. It produced little or 
no effect in Madras, while the N. W. Provinces and the Punjab were 
perfectly silent.” 26 This is not an unfair index of the progress of 
political thought and organization in different parts of India. 

The excitement caused by the agitation over the Ilbert Bill had 
hardly died down when a charge was brought against Surendra-nath 
Banerji for contempt of court on account of some comments he had 
made on the conduct of Mr. Justice Norris of the Calcutta High 
Court who ordered a Hindu to produce the image of his deity in 
the Court. Although Surendra-nath tendered apology, the majority 
of the Judges found him guilty, and sentenced him to imprisonment, 
but the only Indian Judge dissented from this view. The case had 
created great sensation from the very beginning, because Justice 
Norris had taken a prominent part in the Ilbert Bill agitation. A 
vast crowd attended the Court during the trial, and when the sen¬ 
tence of two months’ imprisonment was pronounced, a section of the 
crowd, mostly composed of students, became excited and smashed 
the windows of the building. Indeed so menacing was the attitude 
of the crowd, who had begun to pelt stones at the police, that Surendra- 
nath had to be removed secretly by a back-door in a private 
carriage instead of the prison van. 27 

The incarceration of Surendra-nath, like the deplorable Anglo- 
Indian agitation over the Ilbert Bill, was not an unmixed evil, and 
furthered the cause of India’s political advance. It evoked a spon¬ 
taneous protest from all sections of people in Bengal which was un¬ 
precedented in character. All business was suspended, shops were 
closed, and a strong wave of indignation swept the whole of Bengal 
and even regions far outside its boundary. Numerous protest 
meetings were held in different towns in Bengal, and sometimes the 
attendance was so large that they had to be held in the open air. 
The meeting organized by the Indian Association was held in the 
Beadon Square on 16 May, 1883. “It was the largest meeting ever 
held ih Calcutta. There were about twenty thousand people pre¬ 
sent representing different sections of the community; numerous 
telegrams and letters as well as the presence of delegates specially 
sent from the Muffassil on the occasion testified to the all-pervading 
sympathy and interest of the country”. Not only the educated 
classes but even the masses were affected. No such upheaval was 
witnessed in Bengal before the days of Swadeshi agitation in 1905. 28 

Far more significant was the fact that the imprisonment of 
Surendra-nath evoked sympathy and protest in remote parts of India, 
and public meetings were held in Agra, Fyzabad, Amritsar, Lahore, 


510 


POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 

Poona and various other towns all over India. Even a Pandit of 
Kashmir, ignorant of English, burst into tears, crying, “What have 
they done with our dearest brother? Our Surendranath is in jail.” 29 
All these testify to the extent to which the bonds of fellowship and 
good feeling between the different parts of India had been forged 
during the eighties of the nineteenth century. The following obser¬ 
vations by Ananda-mohan Basu in the Annual Report of the Indian 
Association for 1883 are highly significant: 

“That ‘good cometh out of evil’ was never more fully illustrated 
than in this notable event. It has now been demonstrated, by the 
universal outburst of grief and indignation which the event called 
forth, that the people of the different Indian provinces have learnt to 
feel for one another; and that a common bond of unity and 
fellow-feeling is rapidly being established among them. And 
Babu Surendranath Banerjea has at least one consolation, that his 
misfortune awakened, in a most marked form, a manifestation of 
that sense of unity among the different Indian races, for the accom¬ 
plishment of which he has so earnestly striven and not in vain.” 30 

The incarceration of Surendra-nath produced another good re¬ 
sult. Babu Tara-pada Banerji of Krishnagar (Nadia Dt., Bengal) 
started the idea of a National Fund as a memento of the imprison¬ 
ment of Surendra-nath. 30a He was released from jail on 4 July, 
1883. On 17 July, a public meeting was held which was attended 
by over ten thousand people. It was resolved to raise a National 
Fund to secure the political advancement of the country by means 
of constitutional agitation in India and England. A sum of about 
Rs. 20,000 was collected and it was made over to the Indian Associa¬ 
tion, Calcutta, for the promotion of political work. 31 

The agitation over the Ilbert Bill and the imprisonment of 
Surendra-nath had one particular feature of great importance. This 
was the part played by the student community in matters of public 
importance which agitated the country. They took a prominent part 
in the organization of public meetings, and openly gave vent to their 
feelings of resentment against the Government. Many students 
became victims of official repression, and many cases of harsh treat¬ 
ment, sometimes unduly severe, were reported in the newspapers 
of the time. The Government showed as much nervousness about 
the student agitators in 1883 as they did in the twentieth century. 

The memorable events of 1883 brought into the forefront the 
question of a political organization of all-India character. 32 In spite 
of its remarkable achievements, the Indian Association was, after 
all, a provincial organization, and many felt the need of a closely 
knit organization embracing the whole of India. Hie feelings evok- 


511 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

ed by the Ilfoerfc Bill agitation and the imprisonment of Surendra- 
nath seemed to.be very favourable for such an attempt, and fortu¬ 
nately the necessary opportunity was provided by the proposal of 
the Government to hold an International Exhibition in Calcutta 
in 1883. The Indian Association naturally expected that a large 
number of eminent Indians would visit Calcutta on the occasion, and 
resolved to take advantage of it to inaugurate an all-India National 
Conference at 'hat time. The idea was fully approved by all the 
branches of the Association in North India as well as by the leading 
political organizations of Bombay and Madras. Backed by this sup¬ 
port of the country as a whole the Indian Association called the 
First National Conference in Calcutta to be held on 28, 29 and 30. 
December, 1883. 

* 

This National Conference is an important landmark in the history 
of the evolution of political organization, as it was the first all-India 
political conference which offered a model to the Indian National 
Congress, inaugurated two years later. Unfortunately, it was cast 
into shade by the growth and phenomenal progress of the latter orga¬ 
nization, and has not been accorded the place it deserves in Indian 
history. As such, it requires a more detailed treatment than its 
brief tenure of existence would warrant. 

The genesis of the Conference is thus described by Surendra- 
nath. “The idea of a National Conference is as old as the year 
1877. It originated on the occasion of the Delhi assemblage, when 
the princes and the rulers of the land met for the purpose of a great 
show, and it suggested itself to the minds of many that the represen¬ 
tatives of the people might also meet, if not for the purpose of a 
show, at least for the consideration and discussion of questions of 
national importance. That idea, however, was not realised until 
1883”. 33 

“The objects of the National Conference were not sectional nor 
regional but truly national”, “We have met”, continued Surendra- 
nath, “to talk, to deliberate, to consult, and if possible, to arrive 
at a common programme of political action. Too often our energies 
are frittered away in isolated and individual efforts. One Associa¬ 
tion, for instance, might be agitating for the Reform of the Civil Ser¬ 
vice, a second for the Reconstitution of the Legislative Councils, a 
third for Retrenchment of Expenditure. Our idea is to bring the 
national forces, so to speak, into a focus; and if possible to concentrate 
them upon some common object calculated to advance the public good. 
Such I conceive to be the prevailing idea of the Conference”. 34 


512 


POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 

The Conference, which met in the Albert Hall on 28 December, 
1883, was attended by more than a hundred delegates, both Hindu 
and Muslim, and the places they represented, outside Bengal, in¬ 
cluded Bombay, Madras, Lahore, Allahabad, Delhi, Cuttack, Jubbul- 
pore, Nagpur, Ahmedabad, Bankipore, Muzaffarpur, Darbhanga, 
Deoghar, Saugor, Bhagalpur, Meerut, Tejpur, Hossainpore etc. 

The proceedings began with a national hymn. The questions 
that were taken up for discussion included industrial and technical 
education, the wider employment of Indians in Civil Service, sepa¬ 
ration of the judicial from the executive functions, Representative 
Government, National Fund and Arms Act. 

The Conference was attended by two Englishmen, one of whom, 
W. S. Blunt, has recorded his impressions in the following words: 

‘Then at twelve, I went to the first meeting of the National 
Conference, a really important occasion, as there were delegates from 
most of the great towns, and, as Bose (Ananda Mohan) in his opening 
speech remarked, it was the first stage towards a National Parlia¬ 
ment.” 35 

The second session of the National Conference was held in Cal¬ 
cutta in ,1885 on December 25, 26 and 27. It was more represen¬ 
tative than the first, being joined by the British Indian Association, 
representing the landed aristocracy, which had kept aloof from the 
first session. As a matter of fact, the Conference was convened by 
the three leading Associations of Calcutta, viz., the British Indian, the 
Indian, and the Central Muhammadan Association. More than 
thirty political Associations, mostly of Northern India, sent their re¬ 
presentatives to the Conference. “Mr. Cotton took part in the proceed¬ 
ings of the conference and assured the delegates that many of his 
countrymen in England sympathised with the natives of this country 
and their desire for more enlarged representation in the Legislative 
Assemblies of the Empire, but counselled moderation”. 338 

Surendra-nath moved the first resolution on the reconstitution 
of the Legislative Councils in such a way that popular opinion might 
be reflected in it. Among other subjects which were discussed may 
be mentioned the Arms Act, the Civil Service question, the separa¬ 
tion of the judicial and executive functions, and the retrenchment 
of expenditure, mainly under three heads, viz., annual military ex¬ 
penditure, the ‘home charges’, and the enormous cost of civil admi¬ 
nistration. In short, almost all the questions that formed the chief 
planks in the Congress platform during the first twenty years of its 
existence were discussed in the two sessions of the National Confe¬ 
rence. 


513 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-11 

The Indian Association wanted to give a permanent character 
to the Conference. Accordingly, Surendra-nath moved That a Con¬ 
ference of delegates from different parts of the country should be 
held next year.’ The delegates from Allahabad and Meerut lent their 
support to the resolution. The latter suggested that the venue of 
the Conference should be changed every year and it should meet 
in places like Bombay, Madras, Allahabad and other great capitals 
of India. This resolution was carried with acclamation. 

At the conclusion of the proceedings of the National Conference, 
a telegram to the following effect was sent to the political conference 
about to be held at Bombay: “The delegates in conference assembl¬ 
ed in Calcutta desire to express their deep sympathy with the 
approaching Conference in Bombay.” 30 

This Conference was the Indian National Congress, which held 
its first session at Bombay on 28 December, 1885. A deep mystery 
hangs round the almost simultaneous holding of these two all-India 
national organizations. The following extract from Surendra-nathfs 
autobiography throws some light on the subject. 

“While we were having our National Conference in Calcutta, 
the Indian National Congress, conceived on the same lines and having 
the same programme, was holding its first sittings at Bombay. The 
movements were simultaneous; the preliminary arrangements were 
made independently, neither party knowing what the other was doing 
until on the eve of the sittings of the Conference and of the Congress. 
Mr. W. C. Bonnerjee, who presided over the Bombay Congress, in¬ 
vited me to attend it. I told him that it was too late to suspend 
the Conference, and that as I had a large share in its organization 
it would not be possible for me to leave Calcutta and attend the 
Bombay Congress.” 37 

It must be regarded as passing strange that even a person like 
Surendra-nath should not have been one of the sponsors of the new 
political organization. But that he should not have even been invited 
to attend it, till at the very last moment, seems to be so extraordinary 
that one cannot help feeling that there was some underlying motive 
in thus deliberately excluding him. 

Perhaps no less mysterious is the silent self-effacement of the 
National Conference in favour of the Indian National Congress. On 
this important point Surendra-nath simply observes as follows: 

“The two Conferences met about the same time, discussed similar 
views and voiced the same grievances and aspirations. The one 
that met in Calcutta was called the ‘National Conference’ and the 
other, which assembled at Bombay, the ‘Indian National Congress.’ 


514 


POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 

Henceforth those who worked with us joined the Congress and hearti¬ 
ly co-operated with it.” 38 

This passage contains all the reliable information that is avail¬ 
able on the subject, but does not help in any way to solve the 
mystery referred to above. It merely states the fact, but does not 
give any satisfactory explanation. Nor does it throw any light on 
the stages or process of the amalgamation of the two organizations. 383 

The end of the National Conference was sudden and abrupt, but 
by no means inglorious. This Conference was the crowning achieve¬ 
ment of the Indian Association and marks the culmination of the poli¬ 
tical evolution in Bengal for more than half a century. It gave the 
first impetus and supplied the pattern for that dynamic all-India 
national movement which took a permanent form in the Indian 
National Congress. 


II. BOMBAY AND MADRAS 

Next to Bengal, the evolution of political ideas and organizations 
was more marked in Bombay than in any other part of India. This 
was due in no small measure to the able leadership of the so-called 
triumvirate, namely, Kashinath Trimbak Telang, Pherozeshah Mehta 
and Badruddin Tyabjee. Another eminent leader was Mahadev Go- 
vind Ranade, but he was associated with social and economic, rather 
than political, problems. 

The general trend of political ideas in Bombay during the se¬ 
venties may be gathered from the speeches and activities of Pheroze¬ 
shah Mehta. Like Dadabhai Naoroji, Mehta had a sincere faith in 
the sense of justice and fair play of the British and completely relied 
on them for the political salvation of India. “When in the inscrutable 
dispensations of Providence”, said he, “India was assigned to the 
care of England, she decided that India was to be governed on the 
principles of justice, equality and righteousness without distinctions 
of colour, caste or creed”. 39 

Even the European agitation over the Ilbert Bill and its with¬ 
drawal by the Government of India did not modify the views of 
Mehta. On the other hand, he was a severe critic of the autocratic 
measures of Lord Lytton who, in his opinion, substituted a “narrow¬ 
minded policy of autocratic imperialism” in place of the traditional 
British policy of “initiating oriental nations into systematic political 
life and existence”. He even went to the extent of opposing the 
proposal of giving a public address and erecting a memorial to Sir 
Richard Temple, the retiring Governor of Bombay. 40 When, on 
account of the menace of Russian invasion, the Government decided 
to form a Volunteer Corps exclusively from the European popula- 

515 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

tion, Mehta entered a strong and emphatic protest. * 1 He had faith 
in the capacity of the Indians to manage representative institutions, 
and also believed that “the time was past when strong popular opinion 
on any subject could be successfully resisted by Government for any 
length of time.” 

As already noted above, next to Bengal Bombay was seriously 
perturbed by the Xlbert Bill agitation. It was mainly as a result of 
this that the Bombay Presidency Association came into being. The 
oldest political association in Bombay, the Bombay Association, 
founded in 1852, 42 had lost its vitality within a decade and, though 
“revived in 1870 and galvanised into fresh life by Mr. Naoroji Fur- 
dunji in 1873, it shortly became practically extinct/' 43 This was 
partly due to the fact that a Branch of the East India Association 
of London was established in Bombay in 1871 and carried on useful 
work in developing political ideas. But its useful career came to 
an end along with that of the parent body in London, to which re¬ 
ference will be made later. 43a 

After making vain efforts to put fresh life into these two poli¬ 
tical organizations, Mehta, Tyabji and Telang conceived the idea of 
starting a new political association in Bombay. For this purpose 
they convened a public meeting on 31 January, 1885, which was 
attended by a large number of persons representing all classes and 
shades of opinion. The Bombay Presidency Association, which was 
inaugurated in this meeting, amid great public enthusiasm, “showed 
considerable activity in the early years of its existence. By reso¬ 
lutions, memorials, and public meetings it focussed the general feel¬ 
ing of the community on all matters of common interest". Unfor¬ 
tunately, the public interest gradually waned and the whole show 
was run by the illustrious triumvirate. 44 While there is a great deal 
of truth in these remarks, it is only fair to remember that after the 
foundation of the Indian National Congress in December, 1885, the 
main political activities of India flowed through that great channel, 
leaving the other fields high and dry. 

A passing reference should be made to a new venture under¬ 
taken by the Bombay Presidency Association. They took advantage 
of the forthcoming General Election in England to make some pro¬ 
paganda in that country on behalf of India. Having received good 
response to their appeal for co-operation from the other two Presiden¬ 
cies, and acting jointly with the Poona Sarvajanik Sabha, three de¬ 
legates representing the three Presidencies were sent to England. 
They were to support those English candidates for Parliament who 
had made the cause of India their own, by speeches and distributing 
leaflets which were calculated to make the British people acquainted 


516 


POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 

with the true condition of India and the hopes and aspirations of 
her people. How far the delegates , succeeded in educating the 
British electorate, it is difficult to say, but to judge by the result, it 
must have been very little indeed. In any case, the candidates sup¬ 
ported by them were not returned to the Parliament, while those 
who were condemned as anti-Indian were mostly successful in the 
election. It is necessary to remember, however, that the electors 
were influenced more by the vital issues of the party politics at home 
than by any Indian policy. 45 

* i 

Reference has been made above to the Poona Sarvajanik Sabha. 
It was established in 1867 and issued a Quarterly Journal since 1878. 
Its object, to use its own words, was ‘to represent the wants and 
wishes of the inhabitants of the Deccan, being appointed on a popu¬ 
lar elective system'. The members of the Sabha consisted of the 
“Sardars, Jahagirdars, Inamdars, Sawakars and the Gentry, who... 
represent the people of Maharashtra.” In reply to an Address, in 
1884, to the Raja of Kolhapur, from which the above is quoted, the 
Dewan s!aid that the Sabha “has become... the recognized political 
organ of the people of Maharashtra”, noted for “assiduous and 
prompt application to the various important public questions.” This 
is fully borne out by the contents of the Journal. The Dewan also 
referred to the “useful services rendered by the Sabha to our country, 
by its indefatigable exertions in representing to the paramount British 
power, in a spirit of sober independence and profound loyalty, the 
wants and aspirations of the people.” 46 This is hardly an exaggerat¬ 
ed account. A more detailed account of the Sarvajanik Sabha is 
given in the Appendix. 

Another important political association of the time was the 
‘Mahajan Sabha' of Madras, founded on 16 May, 1884. A fair idea 
of its views and activities may be formed from the proceedings of 
the Conference which was summoned by it and met for four days, 
29 and 30 December, 1884, and 1 and 2 January, 1885. A paper was 
read recommending the expansion of the Legislative Council to the 
furthest limit allowed by the Act of 1861, the non-official members 
being appointed on a representative basis. It was decided to send 
a memorial on this line to the Government. Another topic discus¬ 
sed was the separation of the judicial from revenue functions. 

In addition to the political associations mentioned above, there 
were many other political organizations in different parts of India, 
which may be regarded as feeder institutions and were mostly of 
local importance. 


517 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

III. POLITICAL PROPAGANDA IN ENGLAND 

The agitation for the introduction of reforms in Indian adminis¬ 
tration was not confined to India or to the Indians. From very early 
times the work in India was supplemented by work in England, both 
by the Indians and Englishmen. The first Indian to realise the im¬ 
portance of such work was Raja Rammohan Roy. The memoran¬ 
dum which he submitted to the Parliamentary Committee on Indian 
affairs was the first authentic statement of Indian views placed be¬ 
fore the British authorities by an eminent Indian. It is generally 
agreed that this and other activities of the Raja during his visit to 
England (1830-33) produced some good effect and influenced the 
Charter Act of 1833. 47 

Dwaraka-nath Tagore, the grandfather of poet Rabindra-n&th, 
was the next prominent Indian political leader to visit England. The 
honour and cordiality with which he was received in Britain offers 
a striking and refreshing contrast to the general attitude of the 
British towards the Indians in later times. During his first visit to 
Britain in 1842, he was given a public reception by the notabilities 
of England, and even Her Majesty Queen Victoria invited him to 
lunch and dinner. Special importance attaches to a function At 
Edinburgh where a public address was given to Dwaraka-nath Tagore 
in which a hope was expressed that in India “the rod of oppression 
may be for ever broken and that the yoke of an unwilling subjection 
may be everywhere exchanged for a voluntary allegiance/’ 48 

Both Rammohan, and Dwaraka-nath felt the need of carrying on 
propaganda in England on behalf of India, and made permanent 
arrangements for this work, as mentioned above. 49 This was fur¬ 
ther facilitated by the fact that throughout the nineteenth century 
a band of noble-minded Englishmen, inspired by the liberal and de¬ 
mocratic views of their country, felt real sympathy for India and 
exerted themselves on her behalf. Of the many Englishmen of this 
type special reference should be made to Fawcett, John Bright, 
Charles Bradlaugh, and Digby who were public men in England, 
and Allan Octavian Hume, "William Wedderburn, and Henry. Cotton, 
who were members of the Indian Civil Service. 

Henry Fawcett has justly been described as “one of the greatest 
and truest friends of India in England”. He entered the House of 
Commons in 1865. His close vigilance and unremitting attention to 
the Indian finance earned for him the sobriquet of “Member for 
India” He openly and repeatedly advocated the appointment of 
able Indians in increasing number to the higher branches of admi¬ 
nistration in their own country, and, in 1868, moved a resolution in 
the House of Commons for holding the competitive examination for 


5,18 


POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 


admission to the Indian Civil Service, not only in London, but also 
simultaneously in Calcutta, Bombay and Madras. 

Fawcett deplored the lack of interest in Indian affairs even 
among the members of the House of Commons. Addressing his con¬ 
stituency at Brighton in 1872, he said: “The most trumpery question 
ever brought before Parliament, a wrangle over the purchase of a 
picture, excited more interest than the welfare of one hundred and 
eighty millions of our Indian fellow-subjects. The people of India 
have no votes, they cannot bring even so much pressure to bear 
upon Parliament as can be brought by one of our Railway Com¬ 
panies; but with some confidence I believe that I shall not be 
misinterpreting your wishes if, as your representative, I do whatever 
can be done by one humble individual to render justice to the 
defenceless and powerless.” 60 

Nearly three-fourths of the army that took part in the Aby¬ 
ssinian expedition of 1868 were drawn from India and the entire 
cost was thrown upon the Indian exchequer. Fawcett protested 
against this in the House of Commons, but found himself in the 
minority of 23 to 198, though later, on account of his repeated pro¬ 
tests, the cost was shared between England and India. 61 Fawcett 
also protested against the cost of the Ball Dance given to the Sultan 
of Turkey at the India Office being charged to India. 

Fawcett was never tired of drawing attention to the dire poverty 
of India and the dangerously narrow margin upon which the mass 
of the Indian population lived on the verge of starvation. It was at 
his instance that in 1871 the British Parliament appointed a com¬ 
mittee, with Fawcett himself as Chairman, to inquiro into the fin¬ 
ancial administration of India. Fawcett was also unsparing in his 
criticism of the autocratic regime of Lord Lytton. He attacked the 
policy leading to war with Afghanistan, and vigorously denounced 
the remission of cotton import duties for the sake of party interest 
in England, as well as the extravagant expenditure incurred for the 
Delhi Durbar, particularly at a time when India was in the grip of 
a terrible famine. 

India fully appreciated the services of Fawcett who had been 
fighting, almost single-handed, her cause against tremendous odds 
against his own countrymen. He was so loved and admired by the 
Indians that when, at the General Election of 1874, he lost his seat 
for Brighton, a sum of £ 750 was raised by public subscription in 
India to enable him to contest another seat. The pious wishes of 
India were fulfilled, for Fawcett was shortly after returned to the 
House of Commons from Hackney. 


519 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

There is no evidence to show that the sympathy and activities 
of Fawcett and other British friends of India, to whom reference 
has been made elsewhere, really exercised any appreciable influence 
on British policy towards India. But it had a great effect upon Indian 
politics. Throughout the nineteenth and part of the twentieth cen¬ 
tury their examples kept up the faith of the largest and most in¬ 
fluential section of Indian political leaders in the sense of justice 
and fair play of the British, and sustained their hope that the Indians 
would attain their political goal with the help and co-operation of 
the British. 

One of the oldest and most well-known representatives of this 
class of Indian politicians was Dadabhai Naoroji to whom reference 
has already been made above. He was also one of the small band 
of Indians who made England their centre of activity for the poli¬ 
tical advancement of India by awakening the consciousness of the 
British people to their sense of duty towards India, and appealing 
to their democratic instincts and liberal principles. In order to carry 
on this work in a regular and systematic manner Dadabhai, in col¬ 
laboration with W.C. Bonnerjee, started a society in London, in 
order to enable the Indians and Englishmen to meet together and 
discuss various matters concerning Indian administration. It was 
called ‘The London Indian Society’ and its inaugural meeting was 
held at the London residence of Jnanendra-mohan Tagore in 1865. 
Dadabhai was the President of the Society and Bonnerjee, the Secre¬ 
tary. 52 This Society was amalgamated within a year with another 
Society known as the ‘East India Association*, which was inaugu¬ 
rated on 1 December, 1866. in collaboration with a Committee of 
retired English officials. This Society became very popular and 
counted among its members, natrons and sympathisers a large num¬ 
ber of Englishmen who had distinguished themselves in various 
walks of life, as well as retired high officials from India, resident in 
England, who felt sympathy for Indian aspirations. Its meetings were 
usually well attended, and various grievances of India were discussed 
and remedial measures of various kinds proposed therein. It soon be¬ 
came recognized as an important political association and branches of 
it were established in Bombay, Calcutta, and Madras in 1869. By the 
year 1871 the number of members of the East India Association ran 
into four figures and it began to exercise some influence even in the 
British Parliament. It continued its useful career till 1884 and then 
gradually sank in importance, due mainly, no doubt, to a change in 
the attitude of the Englishmen towards India. The shadow of Jingo 
Imperialism was slowly creeping over Indo-British relations. The 
East India Association continued—it continues even today—but it 


520 


POLITICAL, IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 

lacked the old sympathy for India and consequently lost its old 
vigorous activity, beneficial to India. 63 

Another association, with a view to carrying on both social and 
political work for India in London, was founded in 1867 by Mary 
Carpenter, the famous biographer of Raja Rammohan Roy, who 
visited India four times during the sixties and seventies of the 
nineteenth century. The “National Indian Association”, as it was 
called, had its branches in different parts of India. It did not, how¬ 
ever, acquire much importance. 64 

Reference may be made to a few Indians who distinguished 
themselves by propagating Indian views during short residence in 
England. Ananda-mohan Bose, a young student of Cambridge, est¬ 
ablished ‘Indian Society’ in London in 1872 in order to foster the 
spirit of nationalism among the Indian residents in Britian. About 
his speech at Brighton in 1873 Mr. White, M.P., remarked that never 
in his life had he listened to a more eloquent description of the wrongs 
of India. Bose’s speech was mainly instrumental in carrying by 74 
votes against 26 a motion in the Cambridge University Union, “that in 
the opinion of this House England has failed in her duties to India”, 
moved by Syed Mahmud. 56 


APPENDIX 

SARVAJANIK SABHA—POONA 

Started originally as Poona Association in 1867 (on the lines of 
Bombay Association started in 1852 in Bombay), the Sarvajanik 
Sabha got its name three years later, and its main object was to 
serve as a bridge between the Government on the one hand and the 
people on the other. Just as it was necessary for the Government 
to know the reactions of the public for whom it was in fact admi¬ 
nistering, so also the public in their turn had to be told what 
Government was aiming at in enacting certain legislations. 

Curiously enough, almost the first public work that the Sabha 
had to do, was to bring about suitable changes in the management 
of the famous Parvatl Temple of Poona. Originally it was patronis¬ 
ed by most of the Southern Maratha “Princes” who had their “pa¬ 
laces” (—Wadas) in Poona. They even held leading offices of the 
Sabha as chairman, vice-chairman and secretary. This princely 
aspect of the Sabha did not endure long; by 1897, the Government 
of Bombay withdrew the recognition they had previously granted 
to the Sabha as a public body, and one by one, all the princely figures 
as well as Government officials cut off their connection with it. 

It is not clear whether M. G. Ranade had any official connection 
with the Sabha, as his name is not found among the members, 


521 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—XI 


founders, or patrons. But this much is clear that he was the strong 
man behind the screen, pulling wires in this or that direction for 
making people institution-minded, giving them, as it were, practical 
lessons in running bodies engaged in public service. His close 
association with G.K.Gokhale, who was the Sabha’s Secretary 
(1891-96), and with many others, indicates that though Ranade’s 
connections with the Sabha were not direct, the indirect influence 
which he wielded was very strong. This was evident when, after 
the ‘extremists’ under B. G. Tilak had captured the committee of 
management, the defeated group, again under the guiding influence 
of Ranade, started what came to be known as the Deccan Sabha in 
1896. 

It will be difficult to adequately appreciate the achievements 
of the Sarvajanik Sabha at this distance of time. In the early 
stages of awakening the people, rousing them to the political 
consciousness of their rights, and inculcating in their minds the 
necessity of fighting constitutionally for them, the Sabha’s work 
must be considered highly important as the Government of the day 
was prompted to withdraw recognition from it. Similar fate was 
not the lot of other contemporary organizations, working in Bombay 
or Calcutta. Its greatest contribution was the awakening of the 
people and the direct help it rendered during the great famine of 
1876-77. It can be said that the Sabha was mainly responsible for 
the relief operations started by the Government and concessions 
that were secured for the peasants and victims of the catastrophe. 

Expression of representative views on important public 
topics was regularly undertaken by the Sabha through memorials 
submitted to Government and through its quarterly journal that 
was well-informed and conducted in a dignified manner. Au¬ 
thoritative studies on agricultural and financial problems of the day 
always appeared in the pages of this quarterly journal, and al¬ 
though Government had withdrawn its recognition of the Sabha, 
it could not ignore its activities. The expositions in its journal 
were appreciated even in high official circles, being the contributions 
of the best brains outside the official world. 

Able political leaders like Ranade, Gokhale and Tilak had made 
the Sarvajanik Sabha what it was, and it undoubtedly was the train¬ 
ing school for many politicians and agitators of the day. But 
by the time Tilak returned from Mandalay in 1914, it was evident 
that the Sabh£ had outlived its utility. It exists today, more as a 
relic of the past than as a living institution. 66 

1. A Nation in Making^ 67. " 

2. Bengal Celebrities, 41. 

S. Quoted in the Tree Lance, Puja Number, 1957; H.P. Ghosh, p. S3. 

4. Bagal-V, p. 8. 


522 





POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 


5. 

6 . 

7. 

8 . 
9. 

10 . 

11 . 

12 . 

13. 

14. 


Ibid, 10. 

A Nation in Making, 41 
Ibid, 42. 

Bagai-V, p. 15. 

A Nation in Making, 42. 
Ibid, 44. 


22 . 

23. 

24. 


27. 

28. 

29, 

30. 


Ibid. 

Ibid, 44-51. 

Cotton-I, p. 28. 

See p. 247. 

15. See pp. 244-5. 

16. R&gai-V, pp. 34-9. 

17. A Nation in Making, 54; cf. Vol. IX, pp. 787-9. 

18. Bagal-V, p. 41; cf. Vol. IX, pp. 801 flf., 161 ff. 

19. See p. 49®. 

20. Bagal-V, p. 48. 

21. cf. Vol. IX, p. 346. 

Ibid. 

W.8. Bhrnt-X, pp. 100, 273. 

Cotton-II, pp. 178-81. 

25. Indian National Evolution, 39. 

28. Ibid, 38. 

A Nation in Making, 76; Bagal-V, p. TO. 

A Nation in Making, 79. 

Ibid, 80. 

Ibid, 80-1. 

30a. Ibid, 81. J.C. Bagal, however, points out that the idea was first mooted by the 
Brahma Public Opinion, which, in its issue of 21st June, 1883, proposed edito¬ 
rially that such a fund for national purposes should be opened. On the lines 
of this proposal Tarapada Banerji, the leader of Krishnagar, formulated a 
scheme on the subject and got it published on 4 July, 1883, in the Indian Mirror 
(Bagal-V, p. 61). 

A Nation in Making, 85; Bagal-V, pp. 61-3. 

It is urged by some that it was Tarapada Banerji, mentioned above in f.n., 
30a, who suggested the creation of a national assembly and a national fund in 
a letter published in the Indian Mirror of June 4, 1883 (Congress in Evolution 
by D. Chakrab&rty and C. Bhattacharyya, p. xvii). cf. fn. 30a. 

Bagal-V, pp. 80-1. 

Ibid, 81. 

Blunt-I, pp. 114, 116. 

35a. The details are given in the Hindoo Patriot, December 28, 1885, from which this 
extract is quoted. 

36. Bagal-V, pp. 80-8, 

37. A Nation in Making, 98. 

38. Ibid, 99. 

38a. These questions have been fully discussed in the Glimpses of Bengal in the Nine¬ 
teenth Century, by R. C. Majumdar, pp. 97-100. 

Mody, Ferozesnah Mehta, I, 130-1. 

Ibid, 108-9, 

Ibid, 92. 

See p. 459. 

A. C. Mazumdar, p. 6. 

43a. See pp. 520-1. 

44. Mody, 16M. 

Ibid, 1® B. ™ 

Journal of the Poona Sarvajanik Sabha, 1885. 

See p. 438. 

Mifcra, X.C., Memoirs of Dwarkanath Tagore, pp. 88 ff. 

See p. 447. 

_ A. C. Mazumdar. pp. 13-4. 

51. W. Hunt and R. L Poole (Ed.), Political History of England, Vol. XU, pp. 309-10. 

52. Bengal Celebrities, p. 41. 

53. Masani, Dadabhai, p. 224 . 

54. Modem Review, December, 1948, p. 463. 

55. H.C. Sarkar, Anandmokm Bose, p. 85. 

56. I am indebted for this note to Shri S. R. Tikekar of Bombay (Xd.). 


31. 

32. 


33. 

34. 

35. 


39. 

40. 

41. 

42. 

43. 


45. 

46. 

47. 

48. 

49. 

50. 


523 


' 

CHAPTER XV (LIII.) 

THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 

I. THE GENESIS 

A new era in the political life of India began with the foundation 
of the Indian National Congress towards the very end of the year 
1885. For more than twenty years after that it completely domi¬ 
nated the political life of India and gave a shape and form to the 
ideas of administrative and constitutional reforms which formed the 
chief planks in the political programme of India. Even though the 
Congress ceased to play the dominant role in Indian politics after the 
split at Surat in 1907, it served the very useful purpose of keeping 
alive an all-India political platform which enabled Gandhi to revita¬ 
lise this great organization and make it a lit instrument for leading 
India, stage by stage, to its goal of independence. 

It is difficult to think of any age or country in which a single 
political institution played such a dominant role for more than 
fifty years in the liberation of a country from foreign yoke. It is 
not, however, historically accurate to say, as many do, that the 
history of the Freedom Movement in India is nothing but the history 
of the Indian National Congress; for, as will be shown later, there 
were other forces and agencies at work to achieve the same end. 
Nevertheless, the Congress must always form the central theme in 
any delineation of India’s long struggle for freedom—the pivot 
round which revolves or evolves that story of epic grandeur. 

The Indian National Congress was the result, rather the culmi¬ 
nation. of the evolution of those political ideas and organisations 
which have been described in detail in the three preceding chap¬ 
ters. There as nothing like the sudden emergence of a political 
institution, nor was there anything novel either in its ideas or 
methods, for the National Conference held in Calcutta in 1883 and 
1885 forestalled it in all essential aspects. 

There is a general consensus of opinion that the reactionary 
measures of Lord Lytton and the Anglo-Indian agitation over the 
Ilbert Bill hastened the process which ultimately led to the founda¬ 
tion of the Congress. There is equally little doubt that the Congress 
was the direct result and a visible embodiment of the national awaken¬ 
ing which has been described in Chapter XIII, and owed not a little 
to the English education and all the liberal political ideas of the West 


THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 

which came along with it. It will also be perhaps generally agreed 
that the inauguration of the Indian National Congress was facilitated, 
and to a large extent inspired, by the various political associations that 
existed in different parts of the country, and the all-India tours of 
Surendra-nath Banerji, to both of which reference has been made 
above. 

It is not, however, an easy task to trace the genesis of the Indian 
National Congress as a distinct institution. The problem has been 
stated as follows by Pattabhi Sitaramayya in his History of the 
Indian National Congress , published by the Working Committee of 
the Congress: 

“It is shrouded in mystery as to who originated this idea of an 
All-India Congress. Apart from the great Darbar of 1877 or the Inter¬ 
national Exhibition in Calcutta, which, as stated above, are supposed 
to have furnished the model fGr the great national assemblage, it is 
also said that the idea was conceived in a private meeting of seven¬ 
teen men after the Theosophical Convention held at Madras in 
December, 1884. 2 The Indian Union started by Mr. Hume after his 
retirement from the Civil Service is also supposed to have been 
instrumental in convening the Congress. Whatever the origin, and 
whoever the originator of the idea, we come to this conclusion, that 
the idea was in the air, that the need of such an organisation was 
being felt, that Mr. Allan Octavian Hume took the initiative, and 
that it was in March 1885, when the first notice was issued convening 
the first Indian National Union to meet at Poona in the following De¬ 
cember, that what had been a vague idea floating generally in the air 
and influencing simultaneously the thought of thoughtful Indians in 
the north and the south, the east and the west, assumed a definite 
shape and became a practical programme of attion.” 1 

As pointed out above, the Delhi Durbar of 1877 suggested to 
Surendra-nath Banerji the idea, not of the Indian National Congress, 
but of the National Conference which was held in Calcutta on 28 
December, 1883. 2 He chose this date in order to take advantage of the 
presence of the people from different parts of India on the occasion 
of the Exhibition, to be held in Calcutta about that time. The third 
source of Sitaramayya is also more than doubtful. The theory that 
seventeen Indians, most of whom attended the Theosophical Conven¬ 
tion at Madras, conceived the idea of the Congress, is found in Mrs. 
Besant’s book How India wrought for Freedom . 3 Besides her 
statement there is no evidence to connect the meeting of these se¬ 
venteen men with the organization of the Congress. But there are 
glaring inaccuracies in the statement. Mrs. Besant includes Suren¬ 
dra-nath Banerji among these seventeen. 4 But Surendra-nath him- 


525 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


self says that “while we were organizing our National Conference at 
Calcutta, some of our friends headed by the late Mr. Allan Hume 
had met at Madras for a similar purpose.” 6 There seems to be 
a double contradiction between the statements of Surendra-nath and 
Mrs. Besant. In the first place, Surendra-nath was evidently not pre¬ 
sent in the meeting at Madras though Mrs. Besant includes his name. 
This is not only implied in the statement of Surendra-nath just quoted, 
but also follows from another statement of his, almost immediately 
preceding it, viz., that he did not know anything about the Conference 
(later called Indian National Congress) “until on the eve of the sit¬ 
tings of the Conference (National Conference held in Calcutta) and 
of the Congress”. Secondly, Hume, whom Surendra-nath places at 
the head of the list of those who attended the meeting, and who is 
universally regarded as the founder of the Congress, was not one of 
the seventeen “good men and true” named by Mrs. Besant. In view 
of this fiat contradiction on a vital point, it is difficult to place much 
reliance on the somewhat vague statement, unsupported by any posi¬ 
tive evidence, that the idea of the Indian National Congress was con¬ 
ceived by seventeen men, nearly all of whom were delegates to the 
annual Convention of the Thesophical Society held in December, 
1884, at Adyar, Madras. It is, however, probable that a small body, 
including some delegates, met together and discussed the idea of a 
political organization/® But it is difficult to believe, as stated by 
Mrs, Besant, that this body set up a number of “provisional Com- 
mittes” who would work in different parts of India and meet later 
for/eonsultation. Mrs. Besant herself admits that “there seems to 
be no record of the work done in their own towns and provinces on 
their return home.” 6 * Yet she seems to convey, at least indirectly, 
that It was through their initiative that a circular was issued in 
March, summoning the Congress, 6 * as will be related later. But Wed- 
derbum, the biographer of Hume, who gives a detailed account of the 
preliminary steps taken by Hume in connection with the first session 
of the Congress, makes no reference to the meeting at Madras or the 
committees set up by it. It is also worthy of note that the majority 
of the seventeen persons who, according,to Mrs. Besant, took the 
initiative, did not attend the first session of the Congress. In view 
of all this, we cannot accept the view of Mrs. Besant. 

Thus of the three possible sources, referred to by Sitaramayya, 
the first two are definitely wrong and the third has nothing to com¬ 
mend itself. In view of this it is not a little curious that Sitaramayya 
did not refer to the National Conference in Calcutta as even a possible 
source of the idea of the Congress. He certainly knew of this Con¬ 
ference and refers to it only a few lines above his discussion of the 



THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 

possible sources of the Congress, quoted above. Yet the idea does 
not seem to have occurred to him that this Conference could most 
reasonably be looked upon as furnishing the idea of an All-India 
political organization such as the Congress was intended to be. This 
is quite clear from his conclusion, namely, “that the idea was in the 
air, that the need of such an organisation was being felt, that Hume 
took the initiative.” It is difficult to accept this conclusion. The idea 
was not merely in the air, as he says, but took a definite shape in the 
National Conference of Calcutta. As Surendra-nath rightly points 
out, ‘the Indian National Congress was conceived on the same lines 
and had the same programme as the National Conference’. 6 Another 
President of the Indian National Congress more definitely states that 
the Calcutta National Conference “anticipated the Congress by two 
years and in a large measure prepared the ground for the great 
National Assembly”. 7 The authors of the Rise and Growth of the 
Congress observe with reference to the Indian Association of Cal¬ 
cutta which sponsored the National Conference: “It has to be re¬ 
membered that the idea of holding an All-India Conference with re¬ 
presentatives from every province was its own invention.” 8 It is rele¬ 
vant to note in this connection that the organizers of the Indian 
National Congress knew about the National Conference of Calcutta, 
for Surendra-nath tells us that *K. T. Telang wrote to him from Bom¬ 
bay requesting him to send him some notes about the First National 
Conference held in 1883*. The old Dadabhai Naoroji was also credited 
with the foundation of the Indian National Congress, and the question 
was referred to the old Dinskaw Wacha. He repudiated the Idea 
and said: “The idea of the Indian National Congress originated with 
Hume, and not with Dadabhai Naoroji. The idea of a National As¬ 
sembly with a National Fund came from the public men of Calcutta.”® 
Taking all these things into consideration it is a reasonable assump¬ 
tion that the idea and model of the Indian National Congress, as a 
specific institution of All-India politics, are to be traced to the Cal¬ 
cutta National Conference. 

But whatever may be the genesis, the credit of organizing the 
Indian National Congress undoubtedly belongs to a large extent to 
Allan Octavian Hume, a retired member of the Indian Civil Service, 
and son of the founder of the Radical Party in England. There is 
no doubt that he was inspired by genuine feeling of sympathy for the 
interest and welfare of India, and it by no means detracts from the 
merit of this noble-minded Englishman that in setting up a political 
organization like the Congress, he could not possibly be, and was 
crtainly not, inspired by the same national sentiment and patriotic 
yearning for freedom of India which characterized the advanced 
political thinkers of Bengal and other parts of India. The reasons 

527 



me BRITISH PARAMOTJNTCY' AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


which induced him to conceive the idea of a political organization 
like the Indian National Congress were of an entirely different cha¬ 
racter, He was deeply impressed by the general discontent in India 
threatening imminent danger to the Government. “From well- 
wishers in different parts of the country he received warnings of the 
danger to the Government, and to the future welfare of India, from 
the economic sufferings of the masses, and the alienation of the in¬ 
tellectuals .” 10 A memorandum, preserved among the papers of 
Hume, describes in detail, how, about fifteen months before the end 
of Lord Lytton’s administration, he (Hume) got very definite infor¬ 
mation about the seething discontent among the masses from some 
religious devotees, held in highest veneration by the people. They 
approached him “because they feared that the ominous unrest through¬ 
out the country which pervaded even the lowest strata of the popu¬ 
lation, would lead to some terrible outbreak, destructive to India’s 
future, unless men like him, who had access to the Government, 
could do something to remove the general feeling of despair and thus 
avert a catastrophe ”. 11 

The evidence which convinced Hume of “the imminent danger 
of a terrible outbreak” was contained in seven large volumes which 
were shown to him. These contained a vast number of communica¬ 
tions from over thirty thousand different reporters from the different 
parts of India. These seemed to indicate that even men of the lowest 
classes, “convinced that they would starve and die”, were deter¬ 
mined to “do something, and that something was violence”. “Innu¬ 
merable entries referred to the secretion of old swords, spears and 
matchlocks, which would be ready when required. It was not sup¬ 
posed that the immediate result, in its initial stages, would be a 
revolt against our Government, or a revolt at all, in the proper sense 
of the word. What was predicted was a sudden violent outbreak of 
sporadic crimes, murders of obnoxious persons, robbery of bankers, 
looting of bazaars. In the existing state of the lowest half-starving 
classes, it was considered that the first few crimes would be the sig¬ 
nal for hundreds of similar ones, and for a general development of 
lawlessness, paralysing the authorities and the respectable classes. 
It was considered certain, also, that everywhere the snail bands 
would begin to coalesce into large ones, like drops of water on a 
leaf; that all the bad characters in the country would join, -»nd that 
very soon after the bands obtained formidable proportions, certain 
small number of the educated classes, at the time desperately, per¬ 
haps unreasonably, bitter against the Government, would join the 
movement, assume here and there the lead, give the outbreak 
cohesion and direct it as a national revolt ”. 12 


528 


THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 

Hume now ‘'became convinced that some definite action was 
called for to counteract the growing unrest/’ “He, however, waited 
until, by his retirement from the service he should be free to act.” 
Hume retired from Government service in 1882, and on 1 March, 
1883, addressed an open letter to the graduates of the Calcutta Uni¬ 
versity. 13 It was indeed a soul-stirring appeal to the educated 
Indians and every line of it bespeaks the genuine heart-felt yearning 
of a foreigner for the upliftment of India. “Whether in the indi¬ 
vidual or the nation”, said he, “all vital progress must spring from 
within, and it is to you, her most cultured and enlightened minds, her 
most favoured sons, that your country must look for the initiative. In 
vain may aliens, like myself, love India and her children, as well as 
the most loving of these; in vain may they, for her and their good, 
give time and trouble, money and thought; in vain may they struggle 
and sacrifice; they may assist with advice and suggestion, they may 
place their experience, abilities and knowledge at the disposal of the 
workers, but they lack the essential of nationality and the real work 
must ever be done by the people of the country themselves”. Hume 
then enlarged upon the necessity of an organization: “Scattered in¬ 
dividuals, however capable and however well-meaning, are power¬ 
less singly. What is needed is union, organization, and to secure 
these an association is required, armed and organized with unusual 
care, having for its object to promote the mental, moral, social and 
political regeneration of the people of India”. “If only fifty men, 
good and true, can be found to join as founders, the thing can be 
established and the future development will be comparatively easy”. 
“If you, the picked men, the most highly educated of the nation, 
cannot, scorning personal ease and selfish objects, make a resolute 
struggle to secure greater freedom for yourselves and your country, 
a more impartial administration, a larger share in the management 
of your own affairs,. . .then, at present at any rate, all hopes of pro¬ 
gress are at an end, and India truly neither lacks nor deserves any 
better government than she now enjoys. Only...let there be no more 
complaints of Englishmen being preferred to you in all important 
offices, for if you lack that public spirit, that highest form of altruistic 
devotion that leads men to subordinate private ease to the public 
weal, that true patriotism that has made Englishmen what they are,— 
then rightly are these preferred to you, and rightly and inevitably 
have they become your rulers. And rulers and taskmasters they 
must continue, let the yoke gall your shoulders never so sorely, 
until you realize and stand prepared to act upon the eternal truth 
that, whether in the case of individuals or nations, self-sacrifice and 
unselfishness are the only unfailing guides to freedom and happiness”. 

529 


Ii.P.KH.—34 


THE BRITISH PARAMO UN TCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

“This appeal”, the biographer of Hume informs us, “was not 
made in vain. The men required as founders to initiate the move¬ 
ment were forthcoming from all parts of India; and the ‘Indian 
National Union’ was formed.” It was this Union which was instru¬ 
mental in summoning the first Indian National Congress. But before 
proceeding to describe that it is necessary to discuss a few preli¬ 
minary points. The circular letter issued by Hume undoubtedly 
advocates the setting up of an organization which, among other 
things, should aim at the “political regeneration of the people of India”. 
But, according to his biographer, “whereas he (Hume) was himself 
disposed to begin his reform propaganda on the social sid£, it was 
apparently by Lord Dufferin’s advice that he took up the work of 
political organisation, as the matter first to be dealt with”. 14 This 
view is also supported by W. C. Bonnerjee, the first President of the 
Congress, who says: 

“It will probably be news to many that the Indian National Con¬ 
gress, as it was originally started and as it has since been carried 
on, is in reality the work of the Marquis of Dufferin and Ava, when 
that nobleman was the Governor-General of India. Mr. A. O. Hume, 
C. B., had in 1884 conceived the idea that it would be of great ad¬ 
vantage to the country if leading politicians could be brought to¬ 
gether once a year to discuss social matters and be upon friendly 
footing with one another. He did not desire that politics should form 
part of their discussion, for, there were recognised political bodies 

in Calcutta, Bombay, Madras and other parts of India... .Full 

of these ideas he saw the noble Marquis when he went to Simla early 
in 1885. Lord Dufferin took great interest in the matter, and after 
considering it for some time he sent for Mr. Hume and told him 
that in his opinion Mr. Hume’s project would not be of much use. 
He said there was no body of persons in this country who performed 
the functions which Her Majesty’s Opposition did in England ... It 
would be very desirable in their interests as well as the interests of 
the ruled that Indian politicians should meet* yearly and point out 
to the Government in what respect the administration was defective 
and how it could be improved, and he added that an assembly such 
as he proposed should not be presided over by the Local Governor, 
for in his presence the people might not like to speak out their minds. 
Mr. Hume was convinced by Lord Dufferin’s arguments, and when 
he placed the two schemes, his own and Lord Dufferin’s, before lead¬ 
ing politicians in Calcutta, Bombay, Madras and other parts of the 
country, the latter unanimously accepted Lord Dufferin’s scheme and 
proceeded to give effect to it. Lord Dufferin had made it a condi¬ 
tion with Mr. Hume that his name should not be divulged so long as 
he remained in the country”. 16 


530 



THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 

A somewhat different version is given by Professor Sundar Ra 
man who attended the first session of the Indian National Congress. 
According to him Hume’s original idea was to rouse the conscience 
of the people of England by carrying on a persistent agitation in 
Great Britain. When Mr. Hume talked about this to Lord Dufferin 
he expressed his opinion that such an agitation in England was fore¬ 
doomed to failure, and convinced Hume that the latter could secure 
his own aims best by confining the agitation to India for the present, 
and by making Indian public men all over the land to start and 
develop to its full strength a national organization in India itself 
conducted with zeal and discretion by her own leaders under Mr. 
Hume’s sympathetic and courageous lead. 1G 

Curiously enough. Lord Dufferin himself contradicts both these 
views and categorically states that he thought the Congress should 
direct its attention only to social questions. This is clear from the 
following passage in his famous speech at St. Andrews Day Dinner 
on November 30, 1888: “When the Congress was first started, I 
watched its operations with interest and curiosity, and I hoped that. 
in certain fields of useful activity it might render valuable assistance 
to the Government. I was aware that there were many social topics 
connected with the habits and customs of the people which were of 
unquestionable utility, but with which it was either undesirable 
for the Government to interfere, or which it was beyond their power 
to influence or control.When Congress was first started, it seem¬ 

ed to me that such a body, if they directed their attention with 
patriotic zeal to these (social questions) and cognate subjects, as 
similar Congresses do in England, might prove of assistance to the 
Government and of great use to,their fellow-citizens; and I cannot 
help expressing my regret that they should seem to consider such 
momentous topics, concerning as they do the welfare of millions of 
their fellow-subjects, as beneath their notice, and that they should 
have concerned themselves instead with matters in regard to which 
their assistance is likely to be less profitable to us! .” 17 Further, 
the view that Hume’s original plan was to set up merely a non-politi¬ 
cal organization cannot be^easily reconciled with his “appeal” re¬ 
ferred to above, and possibly Dufferin’s share in this project has 
been misunderstood or exaggerated. But there is no doubt whatso¬ 
ever that the Congress was really designed by Hume to arrest the 
progress of a revolutionary outbreak. Wedderburn clearly states 
this in his biography of Hume: “These ill-starred measures of reaction 
combined with Russian methods of Police repression, brought India 
under Lord Lytton within measurable distance of a revolutionary 
outbreak, and it wa$ only in time that Mr. Hume and his Indian ad¬ 
visers were inspired to intervene.” 18 


531 




THE) BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


This passage leaves no doubt as to the real motive which inspir¬ 
ed Hume to set up the Congress organization with the advice and 
blessings of the Viceroy, Lord Dufferin. So far as its political ob¬ 
jectives were concerned, it was not intended to subserve the object of 
securing representative government for India such as inspired the 
National Conference in Calcutta, nor was it actuated by the more 
moderate desire of training the Indians in Parliamentary form of 
Government, as has so often been claimed. It was solely designed to 
hold back the Indian intelligentsia from joining an apprehended 
general outbreak against the British. Hume candidly expressed it 
himself in the following words: “A safety-valve for the escape of 
great and growing forces, generated by our own action, was urgently 
needed, and no more efficacious safety-valve than our Congress move¬ 
ment could possibly be devised.” 19 

Thus whereas the National Conference of Calcutta was the cul¬ 
mination of a genuine political movement extending over half a 
century, the Indian National Congress, which otherwise resembled 
it, w r as suddenly brought into existence as an instrument to safeguard 
the British rule in India. To many Indians of the twentieth century 
it may appear strange that in spite of all this the Indian leaders chose 
the Congress as their national organization rather than the National 
Conference. The explanation probably lies in the unequal progress 
of political ideas in those days in different parts of the country, as 
was clearly shown by public reaction to the Ilbert Bill in different pro¬ 
vinces of India, as noted above. There were evidently many Indian 
leaders who could not yet reconcile themselves to the advanced poli¬ 
tical ideas of the Indian Association of Calcutta. This is indicated 
by the exclusion of men like Surendra-nath Banerji at the inception of 
the movement, and the selection, as the first President of the Congress, 
of W. C. Bannerjee of Calcutta who had kept aloof from the Indian 
Association. 

There was probably another consideration which weighed with 
those who responded to the clarion call of Hume. The Government, 
they rightly thought, would not look with kindly eyes upon any 
political organization of the Indians, demanding substantial reforms 
in the administration. But if the leading part were taken by an Eng¬ 
lishman, who once held a high office, the hostility of the official class 
could be considerably neutralized. The great Indian political leader, 
Gokhale, gave expression to this view when he said: “No Indian could 
have started the Indian National Congress... If an Indian had come 
forward to start such a movement embracing all India, the officials 
in India would not have allowed the movement to come into exist¬ 
ence, If the founder of the Congress had not been a great English- 


532 


THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 


man and. a distinguished ex-official, such was the distrust of political 
agitation in those days that the authorities would have at once found 
some way or the other of suppressing the movement/’ 20 This feeling 
also probably influenced, to a large extent, the organizers of the 
National Conference in Calcutta to merge it in the Indian National 
Congress. 

In any event there is no doubt that once Hume set the ball rol- 
ling, it gathered a momentum beyond expectation. Hume himself 
generously referred in his public speeches to the help he had received 
from Indian leaders. The Congress movement, he said, was the out¬ 
come “of the labours of a body of cultured men mostly born natives 
of India”. 21 It appears that he met and discussed his plans with a good 
many leaders of Bombay such as Badruddin Tyabji, Dadabhai Nao- 
roji, Pherozeshah Mehta and K. T. Telang. But he did not consult 
Surendra-nath Banerji. According to B. C. Pal, Hume had a personal 
dislike for Surendra-nath, partly for his dismissal from Government 
service and partly for his advanced political views. The Government 
of the day did not like the political advance made in Bengal and 
Surendra-nath was definitely in their black list. These considerations 
might have also dissuaded the other more moderate Indian leaders 
of those days from associating themselves with the “extremist” 
Surendra-nath. No other Indian leader had done so mucfi to foster the 
idea of an all-India political organization such as the Congress was 
intended to be. Yet he does not seem to have been taken into con¬ 
fidence by Hume along with the others named above. In any case, there 
can be hardly any doubt that Surendra-nath was deliberately kept 
out of this organization at its initial stage. This fact as well as the 
selection of W. C, Bonnerjee as the President of the first Congress 
gives a fair idea of the political outlook of the founders of the Con¬ 
gress. Mr. Bonnerjee lived the life of an Englishman and not only 
kept himself aloof from, but almost ridiculed, all sorts of political agi¬ 
tation. He was not even a member of the Indian Association, the 
premier political organization of Bengal. According to B. C. 
Pal, Mr. Bonnerjee “never appreciated the labours of Surendranath. 
In fact, it was an open secret in those days that Mr. Bonnerjee was 
not in favour of inviting Surendranath and the leaders of the Indian 
Association to the first session of the Congress in Bombay.” 22 

As Dufferin was intimately associated with the inauguration of 
the Congress, his views about the politics of Surendra-nath might 
have something to do with the exclusion of that great leader from the 
first or inapgural session of the Congress. Writing to Lord Cross, 
the Secretary of State, on 26 April, 1886, i.e. within four months 
of the Congress session. Dufferin praised the “moderate” Association 


533 


THE BRITISH PAHAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-H 

formed by Sir Jatindra Mohan Tagore, who “have no desire to em¬ 
barrass the Government”. Then Bufferin adds: “But besides them is 
a more violent and less respectable party, headed, as far as I can 
make out, by Mr. Surendranath Banerji, who is connected with a 
cleverly-conducted hut vicious paper called the Mirror”. Bufferin 
then further denounces Surendra-nath and his party, his wrath being 
presumably directed against the activities of the Indian Association. 

While all this may explain the attitude of the sponsors of the 
Congress towards Surendra-nath, it is not easy to explain why the 
National Conference silently merged itself in the Congress. The 
political leaders of Bengal could legitimately, claim recognition for 
the former as the national forum.of all India and dispute, on valid 
grounds, the necessity of starting a new institution. That apprehen¬ 
sions of such a squabble proved baseless reflects the highest credit on 
Surendra-nath and his colleagues. This self-abnegation or self-sacri¬ 
fice on their part was inspired by a high sense of patriotism, and it is 
not unlikely that there were weighty political considerations behind 
the move. The British decried the political agitation in India as solely 
inspired by the cowardly Bengalis, and claimed that the sturdy mili¬ 
tary races were all against it. Surendra-nath says in his autobio¬ 
graphy: “We wanted to dissipate this myth. To-day it stands explod¬ 
ed by the creation of the Congress.” These two cryptic statements! 
perhaps account for the readiness with which the political leaders 
of Bengal gave up their own organization and joined the Congress. 
The National Conference was, after all, a creation of Bengal, and in 
spite of its all-India character, the hostile critics, particularly the 
British, would never cease to represent it merely as a handiwork of 
the Bengali agitators. An organization sponsored by a British civilian 
and Indian leaders, without any special association with any parti¬ 
cular province, was more likely to command great respect as an in¬ 
dependent all-India organization than the National Conference. 

These considerations gained additional strength from the fact 
that the new organization was started under the auspices of an Eng¬ 
lishman, and was therefore sure to enjoy the blessings of the small 
group of public men in England who sympathised with the cause of 
India. Indian politicians of all shades of opinion had in those days an 
unbounded faith in the honesty and sense of justice of Englishmen. 
The Englishmen, they thought, had only to be convinced of the jus¬ 
tice of Indian demands, and Our salvation would not be long in com¬ 
ing. Besides, a special prestige was attached in those days to an 
English name. They would therefore naturally welcome the move¬ 
ment which was initiated by an Englishman. 22 * 


534 



THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 

In conclusion, reference should be made to a view which seeks 
to give an entirely different and very unfavourable interpretation of 
the activity of Hume in connection with the Indian National Congress. 
The propounder of this view, Dr. N. L. Chatterji, starts with a pro¬ 
position which may appear to be very startling indeed, but in view of 
what has been said above, merits serious consideration. It may be 

stated in his own words: 

• » 

“An inquiry into the available evidence leads one to suppose 
that Mr. Hume’s real originality lay not so much in the propounding 
of the idea of an Indian National Congress, for the Indian Asso¬ 
ciation of Calcutta, founded in 1876, had already arranged for 
the Indian National Conference in 1883 at the instance of Mr, Suren- 
dranath Banerjea, but that his achievement was the bypassing of 
the aforesaid Indian National Conference and the formation of an ad¬ 
mittedly loyalist organisation apart from, and independent of, the 
existing body. It seeme^J, as if Mr. Hume was out to sabotage the 
Indian National Confenence sponsored by ‘a dismissed Government 
servant’, Mr. Surendranath Banerjea, and controlled by ‘Babus from 
Bengal’. The student of Indian history is entitled to ask why a 
parallel body with an identical programme had to be brought into 
existence, even though the National Conference was going to hold an 
all-India Session at Calcutta in the Christmas week of 1885—-the 
same fateful week which saw the birth of the Congress at Bombay.” 

Dr. Chatterji then answers the question himself: “The Congress 
was founded in fact as a precautionary move against an apprehended 
Russian invasion of India.” In support of his view he quotes the 
following statement of Lord Ripon: 

“.As the Russians approach our frontiers more nearly, 

they may try to stir up discontent and trouble by intrigues carried 
on within our dominions, and the real question, therefore, is how can 
such intrigue be best met and defeated”. Dr. Chatterji points to the 
part played by Dufferin, as stated by W. C. Bonnerjee, and comments: 
“Evidently, the Congress was meant to be the long-awaited counter¬ 
poise to possible Russian intrigue in India.” Dr. Chatterji finds sup¬ 
port for his view in the address of W. W. Wedderbum as President 
of the Indian National Congress. Wedderbum undoubtedly implied 
that the Russians planned an attack of India in 1885 in order to test 
how far they could rely upon Indian support, but the Russian move 
was not followed by any signs of sympathy in India; and though 
Wedderbum does not say so, in Dr. Chatterji’s opinion, he implies 
that it was the foundation of the Congress that led to this happy re¬ 
sult. This may be true, but it is difficult to follow Dr. Chatterji when 


535 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

he asserts that Wedderburn “explicitly corroborated the fact that 
the foundation of the Congress was a move to safeguard India against 
the menace of Russian invasion.” Similarly, Dr. Chatterji is right 
when he says that “the Congress became in its early years a platform 
for anti-Russian and pro-British propaganda”. But the Congress 
merely reflected the public opinion in this respect and it would be 
very far-fetched indeed to derive from it any clue regarding the 
origin of the Congress. On the whole, it is difficult to attach much 
importance to Dr. Chatterji’s view unless more positive evidence is 
forthcoming in support of it. 23 

II. THE FIRST TWENTY SESSIONS OF THE 
CONGRESS (1885-1904) 

The Indian National Union, formed by Hume, as mentioned 
above, decided in March, 1885, to hold a conference at Poona from 
25th to 31st December, and immediately issued a circular letter to 
this effect. “The leading politicians, well acquainted with the Eng¬ 
lish language, from all parts of Behgal, Bombay and Madras 
Presidencies were invited to attend this conference whose objects 
were stated to be ‘(1) to enable all the most earnest labourers in 
the cause of national progress to become personally known to each 
other; and (2) to discuss and decide upon the political operations to 
be undertaken during the ensuing year.’ It was also stated that sub¬ 
ject to the unswerving allegiance to the British sovereign, the Union 
would oppose by all constitutional methods all official acts or mea¬ 
sures opposed to those principles which were laid down by the Par¬ 
liament. Lastly, a hope was expressed that ‘indirectly this Confer¬ 
ence will form the germ of a native Parliament and, if properly con¬ 
ducted, will constitute, in a few years, an unanswerable reply to the 
assertion that India is still wholly unfit for any form of representa¬ 
tive institutions.” 24 

On receipt of this circular letter, special committees were formed 
in a large number of towns in India, whose members or delegates, 
selected from among themselves, promised to attend the Conference. 
Hume then proceeded to England and succeeded in enlisting the 
sympathy and support of a number of liberal Englishmen. He also 
took steps to ensure wide publicity to the conference in the British 
Press before he returned to India. 

On account of the outbreak of a cholera epidemic in Poona the 
venue of the conference was shifted to Bombay. Its name was chang¬ 
ed to the ‘Indian National Congress’ and the first session was held on 
December 28, 1885. The total number of delegates who attended the 
session was about 72, but they were fairly representative of the 


536 


THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 


different regions of India. According to the official proceedings, “all 
the leading native political associations and the principal Anglo- 
native newspapers were represented; there were members of Legis¬ 
lative Councils, Presidents and members of Municipal Committees 
and Local Boards.” It is to be noted, however, that only a few Mus¬ 
lims attended the session and the delegates from Bengal were very 
small in number, presumably because the second session of the 
National Conference was held about the same time in Calcutta. The 
meeting was strictly confined to the delegates, the members of the 
public not being admitted even as spectators. 25 

W. C. Bonner jee, who was elected President of the Congress, 
elaborated in his Presidential address the objects of the Congress 
under the following four heads: 

“1. The promotion of personal intimacy and friendship amongst 
all the more earnest workers in our country’s cause in the various 
parts of the Empire. 

2. The eradication, by direct friendly personal intercourse, of 
all possible race, creed, or provincial prejudices aniogst all lovers of 
our country, and the fuller development and consolidation of those 
sentiments of national unity that had their origin in their beloved 
Lord Ripon’s ever memorable reign. 

3. The authoritative record, after this has been carefully eli¬ 
cited by the fullest discussion, of the matured opinions of the edu¬ 
cated classes in India on some of the more important and pressing of 
the social questions of the day. 

4. The determination of the lines upon, and methods, by which, 
during the next twelve months, it is desirable for native politicians to 
labour in the public interests.” 26 

The Congress then discussed and passed nine resolutions. The 
more important of these were in the forms of demands to the Govern¬ 
ment of India for the 

1. Appointment of a Royal Commission to inquire into the 
working of Indian administration. 

2. Abolition of the Indian Council (of the Secretary of State). 

3. Creation of Legislative Councils for the North-West Pro¬ 
vinces and Oudh and the Punjab. 

4. Admission of a considerable proportion of elected members 
to the Supreme and Local Legislative Councils with the 
right of interpellation and discussion of Budgets, and the 
creation of a Standing Committee in the House of Commons 
to consider formal protests from majorities in the Councils. 


537 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

5. Reduction of military expenditure and its equitable appor¬ 
tionment between India and England. 

6. Introduction of simultaneous Public Service Examinations 
in England and India and the raising of the age of 
candidates. 

The speeches were characterized by moderation and extreme 
(almost servile) effusions of loyalty to the British Crown. A number 
of Government officials took part in the drafting of the resolutions, 
and Justice Ranade of Bombay even spoke at the open session of the 
Congress. 

The resolution formulating the fourth demand 27 , mentioned 
above, was most hotly debated by a large number of delegates, and 
there was a wide divergence of opinion as to the best method of 
making India’s voice heard in the British Parliament. The creation 
of a Standing Committee in the House of Commons, which was ulti¬ 
mately accepted, did not commend itself to many. Narendra-nath 
Sen very cogently argued that “a Standing Committee of the 
House of Commons would be good if we had representatives of our 
own in the House”. As an alternative proposal he suggested that 
“there might be a small Parliament in India with many Indian 
members. Indian political bodies should be asked to name such 
members and also have a voice in the formation of the existing Exe¬ 
cutive Councils”. 

In spite of the moderation and loyalty of the Congresss, the Eng¬ 
lish public opinion looked upon the emergence of the Congress as a 
potential danger to the British power in India. An editorial in The 
Times of London frankly stated that to concede the demands of the 
Congress was tantamount to the grant of Home Rule in India, and 
the British would never retire from India in favour of those who 
could only talk. A long extract from this editorial has been quoted in 
the next section of this Chapter. The comment of. The Times fore¬ 
doomed to failure the methods pursued by the Congress and was a 
correct forecast of the attitude of studied indifference which the 
Government adopted towards the resolutions passed by the Con¬ 
gress year after year-—the ‘hardy annuals’, as someone characterised 

them. 

* 

The Times as well as its Bombay correspondent drew pointed 
attention to the fact that not a single Muslim member joined the 
Congress. K. T. Telang, on behalf of the Congress, pointed out that 
the statement was inaccurate, as two leading Muslim gentlemen 
—R. M. Sayani and A. M. Dharamsi—did attend the Congress. But 
this refutation was hardly less damaging than the original accusation. 
It is interesting to note in this connection that in a letter dated 31 


538 



THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 

December, 1885, i.e. almost immediately after the first session of the 
Congress was over, the Bombay correspondent of the London Times, 
recorded his impression of it as follows: “Its congeries of races, its 
diversity of castes, all seemed to find common ground in their poli¬ 
tical aspirations. Only one great race was conspicuous by its ab¬ 
sence, the M'ahomedans of India were not there. They remained 
steadfast in their habitual separation. They certainly do not yield to 
either Hindu or Parsee in their capacity for development, but they 
persistently refuse to act in common with the rest of the Indian sub¬ 
jects of the Queen-Empress. Not only in their religion, but in their 
schools and almost all their colleges and all their daily life they 
maintain an almost haughty reserve. The reason is not hard to find. 
They cannot forget that less than two centuries ago they were the 
dominant race, while their present rivals in progress only counted as 
so many millions of tax-paying units who contributed each his mite 
to swell their glory of Islam.” 28 

The main result of the first session of the Congress was that it 
quickened the political consciousness of the people. The resolutions 
passed by it were widely circulated and discussed by the local poli¬ 
tical associations. The newspapers also heartily welcomed the new 
organization as the most powerful organ of Indian political opinion, 
and put forward various suggestions for the consideration of the 
next Congress. The result of all this was clearly perceived in the 
second session of the Congress which met in Calcutta on 28 December 
with Dadabhai Naoroji as President. The number of delegates 
attending the session was about 440, 29 more than six times that of 
the first session. The eminent political leader Surendra-nath took an 
active part in this session 30 , and henceforth proved to be one of the 
strongest pillars of the Congress organization, like Dadabhai and 
Pherozeshah Mehta. The conservative British Indian Association of 
Calcutta joined the Congress but the National Muhammadan Asso¬ 
ciation of Bengal held aloof, and the Muslims, as a class, deliberately 
abstained from taking any part in the Indian National Congress. 

The second session of the Congress marked a distinct advance 
over the first. The men who attended the first Congress at Bombay 
had no representative character—they were only volunteers. The 
second Congress was composed of delegates, elected at public meet¬ 
ings held for the purpose in different provinces. “Five hundred de¬ 
legates were elected, of whom 434 actually registered their names 
and credentials as present.” 30 * This procedure has continued ever 
since and the method of electing delegates has been clearly formulat¬ 
ed from time to time. Another innovation was the admission of the 
public as spectators of the proceedings. A third novel feature was 

539 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-II 


also introduced. “Various circulars were issued suggesting subjects 
for discussion and outlining proposals, so that delegates might not 
come unprepared—a plan that, unfortunately, fell into desuetude.” 301 * 

Bengal naturally sent the largest number of delegates, namely, 
230. Next came N.W.P. and Oudh with 74. Bombay, Madras, Pun¬ 
jab, C. P. and Assam sent, respectively, 47, 47, 17, 8 and 8. 

The great scholar and antiquarian, Rajendra-lal Mitra, was the 
Chairman of the Reception Committee. In his address of welcome 
he observed: “We live, not under a National Government, but under 
a foreign bureaucracy; our foreign rulers are foreigners by birth, 
religion, language, habits, by everything that divides humanity into 
different sections. They cannot ascertain our wants, our feelings, 
our aspirations.” The Congress received the blessings of Devendra- 
nath Tagore, a great religious and political leader of the previous 
generation, and Jay-krishna Mukherji, the head of a distinguished 
aristocratic family of Zamindars in Bengal—an old man of 79, 
“blind and trembling with age.’* 

The Congress passed a resolution drawing attention to the in¬ 
creasing poverty of the people. D. E. Wacha, who moved it, pointed 
out that 40 millions of people had only one meal a day, and not always 
that. The Congress, by another resolution, reiterated the demand 
for the expansion of the Legislative Councils and laid down elabo¬ 
rate principles according to which it should be carried into effect. 
It demanded enlarged powers for the Legislative Councils and an 
increase of members, not less than one-half of whom should be elected. 

The Congress appointed a Committee to consider the question of 
recruitment for Public Services and recommended open competitive 
examination, that for the senior services being held simultaneously 
in India and in England. 

A distinct change in the tone and spirit of the Congress was noti¬ 
ceable during its session at Calcutta, and this was undoubtedly due 
to the greater advance in political life in Bengal during the preced¬ 
ing half-a-century, as noted above. Although the first Congress was 
held at Bombay, and prominent political leaders of Bengal were ab¬ 
sent, the idea was already growing that in demanding political rights 
the Congress only echoed the voice of Bengal. Malik Bhagavan Das 
from Dehra Ismail Khan protested against this and, drawing up his 
body in N. W. Frontier dress, asked: “Do I look like a Bengali Babu?” 
He then said that all the more intelligent persons wanted the reforms 
demanded by the Congress. 

Nevertheless, the idea persisted. Syed Ahmad Khan of Aligarh 
tried to dissuade the Musalmans from joining the third session of 
the Congress on the ground that it was dominated by the Bengalis 


540 



THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 

and the satisfaction of its demands would lead to Bengali rule. In 
a speech delivered on the eve of the third* session at Madras to a 
Muslim audience he said: “if you accept that the country should 
groan under the yoke of Bengali rule and its people lick the Bengali 
shoes, then, in the name of God! jump into the train, sit down, and 
be off to Madras.” 30 * The Viceroy, Lord Dufferin, also referred to 
such a feeling entertained by the Muslims in a letter to the Secre¬ 
tary of State, dated 4 January, 1887, i.e. immediately after the Cal¬ 
cutta session of the Congress: “You will have observed that the 
Mahomedans have abstained from taking any part in the Indian 
National Congress .... What the Mahomedans feel is that under a 
Bengalee constitution they would be more completely left out in 
the cold than they are at present.” Three years later, Malleson, the 
great English historian oh the Mutiny, described the Congress as 
“started by the noisy Bengalis” and its demands for representative 
institutions as ‘utterly abhorrent to the manly races of India like 
the Sikhs, Rajputs, Rohillas, Jats, and the frontier Pathan tribes.’ 30d 

Whatever we might think of these criticisms, there is no doubt 
that the Congress was invigorated by the political traditions and 
achievements in Bengal. 

It is interesting to note the reaction of the Viceroy, Lord Duffe¬ 
rin, to the Congress session in Calcutta. In his letter to the Secretary 
of State, Lord Cross, dated 4 January, 1887, mentioned above, he 
referred to some of the resolutions as extravagant. He also des¬ 
cribed the discussions as very childish, reminding “rather of an Eton 
or Harrow Debating Society than even of Oxford or Cambridge 
Union”. 

But this letter is not altogether devoid of interest. In his Presi¬ 
dential Address, Dadabhai Naoroji had regretted the refusal of the 
Government to grant the prayer of the first Congress for a Royal 
Commission of inquiry. But in his letter to Cross, Dufferin assumed 
that there would be a Parliamentary Commission on Indian affairs. 
It is in this letter, again, that Dufferin recommended, for the first 
time, election of Indian members of the Legislative Councils, in place 
of nomination, and an increase in their number. Coming immediate¬ 
ly after the Congress session in Calcutta, the idea of Dufferin may be 
looked upon as being influenced by that body. This view is streng¬ 
thened by the following lines in the same letter: 

“A concession of the kind now would stop a good deal of agita¬ 
tion. Of course to political agitation in India we can afford to be 
more or less indifferent at present, though I am by no means certain 
that this will continue to be the case.’* 


541 


THE BRITISH PARAMGUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

On the whole, it may be fairly presumed that the Calcutta ses¬ 
sion of the Congress set in motion the ideas of the Viceroy which 
ultimately led to the Indian Councils Act of 1892. 

The third session, held at Madras, was presided over by an emi¬ 
nent Muslim leader, Badruddin Tyabji, who later rose to be a judge 
of the Bombay High Court. The number of delegates rose to 607, 
and the need was*felt for drawing up a regular constitution of the 
Congress. But though a Committee of 34 members was set up for 
this purpose, no regular constitution was adopted during the next 
twenty years. The difficulty caused by the absence of such consti¬ 
tution was brought to a head by the strong opposition made by a 
group of young delegates to the current practice of leaving to a few 
senior delegates the task of preparing drafts of resolutions to be 
moved at the public session. The opposition was somewhat violent 
in character, and ultimately it was decided to set up at the opening 
of each session of the Congress a small representative committee in 
order to fix up the programme and prepare the draft of the reso¬ 
lutions to be placed before the plenary session of the Congress. 
This was the genesis of the “Subjects Committee” which henceforth 
became a regular feature of the Congress, and made the first breach 
in the strong citadel of orthodox and conservative leadership of the 
Congress. 31 

Perhaps the most significant feature of the third session was the 
eloquent appeal made by the President to his Muslim co-religionists 
to join the Congress. In his Presidential address, Tyabji ably 
answered the reproach made against the previous two sessions of 
the Congress that the Muslims had kept aloof from them. He urged 
them to work hand in hand with the other communities of India, 
and hoped that in future the Muslims would not stand aloof from 
the others in their joint efforts to secure “those great general rights 
which are for the common benefit of us all... ” The appeal of the 
Muslim President to his co-religionists did not go in vain. The Mus¬ 
lims, who had held aloof from the first two sessions, joined in large 
numbers in the fourth. It did not, however, remove their nervous 
fear of the Hindus as will be seen from the proceedings of the fifth 
session, described later. 

The Indian National Congress passed a number of resolutions 
in each session, but the Government of India paid no heed to them. 
There was no doubt that the official attitude towards the Congress 
had undergone a change. Some officials attended the first session, 
but when, in the second session at Calcutta, invitation cards were 
sent to the Government House, they were returned on the ground 
that the officials could not attend the meetings of a political body. 


542 


THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 

Lord Dufferin, however, explained away this action and even invi¬ 
ted the delegates of the Congress, not as such but as distinguished 
visitors, to a garden party. The Governor of Madras also did the 
same. But in spite of this politeness, there was no sympathetic res¬ 
ponse from the side of the Government to the demands of the 
Congress for reforms, repeated year after year. This chilled the 
enthusiasm of some and caused irritation to others. Among the latter 
group was Hume himself. He was shocked and pained by the stolid 
indifference displayed by the Government, and no less by the un¬ 
disguised hostility shown towards the Congress by the official cir¬ 
cles and the minority communities in India, who represented the 
Congress movement as an attempt to subvert the Government and 
establish a Hindu Raj. 

“To the ardent mind of Mr. Hume platonic expressions of sym¬ 
pathy by the authorities were a mockery while nothing practical 
was being done” to relieve the misery of the masses. “The sufferings 
of the Indian masses from famine and disease arose from poverty; 
and this poverty was preventible, if the Government would take into 
their counsels experienced representatives of the people’'. But the 
Government refused to do this, while “deaths by famine and pesti¬ 
lence were counted, not by tens of thousands, or by hundreds of 
thousands, but by millions”. In this great predicament Hume rose 
to the height of his stature as a political leader. He decided that, 
“in order to constrain the Government to move”, the leaders of the 
Indian people must follow “the drastic methods pursued in England 
by Bright and Cobden in their great campaign on behalf of the 
people’s food”. 32 

“The educated men, the Press, and the Congress”, said Hume, 
“have endeavoured to instruct the Government, but the Govern¬ 
ment, like all autocratic Governments, has refused to be instructed, 
and it will now be for us to instruct the nations, the great English 
nation in the island home, and the far greater nation of this vast 
continent, so that every Indian that breathes upon the sacred soil of 
this our motherland may become our comrade and coadjutor, our 
supporter, and if needs be our soldier, in the great war that we, like 
Cobden and his noble band, will wage for justice, for our liberties 
and rights.” 33 

In pursuance of such a propaganda Mr. Hume, according to his 
biographer, set to work “with his wonted energy, appealing for 
funds to all classes of Indian community, distributing tracts, leaflets, 
and pamphlets, sending out lecturers and calling meetings both in 
large towns and in country districts.” Throughout’the country over 
thousand meetings were held, many of which were attended by more 


543 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

than five thousand persons. Of the numerous pamphlets attention 
may be drawn to two which were widely distributed and created 
considerable stir at the time. These were entitled “A Congress 
Catechism’' and “A Conversation between Maulvi Furreduddin and 
one Ram Buksh of Kambakhtpur”. They vividly depicted the 
evils of absentee landlordism and despotic Government and 
pointed out that the only remedy of these evils was the representa¬ 
tive Government for which the Congress was fighting. These pam¬ 
phlets contained bitter attacks against Government and were not as 
harmless as some have represented them to be; 34 

The mass movement inaugurated by Hume made the official 
attitude towards the Congress definitely antagonistic. Hume de¬ 
fended his action in a speech at a meeting at Allahabad on 30 April, 
1888, which was published under the title, “A Speech on the 
Indian National Congress, its Origin, Aims, and Objects”. 35 This 
only added fuel to the flame, and excitement ran very high among 
the reactionary class of officials who “desired to suppress the Con¬ 
gress” and even “recommended that Mr. Hume should be deport¬ 
ed.” 36 Even Sir Auckland Colvin, Lieutenant-Governor of the 
North-Western Provinces, who was hitherto “distinctly friendly to 
the Congress movement”, was very much perturbed by this active 
political propaganda among the masses. It gave rise to the historic 
correspondence between Colvin and Hume in October, 1888, later 
published as a pamphlet under the title of Audi Alteram Partem. 
Colvin’s criticisms were directed against the methods and not against 
the principles or objects of the Congress, which he generally approv¬ 
ed. He considered the mass propaganda “premature and mischiev¬ 
ous”, but Hume considered it necessary for the safety of the State. 
As the biographer of Hume has pointed out, the difference was irre¬ 
concilable. For while Hume looked at the whole question from the 
point of view of the Indians, with whom he identified himself after his 
retirement from the service, Colvin’s outlook was that of a British ad¬ 
ministrator. Hume wrote to Colvin: “You still look through 
the rose-tinted official spectacles that so long obscured my sight. 
But leave the service, mix freely with the people, and you would 
wholly change your views”. 

In fairness to Colvin it must be mentioned here that even a class 
of Indian leaders, including Bipin Chandra Pal, who was destined 
to be a leader of the Extremist party in Indian politics, shared his 
views at the time. The following passage in his autobiography ex¬ 
plains his motive: 

“In the Hume-Colvin controversy I took some little part, writing 
to the press practically supporting Sir Auckland Colvin in his 


544 


THE INDIAN NATIONAL OONGRBSS 


warning against drawing the masses to this political movement. I held 
that it would be a dangerous thing not only for the British Govern¬ 
ment, but also for India, if the masses were to be imbued with anta¬ 
gonism to British rule through our political agitations. Mr. W. C. 
Bonnerj ee had declared in course of a public utterance that one of 
the objects of the Congress was to ‘lower the British Government 
in the estimation of the people*. I found it impossible to accept 
much less to support this view of the aims of the Congress’*. 

Referring to the “price of allegiance to the ideals of social re- 
form such as the Brahmo Samaj had to pay”, B. C. Pal continues: 
“The principle of complete religious freedom inculcated by the 
British Government in India secured to the Brahmo Samaj this right, 
and the general body of the Brahmos, therefore, were grateful to 
Providence for the establishment of the new political power in the 
country, which was regarded by them, in those days, as a great 
moral influence. This was really the psychology of the Brahmo 
leader, Keshub Chandra Sen, when he proclaimed ‘loyalty to the 
Government’ as one of the fundamental articles of the creed of his 
new church. Though not openly subscribing to it or incorporating 
it as an article of their religious faith the general body of the Brah¬ 
mos of those days were frankly afraid of a return to Hindu or 
Moslem rule in India. This is why I joined in the protest raised by 
Sir Auckland Colvin against the kind of mass political propaganda 
that had been started by the Congress in 1887. The Congress leaders 
in those days had little or no sensing of the danger of exciting the 
masses against the existing British rule. On the eve of the Congress 
at Allahabad I was prompted to sound this note of warning and, there- 
fore, organised an address to be delivered at the Kayastha Pathsala 
Hall with Babu Kali Charan Bannerjee in the chair. 

“I went to the fundamental question whether India could 
reasonably expect to build up a real modern democracy by enlisting 
the masses to the service of the Congress before they were sufficiently 
advanced in social ideas and had been properly educated. The conti¬ 
nuance of British authority was necessary for building up a real free¬ 
dom movement in the country with a view to establishing a Govern¬ 
ment which would be government of the people, by the people and 
for the people”. 37 

It would be interesting to note the reaction of Lord Dufferin to 
the unexpected vigour shown by his own pet child. He was sympa¬ 
thetic to the main objective of the Congress and actually recommend¬ 
ed to the Home authorities a liberal reconstitution of the Legislative 
Council on the line recommended by the Congress. To this reference 
has been made above. But he, too, changed his views in 1888. In 

545 

# 

B.P.I.R.— 35 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II v 

his famous speech at St. Andrews Dinner, 38 he described the Indiah 
National Congress as representing a “microscopic minority” ancl 
denounced their claim to represent India. He even referred to theN 
Congress ideal as a “very big jump into the unknown”. His Lord- 
ship, in his valedictory address, declared that “in the present condi¬ 
tion of India there can be no real or effective representation of the 
people with their enormous number, their multifarious interests and 
their tessellated minorities”. He also, like Colvin, severely con¬ 
demned the propaganda among the masses. It seems to be some¬ 
what illogical to belittle the Congress as representing a microscopic 
minority, and at the same time to condemn its propaganda among 
the masses, the only means by which it could broadbase the move¬ 
ment on the wishes of the people. Yet this was precisely what 
Dufferin did. 

The remarks of Dufferin on the Congress were specially un¬ 
fortunate, coming, as it did, from one who had sponsored the move¬ 
ment only four years ago. His apologists have argued that his words 
did not convey his real views but were only meant for consumption at 
home, where the new constitution was then in the offing. 39 But 
whatever that may be, the unfortunate speech of Dufferin set the 
tone which was henceforth to be adopted by the Indian Government 
towards the Indian National Congress. 

The changed attitude of the officials was clearly indicated in con¬ 
nection with the fourth session of the Congress at Allahabad, where 
Colvin reigned supreme. Pandit Ayudhya Nath, a prominent poli¬ 
tical worker and generally styled as the lion of U. P., was the Chair¬ 
man of the Reception Committee. But he could not procure any 
suitable site for the Congress, as both the civil and military autho¬ 
rities threw obstacles in his way. At last the Maharaja of Dar- 
bhanga solved the difficulty by purchasing the Lowther Castle and 
placing it at the disposal of the Congress. The official opposition, 
manifested in various other “spiteful” acts of bureaucracy, unworthy 
of a Government, was backed up by the open hostility of Sir Syed 
Ahmad. This great leader, whose views and activities have been 
related in detail in Chapter VIII, joined by a loyal Hindu Zamindar, 
Raja Shiva Prasad, had set up a rival organization, styled United 
Indian Patriotic Association, in order to checkmate the Congress/ 0 
He asked the Muslims not to join the Congress, and the local officials 
not only held out the threat that anybody joining the Congress would 
come to grief, but also openly lent their help for the organization of 
anti-Congress meetings. But in spite of, or perhaps due to, this oppo¬ 
sition, the fourth session of the Indian National Congress at Allaha¬ 
bad was a great success. Over 200 Muslims and more than one thou¬ 
sand other delegates attended. The President of the session was 

546 


THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 

George Yule, a British merchant of Calcutta. In his Presidential 
address he observed that every big movement like the Congress had 
to pass through three stages: the first is one of ridicule, the second, 
of partial concession with misrepresentation of aim, and the third is 
a substantial adoption of the movement with some expression of sur¬ 
prise that it was not adopted before. He then pointed out that the 
Congress had passed the first stage and was now in the second, when 
reforms were accompanied by warnings against taking “big jumps 
into the unknown”. This was, of course, a reference to the St. 
Andrews Dinner speech of Lord Dufferin which came in for a great 
deal of scathing criticism during this session of the Congress. 

The fifth session which met at Bombay in December, 1889, was 
attended by exactly 1889 delegates (a curious coincidence) and pre¬ 
sided over Ky Sir William Wedderburn, the friend and biographer of 
Hume. This session was rendered memorable by the presence of 
Charles Bradlaugh, M.P., whose genuine pro-Indian attitude in the 
House of Commons has been referred to above. 41 He told the dele¬ 
gates that they constituted a living refutation of the charge 
often heard within the walls of Parliament that “there is no Indian 
people; there are only two hundred millions of diverse races and 
diverse creeds.” A scheme of representative government was draft¬ 
ed in this session, but it raised the ugly head of communalism. A 
demand was made by a Muslim delegate that there should be an 
equal number of Hindu and Muslim members in the Imperial and 
Provincial Councils. It did not get much support, and even the 
majority of Muslim members voted against it. 42 But it was a bad 
omen for the future. 

The Congress also resolved to send a deputation to England to 
place before the British public the views of the Congress about poli¬ 
tical reforms in India which were then being considered by the 
British Government. 

Sir Pherozeshah Mehta, who presided over the sixth session at 
Calcutta (1890), put the case of the Congress in a nutshell when he 
said that it had survived the ridicule, abuse, misrepresentation and 
charges of sedition and disloyalty. “We have”, he continued, “also 
survived the charge of being a ‘microscopic minority'. We have 
survived the charge of being guilty of the atrocious crime of being 
educated, and we have even managed to survive the grievous charge 
of being all Babus in disguise”. 43 The Chairman of the Reception 
Committee, Mono-mohan Ghose, condemned the British policy of 
“Divide and Rule” as “unworthy of the British people”. It was also 
during this session that the Government of India, in order to remove 
misunderstanding of the official circle, publicly declared the Indian 


547 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


National Congress to be “perfectly legitimate”, representing, in terms 
of European politics, “the more advanced liberal party”. It was also 
made clear that the Government servants could attend the Congress 
session, but not take any part in its deliberations; even this restric¬ 
tion was not applicable to the pension-holders. 

Once more the stolid indifference of the Government to the Con¬ 
gress demands disheartened Hume, and in his despair he even 
thought of suspending the Congress. This idea was supported by a 
few on the ground that while the Congress had achieved no good 
results, it had irritated the Government and increased the tension 
between the Hindus and the Muslims. But the educated community 
in India repudiated the idea in no uncertain voice. Surendra-nath 
Banerji truly echoed their sentiments when he declared that “we 
should never abandon the Congress, the standard round which we 
have fought for the last eight years, the standard which we trust 
one day to carry proudly before us to victory”. 

The situation was somewhat improved by the passing of the 
Indian Councils Act of 1892. Disappointing though it was, it was 
regarded as the first victory of the Congress and its method of con¬ 
stitutional agitation. The hope of the Congress was further raised 
by the success of its efforts in Britain, to which reference will be 
made later. It was also heartened by the message of the Irish Home 
Rulers conveyed through Dadabhai Naoroji, the President of the 
Lahore Session: “Do not forget to tell your colleagues that the 
Ireland Home Rule members in Parliament are at your back in the 
cause of the Indian people.” 

Henceforth the Congress did never falter in its onward march 
from year to year, buoyed up with courage and hope for ultimate 
success. Though there was no essential change either in its ideal 
and outlook, or in its method of agitation, it came to be gradually 
recognized both by friends and foes, in India and in Britain, to be a 
potent force in the public life of India. ' 

It is not necessary to describe the sessions of the Congress year 
after year, or to give an account of the various resolutions passed in 
them. A general account of the more important reforms demanded 
by the Congress during the first twenty years must suffice. 

The demand for the abolition of the India Council, passed in the 
first session, was reiterated and a proposal was made to replace it by 
a Standing Committee of the House of Commons to advise the 
Secretary of State. 

The Congress made persistent demands for expanding both the 
Supreme and Provincial Legislative Councils and increasing the po¬ 
pular element in them by election of non-official members. The 


548 


THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 


various resolutions passed by the Congress on this subject from year 
to year have been quoted above 44 . When the Indian Councils Act was 
passed in 1892, the Congress regretted that it did not concede to the 
people the right of electing their own representatives to the Council, 
and expressed the hope “that the rules, now being prepared under the 
Act, will be framed on the lines of Mr. Gladstone’s declaration in 
the House of Commons.” In the next two sessions, in 1893 and 
1894, the Congress passed resolutions, pointing out that 'material 
alterations are necessary alike in the rules of the Government of 
India and in the practice of most of the Local Governments if real 
effect is to be given to the spirit of the Act’. 

In 1904, the Congress went one step further and demanded 
representation of Indians in the British House of Commons, each 
Province or Presidency of India returning at least two members. 
It also asked for “the appointment of Indian representatives (who 
shall be nominated by the elected members of the Legislative Coun¬ 
cils) as members of the India Council in London and of the Executive 
Councils of the Government of India and the Governments of Bom¬ 
bay and Madras”. 

It is hardly necessary to add that year after year the Congress 
passed resolutions, protesting against the abuses, and urging for 
reforms, in the various branches of administration. The resolution 
for the separation of the Executive and Judicial functions was passed 
no less than ten times between 1886 and 1906. Trial by jury, re¬ 
form of the police administration, reduction of salt tax and income- 
tax, extension of the Permanent Settlement, etc., formed the subjects 
of resolutions passed in many sessions. In 1898 the Congress ex¬ 
pressed “its deep sense of disapproval of the reactionary policy of 
Government with regard to the Local Self-Government, recently 
inaugurated by the introduction of the Calcutta Municipal Bill into 
the Bengal Legislative Council, the creation of the Bombay City Im¬ 
provement Trust without adequate popular representation, and its 
action in other directions.” The general attitude of the Congress 
towards the British administrative system may be gathered from the 
following resolution adopted in 1891: 

“That this Congress, concurring in the views set forth in previous 
Congresses, affirms—that fully fifty millions of the population, a 
number yearly increasing, are dragging out a miserable existence 
on the verge of starvation, and that, in every decade, several millions 
actually perish by starvation. That this unhappy condition is lar¬ 
gely due to— 

(a) The exclusion of the people of India from a due participation 
in the administration, and all control over the finances of their own 
country... 


549 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

(b) The extravagant cost of the present administration, military 
and civil, but specially the former; and to 

(c) a short-sighted system of Land Revenue administration, 
whereby not only is all improvement in the agriculture of the coun¬ 
try, on which nine-tenths of the population depend for subsistence, 
rendered impossible, but the gradual deterioration of that agriculture 
assured. 

“That hence it has become imperatively necessary— 

That the cost of the administration be greatly reduced in the 
military branch, by a substantial reduction of the Standing Army, by 
the substitution of long-termed local European troops like those of 
the Hon. E.L Company for the present short-term Imperial regi¬ 
ments with their heavy cost of recruitment in England, in transport 
and of the excessive mortality amongst non-acclimatized youths; 
by the cessation of the gigantic waste of money that has gone on 
now for several years, on so-called Frontier Defences, and by a 
strict economy in the Commissariat, Ordnance, and Store Depart¬ 
ments; and in the Civil Branch, by the wide substitution of a cheaper 
indigenous agency for the extremely costly imported Staff; and that' 
measures be at once taken to give, as was promised by the British 
Government thirty years ago, fixity and permanence to the. Land 
Revenue demand and thus permit capital and labour to combine to 
develop the agriculture of the country, which, under the existing 
system of Temporary Settlements in recent times often lasting for 
short periods, in some cases only extending to 10 and 12 years, is 
found to be impossible; and to establish agricultural banks.” 

The resolution has been quoted at length as it indicates that the 
Indian National Congress fully represented the popular feelings about 
the condition of the masses, and that it did not merely indulge in 
destructive criticism but also made constructive suggestions with a. 
view to removing the greatest evils of the British administration. 

As mentioned above, the Congress was insistent in its demands 
for holding simultaneous examinations in London and India for ad¬ 
mission to the Civil Service, and raising the maximum age for com¬ 
petitors 4,5 . The Congress placed on record “its deep regret at the 
resolution of the Government of India on the Report of the Public 
Service Commission” (appointed in 1886), 46 and pointed out in de¬ 
tail how the Government resolution had substantially reduced the 
number of higher appointments which were recommended by the 
Commission to be held by the Indians. It was resolved to send a 
petition to the House of Commons on the subject drawing its atten¬ 
tion to the grave discontent caused by the Report of the Commission 
as well as the action of the Government. 


550 


THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 


The Congress guarded the interest of India like a vigilant watch¬ 
dog, and never failed to record its emphatic protest against any mea¬ 
sure likely to adversely affect the interest of India. Thus in 1894, 
in the Madras session, it protested against the “injustice and impolicy 
of imposing excise duty on cottons manufactured in British India, as 
such excise is calculated to cripple seriously the infant Mill industry 
in this country’', and put on record its firm conviction that in pro¬ 
posing this excise “the interests of India have been sacrificed to those 
of Lancashire”. Similar protests were recorded against many other 
Government measures which, in the opinion of the Congress, would 
inflict unnecessary and unjustified hardship on the people, or would 
injure their true interest. 

III. THE BRITISH REACTION TO THE 

INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 

© 

Since the inauguration of the Indian National Congress it repre¬ 
sented the voice of the politically conscious India, and the British 
attitude towards it may be justly regarded as the touchstone of Bri¬ 
tish liberalism and the key to the British policy towards India. The 
Indians were not left long in doubt as to what that attitude was 
likely to be. Almost immediately after the first session of the Con¬ 
gress was over, there was a leading article on the subject in The 
Times of London, the spokesman of the British people and the most 
renowned newspaper, in the whole world. The following extract 
from it may therefore be rightly interpreted as a very free and frank 
expression of general British opinion on the subject. 

After summing up, in its own way, the various resolutions pas¬ 
sed by the Congress, The Times comments: 

“The first question which this series of resolutions will suggest 
is whether India is ripe for the transformation which they involve. 
If this can be answered in the affirmative, the days of English rule 
are numbered. If India can govern itself, our stay in the country is 
no longer called for. All we have to do is to preside over the con¬ 
struction of the new system and then to leave it to work. The 
lawyers and school masters and newspaper editors will step into 
the vacant place and will conduct affairs with no help from us. Those 
who know India will be the first to recognise the absurd impracti¬ 
cability of such a change. But it is to nothing less than this that 
the resolutions of the Congress point. If they wer£ carried out, the 
result would soon be that very little would remain to England except 
the liability which we should have assumed for the entire Indian 
debt. Then, however, would be the time at which the representative 
character of the late Congress would be subjected to a crucial test. 
Our correspondent tells us that the delegates fairly represent the 


551 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


education and intellectual power of India. That they can talk, and 
that they can write, we are in no doubt at all. The whole business 
of their lives has been a training for such work as this. But that 
they can govern wisely, or that they can enforce submission to their 
rule, wise or unwise, we are not equally sure. That the! entire 
Mahomedan population of India has steadily refused to have any¬ 
thing to do with them is a sufficiently ominous fact. Even if the 
proposed changes were to stop short of the goal to which they ob¬ 
viously tend, they would certainly serve to weaken the vigour of the 
Executive and to make the good government of the country a more 
difficult business than it has ever been. The Viceroy’s Council al¬ 
ready includes some nominated native members. To throw it open 
to elected members, and to give minorities a statutable right to be 
heard before a Parliamentary Committee would be an introduction 
of Home Rule for India in about as troublesome a form as could 
be devised. Do what we will, the government of India cannot be 
made constitutional. If it works well, neither England nor India 
can have any reason to be dissatisfied with it. The educated classes 
may find fault with their exclusion from full political rights. Poli¬ 
tical privileges they can obtain in the degree in which they prove 
themselves deserving of them. But it was by force that India was 
won , and it is by force that India must be governed, in whatever 
hands the government of the country may be vested. If we were 
to withdraw, it would be in favour not of the most fluent tongue or 
of the most ready pen, but the strongest arm and the sharpest sword. 
It would, perhaps, be well for the members of the late Congress to 
reconsider their position from this practical point of view.” 47 

* The outburst of The Times is of more than passing interest. Its 
fundamental assumptions were that the Congress demands for the 
political reforms were tantamount to Home Rule, and that the 
Indians were by no means fit for it. As was pointed out at the time in 
the Quarerly Journal of the Poona Sarvajanik Sabha, 48 the people of 
the neighbouring island of Ceylon enjoyed far greater political 
rights and privileges than the Indians, though both were under the 
British Crown. In Ceylon there was no such racial discrimination 
in the eye of the law as was sought to be prevented by the Ilbert Bill. 
The maximum age for candidates at the competitive examination 
for Civil Service was 24 instead of 19 as in India. Ceylon had 
already effected the disestablishment of the English Church which 
received no grant from the public exchequer. The most important 
point in the present context was the character of the Legislative 
Council in Ceylon as compared with that in India. The Ceylon 
Council was more representative in character as the non-official 
members were elected, not nominated. It possessed the right of 


552 


THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 


interpellating on executive matters, and complete control over finan¬ 
ces, as the annual budget required the sanction of the legislature. 
The result was that Ceylon, unlike India, had not to bear the cost of 
Abhyssinian War and Egyptian expedition, or the expenses for the 
entertainment of the Sultan of Turkey in London. After pointing 
out all these differences the Journal pertinently asked the question 
whether the preferential treatment to the Ceylonese is justified by 
their superiority to the Indian in any respect. 

The Times would have been hard put to it to answer this ques¬ 
tion. It would be difficult to maintain that the Ceylonese have ever 
been more distinguished than the Indians, either in regard to political 
ability or in cultural progress. As a matter of fact, Ceylon is con¬ 
tiguous to India and may be regarded, for all practical purposes, as 
part and parcel of India. Its population always contained a very 
strong element of Indians as it does today. These facts could not have 
possibly been unknown to the editor of The Times. To denounce as 
preposterous the general political demands of the Indians formulat¬ 
ed by the Congress, which did not substantially exceed what was 
already enjoyed by the Ceylonese, betokened a deep-seated policy of 
never relinquishing the hold on India. This alone satisfactorily ex¬ 
plains the attitude maintained by the British Government towards 
India. The writer of the letters to the Englishman, mentioned 
above, 49 and the article in The Times, in an unguarded moment, let 
the cat out of the bag; but they truly represented the real British 
policy, which was usually hidden under a cloak of liberalism and 
sweet phrases. Through these, and not through the liberal group of 
Fawcett, Bright and others, spoke the real voice of Britannia. 

The British people were as usual apathetic to the demands of 
the Congress. Lord Ripon wrote to Sir Henry Cotton from England 
to this effect in 1887 as follows: “I fully share your opinion as to the 
importance of the reorganization of the Legislative Councils. But to 
obtain any attention to that or any other Indian question from the 
people of this country at the present time is simply impossible. Men’s 
thoughts, so much at least of them as they are able to give to poli¬ 
tics, are totally absorbed now upon Irish affairs, and they have not 
five minutes to give to any other matter whatsoever, let alone the 
affairs of India”. 50 This was distinctly to the advantage of the 
officials both in India and England. "‘Not only was the India Office 
opposed to Indian reforms, but many of its operations were conduct¬ 
ed under cover of secrecy. As Florence Nightingale wrote to Wed- 
derbum (referring to Randolph Churchill, who was Secretary of 
State for India in 1885), “Lord Randolph, the ‘Boy with the drum\ is 
doing untold harm—literally untold, because the India Office is a 
secret society. , ’ 61 


553 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


Lord Salisbury (who had been Secretary of State for India from 
1874, during the period of the passage of the Vernacular Press Act, 
and Prime Minister from 1886 to 1892) expressed his opposition to the 
Congress in a memorandum in 1888 regarding the granting of legis¬ 
lative powers to elected councillors. He said: “I think I am not 
wrong in assuming that the men who will be brought to the fore by 
this plan will be (in Bengal) Bengalee lawyers, agents, newspaper 
writers... In India they are the class among whom disaffection is 
the strongest, and they are most competent to use the weapon which 
membership of a legislative Council would place in their hands to 
embarrass and damage the Government.. .1 cannot conceive the ob¬ 
ject of introducing this dangerous principle into the constitution of 
the proposed Councils. We shall in no way please the class on 
whose goodwill the submission of India depends: we shall not re¬ 
concile our only enemies, but we shall give them arms against our¬ 
selves”. At the time of the introduction of Lord Cross’s Councils 
Bill into the House of Lords in 1890, Lord Salisbury (Prime Minister 
of Britain at the time) was still in opposition to the principle of 
election. He commented on its application to India: “The principle of 
election or Government by representation is not an Eastern idea; it 
does not fit Eastern minds”, and further, “Do not imagine that you 
can introduce it in small doses, and that it will be satisfied by that 
concession”. 1 - 2 

The Anglo-Indian Press was generally hostile towards the Con¬ 
gress. In January, 1889, the Calcutta Review observed: “The Com 
gress then is something more than a Political Club. It is a Revo¬ 
lutionary League... .It is obvious that agitation is on foot which may 
in certain events lead to the most serious consequences to the Govern¬ 
ment and the country.” 63 

The view that the Anglo-Indian Press was merely the mouthpiece 
of official policy is supported by such articles as “India for the Indians, 
or India for England?”, in which a member of the Civil Service asks: 
“Is the peace of India to be sacrificed to the ambition of Babudom? 
Is the stability of the empire to be endangered for a set of Parlia¬ 
mentary Pecksniffs? Are we to forget the triple strife between 
French, Dutch and English for Hindustan? Is Plassey to go for 
nothing?” 64 An editorial on the Congress in the Calcutta Review 
called upon all Government servants who are “committed to an open 
programme of sedition against the power on which.... they depend 
for their daily bread” to first resign their government posts. 63 

The attitude of the Government of India towards the Indian 
National Congress has been one of steady and increasing hostility. 
As related above, Fe many persons hold that it was at Lord Dufferin’s 


554 


THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 


suggestion that the Indian National Congress as a political organiza¬ 
tion came into being. But after the first two sessions were over, the 
demands of the Congress, though extremely moderate in the eyes of 
the Indians, upset Lord Dufferin. The following extracts from his 
correspondence with Lord Cross, the Secretary of State for India, 
would enable anyone to gauge the real attitude of both to the Con¬ 
gress. 


1. Duffefrin to Cross, 1 February, 1887. 

“I think on the whole the meeting of the Indian Congress at 
Calcutta has had an excellent effect, though not exactly in the direc¬ 
tion its promoters anticipated. In the first place, it has given us in 
some degree the intellectual measure of these gentlemen, and has 
enabled us to gauge their political capacity.... My impression is that 
they are far more able and respectable in their individual capacity 
than as members of a rather hysterical assembly, in which the more 
violent and silly of their number rule the roost (rest?). On the other 
hand, their extravagant pretensions, as embodied in their resolutions, 
have aroused the opposition and indignation both of the Mahomedan 
community and of the conservative section of the society, which is 
both large and influential.” 

2. Cross to Dufferin, 25 February, 1887. 

“You have brought up a favourable view of the Indian Congress 
at Calcutta. This noisy few will no doubt always pass resolutions of 
the most advanced and at the same time of the most unpractical cha¬ 
racter. But the masses of the people do not want to be ruled by the 
Baboos, and it is our duty as well as our interest, and still more the 
interesc of the people, that there is to be English rule.” 

3. Dufferin to Cross, 24 September, 1888. 

“A new feature in connexion with the Congress movement has 
been developed, in the shape of a certain number of Government ser¬ 
vants in various provinces acting as agents of the propaganda, and 
using their official position to collect money on its behalf. Several 
Provincial Administrations have called our attention to the subject, 
and have asked for instructions. I am inclined to tell them in reply 
that they must put a stop to all such proceedings on their own res¬ 
ponsibility, but that of course we will support their action in doing 
so.” 

4. Cross to Dufferin, 17 February, 1888. 

“I must, I am afraid, trouble you for your opinion as to these 
Congresses or Conferences or whatever they call themselves. Will 
they grow or lessen? What weight is to be attached to their declara- 

555 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


tion? Is it wise to take any action in any way? I know you have 
carefully studied the whole question, and that you are quite alive to 
all its difficulties and dangers.” 

In reply to the last, DufTerin forwarded to Cross a paper from 
General Chesney and a letter of Sir Auckland Colvin on the Con¬ 
gress. Chesney’s report runs to 19 pages. He states that though men 
like Sir Madhava Rao and others have joined the Congress, it is really 
run by a class of extremists. He then adds: “What was in 1885 only 
an experiment, in 1887 bears the appearance of becoming, as they 
call it themselves, a prominent national institution.. . .A strong 
feeling of insecurity inherent in our rule has been shared by some 
of the ablest Indian administrators: Mountstuart Elphinstone, Lord 
Metcalfe, Sir Thomas Munro, have given expression to it in vivid 
terms—a feeling that the people at large may some day combine 
to make our government impossible, that a movement may arise 
too widespread to make head against. There is strong evidence, 
I believe, that the beginnings of such a movement are now to be dis¬ 
cerned, a movement directed by the agitators who are ‘running’ the 
Congress, which, if not stopped, will produce an outbreak, in which 
the sympathies of the native army might or might not be enlisted, 
but the great danger of which would consist in its wide extent. 
Hitherto, in all our struggles the people of the country, if not on our 
side, have not been against us. Our wars have been carried on with 
mercenary armies against mercenary troops, and when the enemy 
has been conquered in the field, the people in the country have quickly 
accepted our rule. What difficulties we have encountered hitherto 
would be nothing to the difficulties that would arise if the people of 
the whole country, or even any large part of it, were to become ac¬ 
tively hostile to our rule. This is the result which the agents who 
are working the National Congress are trying, whether they mean 
it or not, to bring about.” 

In conclusion, Chesney recommends that “further meetings of 
the Congress should be prohibited.” 

Sir Auckland Colvin in his letter to Lord DufTerin, dated 10th 
June, 1888, takes a more moderate view, but deprecates Congress 
being invited at Government House as it gives them prestige, and 
advises the Government not to yield to popular demand. 

In a memorable speech at St. Andrews Day Dinner, Calcutta, on 
30 November, 1888, Lord DufTerin gave expression to his feelings in 
words which may be quoted in extenso, for it may be said without 
much exaggeration that they represented the settled policy which 
Britain pursued ever since with remarkable tenacity. Though occa¬ 
sionally forced to yield and make concessions to the strong cuirent 


556 


THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 


of Indian opinion, the principles laid down by Duffer in formed the 
basic policy of the British Cabinet and the Government of India. Lord 
Dufferin observed: 

“Some intelligent, loyal, patriotic and well-meaning men are 
desirous of taking, I will not say a further step in advance, but a very 
big jump into the unknown—by the application to India of democra¬ 
tic methods of government, and the adoption of parliamentary system, 
which England herself has only reached by slow degrees and through 
the discipline of many centuries of preparation. The ideal authori¬ 
tatively suggested, as I understand, is the creation of a representative 
body or bodies in which the official element shall be in a minority, 
who shall have what is called the power of the purse, and who, 
through this instrumentality, shall be able to bring the British exe¬ 
cutive into subjection to their will. The organization of battalions 
of native militia and volunteers for the internal and external defence 
of the country is the next arrangement suggested, and the first prac¬ 
tical result to be obtained would be the reduction of the British army 
to one-half its present numbers. Well, gentlemen, I am afraid that 
the people of England will not readily be brought to the acceptance 
of this programme, or to allow such an assembly, or a number of such 
assemblies, either to interfere with its armies, or to fetter and cir¬ 
cumscribe the liberty of action either of the provincial governments 
or of the Supreme Executive. In the first place, the scheme is emi¬ 
nently unconstitutional; for the essence of constitutional government 
is that responsibility and power should be committed to the same 
hands. The idea of irresponsible councils, whose members could 
arrest the march of Indian legislation, or nullify the policy of the 
British executive in India, without being liable to be called to account 
for their acts in a way in which an opposition can be called to account 
in a constitutional country, must be regarded as an impracticable 
anomaly. Indeed, so obviously impossible would be the appli¬ 
cation of any such system in the circumstances of the case, that I do 
not believe it has been seriously advocated by any native statesman 
of the slightest weight or importance.. .less than one per cent, has 
any knowledge of English;.. .it may be said that, out of a population 
of two hundred million, there are only a very few thousands who 
may be said to possess adequate qualifications, so far as education 
and an acquaintance with Western ideas or even Eastern learning are 
concerned, for taking an intelligent view of those intricate and com¬ 
plicated economic and political questions affecting the destinies of 
so many millions of men which are almost daily being presented for 
the consideration of the Government of India. I would ask then, 
how any reasonable man could imagine that the British Government 
would be content to allow this microscopic minority to control their 


557 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

administration of that majestic and multiform empire for whose 
safety and welfare they are responsible in the eyes of God and before 
the face of civilization?.. .At present, however, it appears to me a 
groundless contention that it represents the people of India... .1 do 
not wish at all to imply that I view with anything but favour and 
sympathy the desire of the educated classes of India to be more 
largely associated with us in the conduct of the affairs of their coun¬ 
try. Such an ambition is not only very natural, but very worthy, 
provided due regard can be had to the circumstances of the country 
and to the conditions under which the British administration in India 
discharges its duties.” 67 

Three days after he delivered this speech Dufferin sent a copy 
of it to Cross with a covering letter, a portion of which is quoted 
below: 


Dufferin to Cross s 3 December, 1888. 

“Of course you will have been carefully watching the pro¬ 
gress of what may be called the Home Rule movement in this coun¬ 
try. It is neither formidable, nor—as far as most of the people who 
take part in it are concerned—either a disloyal or an illegitimate 
movement, though we must never forget that in it, and connected 
with it, there is a very real and bitter element of what I call ‘bastard* 
disloyalty, represented by a small Bengalee clique in Calcutta, whose 
organ is the Mirror. I say ‘bastard’ disloyalty, because, though this 
party hates Englishmen and the English rule, and desires all it can 
to injure and discredit them, I do not believe that in their own secret 
hearts they are aiming at any special ideal as a substitute. It is just 
possible they vfiay be in communication with Russia, but I do not 
think they are. At all events, they ought to know that they would 
find Russia’s little finger bigger than our thigh. For all that, we must 
regard them as our real enemies. On the other hand, the Mahome- 
dans, the Oudh Talookdars, and even most of the responsible and 
sensible Bengalees, have an instinctive dislike of the Congress and 
of its works; but midway between the two parties there stands a con¬ 
siderable mass of irresolute opinion which has been watching with 
wonder the immunity extended to what in its view are the insubordi¬ 
nate proceedings of the Congress-Wallahs, such as Mr. Hume’s fool¬ 
ish threats of insurrection, and the dissemination of the libels and 
calumnies contained in the Tamil Catechism and similar publica¬ 
tions. I considered therefore that before I left it would be my duty 
to give some sign of the light in which I regarded such of the Con¬ 
gress demands and proceedings as are extravagant and reprehensi¬ 
ble. Accordingly I took the opportunity of a Scotch dinner at 


558 


THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 


Calcutta to make the speech which I am sending to you and to the 
members of your Council.” 

Dufferin’s hostile attitude towards the Congress was further dis¬ 
played by his efforts to stop all pecuniary help to the Congress. 

On 8 October, 1888, he wrote to Cross: “Bye the bye I ought to 
mention that some months ago the Maharaja of Mysore was said to 
have contributed largely to the National Congress. Though what 
really happened did not quite amount to this, I thought it well to 
send him a verbal message, the purport of which was reduced to 
writing in the accompanying form. Now the Nizam has sent even a 
larger contribution to the anti-Congress movement, so I have des¬ 
patched an intimation to him in the same sense.” Dufferin further 
added that Government servants were collecting money for Congress, 
but Lieutenant-Governors had been authorised to stop this. 

The effect of Lord Dufferin’s hostile attitude was almost imme¬ 
diately felt. After the fourth session the Government servants were 
forbidden to take any part in the proceedings of the Congress. Re¬ 
ference has been made to Colvin’s inveterate hostility to the Con¬ 
gress and his correspondence with Hume. “In this exchange it be¬ 
comes apparent that the difference of opinion between Hume, who 
had identified himself with the Indian subjects, and Colvin, who re¬ 
presented the British ruling class, was a fundamental one, and one 
which at this time became more crystallized as the Congress was 
formulating its demands”. 63 Lord Lansdowne took a more liberal 
view of the Congress. “He said in December, 1890, that the Congress 
was a legitimate movement which officials could not participate in but 
which they should not impede. Official recognition of the Congress 
dates from this statement. Lansdowne is further reported to have 
referred to the Congress as ‘the advanced Liberal Party in India”. 59 
But Lansdowne was cautious as to the extent to which the reform of 
the Councils should be carried out, particularly with regard to the 
expansion of their functions. “In a despatch to Cross (Secretary of 
State for India) on May 25, 1889, Lansdowne and his Council sup¬ 
ported Cross’ proposals to allow the Councils the right of interpella¬ 
tion, and added, ‘In our opinion the Budget should be submitted to 
the Legislative Council for discussion and criticism only, and that no 
power should be given to make a motion regarding it.’ Also it was 
under Lansdowne’s administration that in January, 1891, censorship 
by a government political agent of all newspapers was imposed. 
Therefore it cannot be maintained that the policy of Lansdowne was 
basically more favourable to the Congress than that of Dufferin, even 
though his public utterances were somewhat less vituperative.”eo The 
next Viceroys and the Secretaries of State continued the traditional 


559 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

hostile policy against the Congress. Lord George Hamilton wrote 
to Lord Elgin on 11 December, 1896: “It is gratifyng to note that 
Congress, as a political power, has steadily gone down during the 
last few years, and this is, I think, largely due to the indifference 
and unconcern with which the Indian Government has tolerated its 
proceedings.” On 24 June, 1897, Hamilton again wrote to Elgin: 
“The more I see and hear of the National Congress Party, the more 
I am impressed with the seditious and double-sided character of the 
prime-movers of the organization.” 

Curiously enough, though Hamilton spoke of the decline in the 
power of the Congress, he was very anxious to curb its influence. On 
1st May, 1899, he wrote to Lord Curzon suggesting three measures to 
counteract Congress activities. These were: 

1. To ascertain who, amongst princes and noblemen, subscrib¬ 
ed to the Congress fund and to let them know that the 
Government were aware of the fact. 

2. To prefer for honours and distinctions those who were not 
Congressmen. 

3. To exercise a greater control over education, its organisa¬ 
tion and text books. 

How Lord Curzon followed his chief’s instructions may be easily 
gathered from his activities. There can be hardly any doubt that 
the Universities Act of 1904 was inspired by the item No. 3, which 
also accounts for the fact that Curzon forced Lee-Wamer’s Citizen of 
India as a text-book upon unwilling universities. 61 As to item No. 
1, he wrote to Hamilton on 7 June, 1899: “I gather that you want me 
to ascertain what native princes or noblemen contribute to Congress 
funds and I will endeavour to discover this.” 62 But Curzon hardly 
required any inspiration. On November 18, 1900, he wrote to Hamil¬ 
ton: “My own belief is that the Congress is tottering to its fall, and 
one of my greatest ambitions while in India is to assist it to a peace¬ 
ful demise.” 

It is interesting to note how Hamilton followed up his general 
instructions by concrete illustrations. He recommended that Mr. 
Bhownagree should be included in the Honours list, for “he has fought 
the violent portion of the Congress with courage and ability and 
seems to me an able and thoroughly loyal man.” 62 * Hamilton also 
asked Lord Curzon to grant the request of Mrs. Besant as she “had 
been very useful in Madras in combating the Congress leaders, and 
denouncing Western methods of agitation as wholly unsuited to India, 
and endeavouring to establish a system of modern education associated 


560 


THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 


with definite religious and moral training.. .It seems to me that 
this college might be a useful antidote, and if so, it would be worth 
our while to try and smooth down the difficulties which have 
occurred between the Committee of this college and Sir Anthony 
MacdonnelI.” 621) 

In other words, the Government adopted the policy of favouring 
the anti-Congress elements and putting pressure upon the rich and 
the aristocracy, who were amenable to Government control, to with¬ 
draw their patronage from the Congress. This was done with re¬ 
markable success, and few would have dared openly to support the 
Congress, and thereby provoke the wrath of the British Government. 
Unfortunately, this unholy conspiracy between the British and Indian 
authorities against the Congress could not achieve its object, owing 
to one miscalculation. They did not perceive that the Indian 
National Congress derived its real strength and support from the 
middle class and not from the wealthy and the aristocracy. 

But Hamilton had other weapons in his armoury to destroy 
the influence of the Congress. In his letter to Lord Curzon, dated 
20 September, 1899, lie writes: 

“I think the real danger to our rule in India, not now but 50 years 
hence, is the gradual adoption and extension of Western ideas of 
agitation and organisation; and, if we could break the educated 
Hindu party into two sections holding widely different views, we 
should, by such a division, strengthen our position against the 
subtle and continuous attack which the spread of education must 
make upon our present system of Government/* 

This is the genesis of the policy of “rally the Moderates”, which 
was followed with conspicuous success in the twentieth century, 
specially by Morley and Montagu, to which reference will be made 

in the next volume. 

It is hardly necessary to add that the British, both at home and 
in India, were very glad that important communities had not joined 
the Congress. Lord Cross wrote to Lord Beay, Governor of Bom¬ 
bay, on 23 January, 1890: “It is, however, very satisfactory to And 
that the Mahometans and the Parsees have as a body separated 
from the Congress.” 

It would appear from what has been said above that the British 
came to look upon the Congress as a great menace to the security 
of their Indian Empire. Hence the Indian National Congress be¬ 
came almost a nightmare with the British politicians. It is inte¬ 
resting to note that in some quarters, Duffer in was held mainly 

561 


86 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


responsible for this evil. Lord Hamilton wrote to Lord Curzon on 
17 May, 1900: 

“Dufferin ... is a thorough Irishman; and I do not believe he 
has been in any single place of responsibility and authority in which 
he did not more or less purchase popularity by leaving to his succes¬ 
sors unpleasant legacies. I attribute largely to his mismanagement 
and want of judgement the origin and development of the Congress 
Party; and he could, as you say, at that time have effected restric¬ 
tions in the admission of natives to the higher ranks of the service 
that at present are quite impossible.” 62 ' 

IV. POLITICAL WORK IN ENGLAND 

Reference has been made above to the political propaganda 
carried on in England, both by liberal Englishmen as well as by 
Indians, on behalf of India. 63 Hume, who conceived the idea of 
Indian National Congress, was also “firmly convinced that the British 
people desired fair play for India, and would see that justice was done, 
provided only they understood the merits of the case.” 64 As soon as 
the idea of the Congress took a definite shape, Hume proceeded to Eng¬ 
land and consulted many liberal Englishmen and faithful friends of 
India, including Lord Ripon, ‘as to the best means of getting hearing 
for Indian political aspirations from the British Parliament and pub¬ 
lic’. The general consensus of opinion was that “a vigorous and sus¬ 
tained propaganda must be kept up throughout the country (Britain), 
by means of public meetings, lectures, pamphlets, articles, and cor¬ 
respondence in the press, and by securing the sympathy of local asso¬ 
ciations and of influential public men”. After the Indian National 
Congress had consolidated public opinion in India, Hume was more 
and more convinced that the future political work lay more in Britain 
than in India. 

He pointed out that ‘the European officials in India must neces¬ 
sarily be antagonistic to the Congress programme whose tendency 
was to curtail the virtually autocratic powers exercised by them, and 
as they are all-powerful, it is not possible to secure any reforms*. 
“Our only hope lies in awakening the British public to a sense of the 
wrongs” of the Indian people. 66 As Wedderbum put it, “a frontal 
attack on bureaucratic power, firmly entrenched at Simla—with all 
the armoury of repression at its command—was hopeless. But 
success was within reach, by means of a flanking movement, that is, 
by an appeal to the British elector.” 66 Inspired by this idea Hume, 
in a letter dated 10 February, 1889, pressed upon Congress workers 
the vital need of carrying on a full-fledged political propaganda in 
Britain. “The least that we could do,” said he, “would be to provide 

562 


THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 


ample funds—for sending and keeping constantly in England depu¬ 
tations of our ablest speakers to plead their country’s cause—to enable 
our British Committee to keep up an unbroken series of public 
meetings, whereat the true state of affairs in India might be expound¬ 
ed—to flood Great Britain with pamphlets, leaflets, newspapers, and 
magazine articles—in a word to carry on agitation there, on the lines 
and scale of that in virtue of which the Anti-Com-Law League 
triumphed”. 67 

In accordance with this scheme, a paid Agency was established, 
in 1888 under William Digby with a regular office, and a vigorous cam¬ 
paign was carried on in Great Britain. “Then thousand copies of the 
Report of the third Congress, and many thousand copies of speeches 
and pamphlets were printed and circulated, while Messrs. W. C. 
Bonnerjee and Eardley Norton, in connection with the Agency, ad¬ 
dressed a number of public meetings, and Mr. Bradlaugh delivered 
many lectures on Indian questions in different parts of England.” A 
permanent committee, under the title (finally adopted) of “The 
British Committee of the Indian National Congress”, was started in 
July, 1889, with Sir W. Wedderburn as Chairman, Mr. Digby as Secre¬ 
tary, and a number of distinguished Englishmen and two Indians 
(W. C. Bonnerjee and Dadabhai Nabroji) as members. The Indian 
National Congress of 1889 confirmed its constitution and voted 
Rs. 45,000 for its maintenance, the amount to be raised by a 
proportional contribution from each of the Provincial Congress 
Committees. 68 

The Committee decided to wage war against the hostile official 
propaganda, particularly of the India Office, on three fronts; in Par¬ 
liament, by organizing an Indian Parliamentary Committee; on the 
platform, by arranging public meetings throughout the country; and 
in the Press, by founding the journal “India” as an organ of Congress 
views. 

The Indian Parliamentary Committee gained great strength in 
1893 when it comprised 154 members of the House of Commons. 
Their activities led to the appointment of the “Welby Royal Commis¬ 
sion on Indian expenditure and the apportionment of charge between 
India and the United Kingdom.” It is also probably due to their 
efforts that the House of Commons adopted in 1893 a resolution in 
favour of holding simultaneous examinations for the I.C.S. 68a 

A number of public meetings and lectures were addressed, not 
only by liberal Englishmen but also by eminent Indians like Surendra- 
nath Banerji and G. K. Gokhale. Gokhale made a very good im¬ 
pression by his political speeches at Manchester and other places. 
He spoke at a meeting of the Undergraduates* Union at Cambridge, 

563 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

where “his motion in favour of more popular institutions for India was 
carried by 161 to 62.” In addition to public meetings and lectures, 
the interest in India was kept alive through addresses to associations 
and other select audiences, social entertainments, and interviews with 
ministers, members of Parliament, editors, and other public men. 69 

The main function of the journal, India, was to supply reliable 
information to the British public about the actual state of affairs in 
India, in order to counteract the influence of the London Press whose 
articles on Indian subjects were “mainly supplied by Anglo-Indians 
unfavourable to Indian aspirations.” The India supplied true re¬ 
cord of “current facts, events and opinions” in India and thus 
furnished “arms and materials to those who were willing to fight for 
the cause of India”. Its circulation was not very large, but it was re¬ 
cognized as “the chief purveyor of Indian news to a large part of the 
Liberal Press”. 

It may be noted in conclusion that political propaganda by the 
Indians was also carried on in Europe outside Britain. To cite an 
example, the veteran Indian politician Dadabhai Naoroji placed the 
Indian question before international opinion at the Congress of Socia¬ 
lists at Amsterdam, on 17 August, 1904. The following summary 
account is taken from the Temps of 19 August, 1904:— 

“At to-day’s sitting a speech has been delivered which has 
caused a profound sensation and has marked, at the same time, 
the entry into the International party of Socialists of a represen¬ 
tative of the Indian race. 

* 

“This delegate is called Dadabhai Naoroji. He is an old 
man. He has been fighting for fifty years for the amelioration 
of the lot of his countrymen. 

“He recalled that the Indian Empire has been founded by 
the English solely by the co-operation of the Indians, who fought 
for them and paid for their wars. To recompense the Indians, 
the English have subjected them to an execrable rule. A per¬ 
manent drain impoverishes India. Two hundred millions of 
rupees are paid every year by the country to the officials who are 
Englishmen. One hundred million alone remains in the country. 
On the other hand, every year commerce takes out of India two 
hundred millions of rupees. It is an impoverishment of 300 mil¬ 
lions of rupees or 460 million francs... This accounts for the 
frightful misery amongst the people. When the harvest is good 
a large portion of the people have scarcely the wherewithal to 
appease their hunger. When the harvest fails, there is famine 
and millions die of starvation. It is not that the produce is 

564 


THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 

insufficient for the requirements of the country, but it is too poor 
to buy back the produce of its labour. Huge exportations of rice 
and grain have taken place at a time when the cultivators were 
dying in inanition. 

“In 1833 and in 1858 England by solemn pledges undertook 
to treat the indigenes as its own subjects. She has conferred all 
the public offices on her own people. She has oppressed and 
ground down the Indians; she has broken her pledged word. Her 
conduct ought to be branded.” 

After this discourse the president had recorded that: “This 
Congress unanimously stigmatises the Colonial policy of England.” 70 

V. THE RELATION OF THE INDIAN NATIONAL 
CONGRESS WITH THE OLD POLITICAL ASSOCIATIONS 

It would be interesting to study the relations between the 
Indian National Congress and the political associations already 
existing in India, which continued to carry on their useful activities 
after the foundation of the Congress. Copious data are available for 
such a study so far as the British Indian Association of Calcutta is 
concerned. The early history and activities of this body, founded 
as far back as 1851, have been described above. 71 It sent delegates 
to the Congress for the first three years (1885-87), but then difference 
arose over the exact nature and function of the Indian National 
Congress. 

“In reply to a letter from the Standing Committee of the Con¬ 
gress (Calcutta), seeking the views of the British Indian Association 
on the tentative rules drawn up for the Congress, the Secretary of the 
British Indian Association stated (6th December, 1888) that while 
the Association had co-operated with the Congress for the past three 
years and would do so in future, it definitely objected to the tenta¬ 
tive rules, which aimed at changing the character of the Congress 
and making it a separate and permanent organisation. The British 
Indian Association considered the Congress as only a national confe¬ 
rence, representing the different political bodies in the country but 
not being a permanent and independent entity. The letter continued 
that the objects of the Congress did not differ materially from those 
of the existing political associations, namely, to petition the autho¬ 
rities on redress of grievances. But it would lose its representative 
character if it turned itself into a separate independent body, since 
the existing political associations would not like to function as mere 
Sub-Committees of the Congress. The letter concluded: ‘The Com¬ 
mittee are clearly of opinion that the Congress should simply be a 


565 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

conference of the representatives of the nation and nothing more, 
and with that view it should dissolve itself as soon as its sitting was 
over, leaving to the different political Associations of the country to 
carry out the objects of the conference in the way which was most 
agreeable to them. In this way unification of public opinion will be 
secured while independence of the actions of the different Associa¬ 
tions will be recognised and respected”. 72 

As the Congress refused to accept this point of view, the British 
Indian Association practically held aloof from it, for it instructed its 
delegates “not to take part in the discussion of any subject matter 
other than those relating to the expansion of the Legislative Council 
and the extension of the Permanent Settlement. The delegates were 
also forbidden to represent any other institution at the Congress”. 73 

The rift between the two political organizations, though unfor¬ 
tunate, was inevitable. “It was not because the Association re¬ 
presented the rich and the Congress the poor, or because the Asso¬ 
ciation's policy was timid while that of the Congress was bold. In 
the early days of the Congress there was not much of a difference 
between the two bodies in respect of either composition or policy. 
The rift was inevitable because of the natural pride of a political 
organisation of 40 years' standing, refusing to be swallowed up by an 
organisation just bom”. 74 

It should be noted that the British Indian Association did not 
altogether lose its prestige and importance as a political organization 
down to the end of the nineteenth century. As noted above, “when 
at the end of 1895 Gandhi came to India to ventilate the grievances 
of Indians in South Africa, he sought the help of the British Indian 
Association (November, 1895) to make necessary representations to 
the British and Indian Governments”. 76 The British Indian Asso¬ 
ciation “fully supported the views of Gandhi and sent a strong re¬ 
presentation on the subject to the Government of India on the 5th 
February, 1897.” 76 

Most of the other political associations, however, recognized the 
Indian National Congress as the central political organization repre¬ 
senting India as a whole, and regarded themselves as more or less fee¬ 
der institutions, concentrating their attention upon, and confining 
their activities to, the political regeneration of the particular pro¬ 
vinces to which they belonged. In Bengal, and later in other pro¬ 
vinces, the Annual Provincial Conference, and later even District 
Conference, became a regular feature of political activities. These 
bodies served as electoral colleges for the selection of delegates to the 
annual session of the Congress. They also formulated the political 

566 


THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 


views to be placed before the Congress, and were mainly instru¬ 
mental in giving publicity to the proceedings of the Congress and 
carrying its resolutions into effect. 77 A properly articulated system 
was thus evolved with the Indian National Congress as its apex,^and 
the local organizations (at the district or even lower level) as the 
broad base. By the beginning of the twentieth century the Indian 
National Congress had become the premier political organization of 
the country, casting into shade all the other political organizations 
in India. 

In spite of its position as the premier political organization in 
India, the Indian National Congress suffered from some serious draw¬ 
backs which were noted by eminent Indians almost from the very 
beginning. Bankim-chandra Chatterji criticised its lack of contact 
with the masses which, in his opinion, was essential for a political 
organization if it wanted to do any effective work. He also ridiculed 
its mentality of a mendicant or beggar. Some younger members 
also felt keenly on the subject, and regretted the lack of all political 
activity on the part of the Congress exept for the three days during 
which it was in session every year. Aswini-kumar Datta of Barisal 
(then a district in Bengal), who was destined to achieve great fame 
during the hectic days of the Swadeshi movement in Bengal, voiced 
this feeling in the session of the Congress held at Amraoti in 1897, 
when he denounced it as a '‘three days’ tarrvashd (fun)”. He was fully 
entitled to make this remark, for in the course of that year he had 
managed to send a petition signed by forty thousand common men, in¬ 
cluding peasants, weavers, carpenters, small traders etc., to the 
British Parliament urging the early introduction of the representa¬ 
tive system of government in India. 78 

These defects were partially removed by the Provincial Con¬ 
ferences which developed into a powerful political organization in 
Bengal. This was mainly due to the activity of the Indian Associa¬ 
tion. 'which was carried throughout the year with a network of 
branch associations spread all over the province. Thus the old po¬ 
litical organizations, wherever they were still active, supplemented 
the work of the Indian National Congress. Nevertheless, it must be 
admittted that it remained in 1905, as it was in 1885, an organization 
of the English-educated middle class, and had no right to claim a 
popular character. 

1. Hist Congr ., p. 11. 

2. See p. 512. 

3. P. 1 ff. 

4. P. 2. 

5. A Nation in Making, p. 89. 

5a„ Professor Sundar Raman, who attended the first session of the Indian National 
Congress, also refers to the meeting mentioned by Mrs. Besant. According to 

567 



THE BRITISH PARAMQUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-II 


him “Diwan Bahadur Raghunath Rao got up a special meeting of his friends ‘to 
find ways and means of bringing together Indian politicians to inaugurate a 
political movement’ ...” (Andrews and Mookerjee, p. 124). 

5b. Besant, p. 3. 

5c. Ibid. 

6. A Nation in Making, p. 98. 

7. A. C. Mazumdar, 40. 

8. Andrews and Mookerjee, 116. 

9. Ibid, 121-2. 

10. Hume, 50. 

11. Ibid, 79. 

12. Ibid, 80-1. Wedderbum corroborates the reality of such danger by his per¬ 
sonal experience of Deccan riots. Cf. Vol. IX, p. 940. 

13. For the extracts from this letter quoted below, cf. Hume, 50-53. 

14. Hume, 59-60. 

15. Introduction to Indian Politics (published by G. A. Natesan, Madras, 1898). 
Indian National Congress (Natesan)—Page A at the end. 

16. Andrews and Mookerjee, 122-4. 

17. IHQ, XXXI, 150. 

18. R.jne, 101. 

19. Ibid, 77. 

20. Ibid, 63-4; Andrews and Mookerjee, 121. 

21. Andrews and Mookerjee, 124. 

22. B.C. Pal-I, H. 13-4. 

22a. For a full discussion of this question cf. R. C. Majumdar, Glimpses of Bengal 
in the Nineteenth Century , pp. 91 ft . 

23. For Dr. Chatterji's views cf. Journal of Indian History XXXVI, 172; al®@ 
Modem Review, October, 1950, p. 273. 

24. Hume, 53. 

25. The accounts of the Congress sessions that follow, unless otherwise stated, are 
based on the published proceedings of the different sessions of the Indian Na¬ 
tional Congress. 

26. Congress, xviii. 

27. This resolution has been quoted in Vol. IX, p. 762. 

28. Appendix to the Proceedings of the First session of the Congress, pp. 78-82. 

29. Tnb is the figure mentioned by Badruddin Tyabji in his Presidential Address 
at the Madras session and supported by Mrs. Besant (p. 15). But A. C. Mazum¬ 
dar (p. 67) and Andrews and Mookerjee (p. 143) put the number respectively, 
at 406 and 412. 

30. B. C. Pal observes (op. cit. 14): “After the Congress cf Bombay, Mr. Hume came 
to Calcutta to organise the next session of the Congress that was to be held 
there. And he soon discovered the impossibility of enlisting the sympathies 
and active co-operation of politically-minded and educated Bengal if Surendra 
Nath was left out of the counsels of the Congress. He, therefore, called upon 
Surendra Nath and induced him to join the Congress.” See above, pp. 514, 533. 

30a. Besant, 15. 

30b. Ibid. 

30c. On the Present State of Indian Politics, pp. 11-2. 

30d. The Indian Mutiny of 1857, p. 412. 

'31. B. C. Pal-I, n. 35-41. 

32. Hume, 61-2. 

33. Ibid. 

34. Congress Proceedings, 1886-91; A. C. Mazumdar, 72. 

35. For details, cf. Hume, 64 ff. 

36. Ibid, 67. 

37. B. C. Pal-I, II. 48-52. 

38. For the text of the speech, cf. Lord Dutferin's Speeches delivered in India, 
pp. 237-44. It has been referred to above, and will be more fully discussed later. 

39. This view gains some support from the following passage in his letter to Lord 
Cross, Secretary of State for India, dated 3 December, 1888, forwarding a copy 
of his speech: ‘It will of course make the Home Rule party in India very angry 
and expose me to a good deal of obloquy and abuse just as I am leaving the 
country, the echoes of which may reverberate at home, but I thought it would 
clear the atmosphere and render Lanadowne’a position easier and pleasanter^ 
H. P. Ghose, a veteran old Congressman in Calcutta, told me that he foiled 
some notes in the handwriting of an eminent Ifrigfaihg&an of the time, in a 

568 



THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 


printed book belonging to him, from which it appears that Lord Dufferin pour¬ 
ed his vial of wrath upon the Congress as the political leaders refused to make 
a demonstration on his departure as they did on the occasion of Lord Riport’s 
leaving India. I have seen the notes. 

40. See p. 312. 

41. See p. 390. 

42. The amendment of Munshi Hid ay at Rasul, a delegate from Awadh, was reject¬ 
ed by the Muhammadan delegates; 16 voted for and 23 against the proposal, 
while the great bulk did not vote at all. 

43. For Englishmen’s hatred and aversion towards the Bengalis, see pp. 337-8, 373-5. 

44. Cf. Vol. IX, pp. 762-3, 767. 

45. Ibid, pp. 787 ff. 

46. Ibid, 789 ff. 

47. Appendix to the Proceeding# of the First session of the Congress, pp. 80-82. 
The italics are mine. 

48. 1885, pp. 6-7. 

49. See p. 397. 

50. IHQ, XXXI, 140. 

51. Ibid, 140-41. 

52. Ibid, 141-42. 

53. Calcutta Review, 1889, p. 142. 

54. Ibid, 1890, pp. 34-5. 

55. Ibid, 1889, p. 144. 

56. See p. 530. 

57. IHQ, XXXI, 149-50. 

58. Ibid, 145. 

59. Ibid. 

60. IHQ, XXXI, 145-6. 

61. Chintamani, 32. 

62. Calcutta Review, 1954, p. 40. 

62a. Hamilton to Elgin, 27 May, 1897. 

62b. Hamilton to Curzon, 9 August, 1899. 

62c. The letters referred to in this section are mostly unpublished and have been 
copied from the CRO Library by Dr. A. K. Majumdar. They have since been 
published in the Advent of Independence, by Dr. A. K. Majumdar (Appendix V). 

63. Cf. pp. 518-21. 

64. Hume, 54. 

65. Ibid, 85-6. 

66. Ibid, 86, 

67. Ibid. 

68. Ibid, 87-8. 

68a. Cf. Vol. IX, p. 790. 

69. Hume, 99. 

70. Modem Review, HI. 527. 

71. See pp. 448-54. 

72. Report of the Regional Records Survey Committee for West Bengal (1957-8), 
pp. 42-3. 

73. Ibid, 43. 

74. Ibid. 

75. Ibid, 43-4. 

76. Ibid, 44. 

77. For an account of the Bengal Provincial Coolerence, cf. Bengal Renaissance, 
pp. 169-71. 

78. Ibid, 170. 



569 


CHAPTER XVI (LIV) 

THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT IN POLITICS 

I. RISE OF THE NATIONALIST PARTY 

The foundation of the Indian National Congress marks a turning 
point in the history of Modern India. It shortly developed into 
a powerful political organization of all-India character and a public 
forum of the politically advanced section of the people. It could 
legitimately claim to represent the Indian intelligentsia. It focussed 
the political ideas of English-educated Indians and gave them a de¬ 
finite shape and form. Compared with the vast population of India 
the class represented by the Congress was no doubt numerically 
very poor, and Lord Dufferin, the Viceroy of India, did not commit 
any arithmetical error when he described, rather derided, it as a 
‘microscopic minority' of the Indian people. But such a minority 
always constitutes the brain of the people and has been regarded as 
their rightful representative even in progressive countries of the 
West. Lord Dufferin might well have remembered that about the 
time when he was born, the House of Commons represented a very 
small minority of the people. 

The Indian National Congress was founded on the twin rocks 
of unswerving loyalty to the British sovereign and indissoluble 
partnership of the British Empire. It was pledged to strictly con¬ 
stitutional mode of agitation, which practically meant humble 
prayers and petitions to the Government, both in India and England, 
and occasional appeals to the English people who theoretically 
constituted the fountain source of all authority. These bore very 
little fruit, but were not altogether useless, for the Indian Coun¬ 
cils Act of 1892 may justly be looked upon as an achievement of the 
Iflffian National Congress. Whatever might have been the intrin¬ 
sic merit of the Act as a measure of political advancement, it cer¬ 
tainly paved the way for further reforms of a more substantial 
character. 

But although the Indian National Congress failed to secure from 
an unsympathetic Government any substantial grant of political 
reforms which it demanded for twenty years. (1885-1905), it helped 
the political advancement of India in various ways. The annual 
sessions of the Congress, by bringing together the leading represen¬ 
tative men from widely remote parts of India, gave a reality to the 
ideal of Indian unity, developed patriotic feelings among all classes 


570 


THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT IN POLITICS 

and the diverse races and creeds of India, and awakened political 
consciousness among a steadily increasing circle of educated Indians. 
Besides, as the more important political, economic and administrative 
problems of India were regularly discussed in the meetings of the 
Congress, and later also in the Provincial Conferences, and these 
discussions often reached a very high level, the Indian National 
Congress became instrumental in widely diffusing very useful and 
accurate knowledge necessary for the political development of India, 
and educating public opinion on all questions concerning the welfare 
and progress of India. 

The same object was further achieved by the part played by 
some of the Congress leaders in the enlarged Legislative Councils 
set up by the Act of 1892. A large number of very distinguished 
political leaders were elected members of these councils, and for 
the first time Indian point of view on every public question was most 
ably pleaded by them. The eloquent speeches of Pherozeshah 
Mehta and Surendra-nath Banerji, voicing the aims and aspirations 
of political India, which were hitherto heard only in the Congress 
pandal or on public platform, were now echoed in the Council Cham¬ 
ber in the presence of the highest officials of the Government. Men 
like Gopal Krishna Gokhale, Ashu-tosh Mukherji, Rash-behari Ghosh, 
R. M. Sayani, P. A. Charlu, B. K. Bose, Sayyid Husain Bilgrami, and 
many others 1 brought to bear upon the burning questions of the 
day such a mature knowledge and wealth of details that no Govern¬ 
ment could easily brush them aside. They achieved little success 
by way of practical results, but their activities as well as the career 
of Dadabhai Naoroji, who placed the Indian question before the 
British public, and before the House of Commons when he was elect¬ 
ed its member in 1892, roused the political consciousness of India 
to an extent unknown before. 

Apart from this notable contribution to the political training 
of the Indian people, the Indian National Congress enhanced the po¬ 
litical prestige of India and quickened our sense of national pride, 
in an indirect way, through the personality, character, patriotism, 
and high intellectual brilliance of the great galaxy of eminent leaders 
who nurtured this infant institution and brought it safely to an adole¬ 
scent stage. Men like Dadabhai Naoroji, Surendra-nath Banerji, 
Pherozeshah Mehta, R. C. Dutt, Lal-mohan Ghosh, G. K. Gokhale, 
B. G. Tilak and Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya,—to mention only 
a few—made a deep impression not only upon all classes and shades 
of opinion in India, but even upon Englishmen, as they were visible 
embodiments of the intellectual and cultural progress that India had 
made in the nineteenth century. Their lives and attainments were 


571 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-II 


living testimony to the fitness of Indiana for advanced political life, 
and they raised the Indians in the estimation of our foreign rulers 
such as nothing else could possibly have done. 

It would be unjust therefore to minimise the importance of the 
Indian National Congress or the value of its work, eyen though 
its actual attainments fell far short of its aims and aspirations. 
It would, however, be equally wrong to look upon the Congress as 
the only channel through which flowed the political currents of India, 
and to regard it as the sole medium of the evolution of national life 
or the only agency which carried on the campaign for political re¬ 
generation of India during the period from 1885 to 1905. 

Broadly speaking, the practical measures of reform demanded 
by the Indian National Congress between 1885 and 1905 represent 
more or less the stage of political progress reached in Bengal during 
the preceding quarter of a century. The shortcomings of the British 
rule and the measures suggested for their removal cover nearly the 
same ground. The means to achieve the ends were also the same. 
One marks the same unflinching faith in the providential character 
of the British rule, the robust and sincere sentiments of devoted 
loyalty to the British crown, and the same pathetic, almost abject, 
belief in the sense of justice of the British people who would concede 
all the reasonable demands of the Indians as soon as they were pro¬ 
perly approached. The Indian National Congress, however, could 
not keep pace with the advanced political ideals, and failed to respond 
to the developed sense of nationality and patriotism, which grew in 
the last quarter of the nineteenth century. An abstract love of 
liberty for its own sake and as our birth-right, a passionate desire 
for freedom based upon a sense of greatness of our ancient culture, 
an innate hatred of British rule on account of its iniquitous character, 
and a spirited protest against the arrogance of the English—all these 
which deeply stirred the neo-nationalists of the period, are conspicu¬ 
ous by their absence in the programme and proceedings of the Indian 
National Congress during the first twenty years of its existence. No 
wonder, therefore, that the ideals and methods of the Congress failed 
to satisfy the advanced political thinkers of the time and the votaries 
of the new spirit of nationalism who were gradually becoming a 
political force in the country. 

There were mutterings of protests against the Congress here 
and there, 2 and Arabinda Ghosh, destined to attain immortal fame at 
a later date, published a series of diatribes against it in the years 
1893-4 in the Indu Prakash of Bombay. The general tone of the 
criticism may be judged by the following passages:* 


572 


THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT IN POLITICS 


“The Congress in Bengal is dying of consumption; annually its 
proportions sink into greater insignificance; its leaders, the Bonnerjis 
and Bannerjis and Lalmohan Ghoses, have climbed into the rarefied 
atmosphere of the Legislative Council and lost all hold on the imagi¬ 
nation of the young men. The desire for a nobler and more inspiring 
patriotism is growing more intense. This is an omen of good hope for 
the future; for what Bengal thinks tomorrow, India will be thinking 
tomorrow week” 3 . 

About a year earlier he had written: 

“I say, of the Congress, then, this,—that its aims are mistaken, 
that the spirit in which it proceeds towards their accomplishment is 
not a spirit of sincerity and whole-heartedness, and that the methods 
it has chosen are not the right methods, and the leaders in whom it 
trusts, not the right sort of men to be leaders;—in brief, that we 
are at present the blind led, if not by the blind, at any rate by the 
one-eyed.... In an era when democracy and similar big words 
slide so glibly from our tongues, a body like the Congress, which 
represents not the mass of the population, but a single and very 
limited class, could not honestly be called national... 

Arabinda then refers to the contrary views of Pherozeshah 
Mehta and Manmohan Ghosh both of whom regarded the Congress as 
national. According to Mehta, “it is because the masses are still 
unable to articulate' definite political demands that the functions 
and duty devolve upon their educated and enlightened compatriots 
to feel, to understand and to interpret their grievances and require¬ 
ments, and to suggest and indicate how these can best be redressed 
and met”. “The Congress”, says Manmohan Ghosh, “represents the 
thinking portion of the Indian people, whose duty it is to guide the 
ignorant, and this in his opinion sufficiently justifies the Congress 
in calling itself national”. Arabinda concludes. “I shall therefore 
amend the obnoxious phrase and declare that the National Congress 
may be as national as you please, but it is not a popular body and 
has not in any way attempted to become a popular body”. 4 

An edge was lent to the criticism against the Congress by the 
obvious fact that it did not respond to the famous manifesto issued 
by Allan Octavian Hume to the graduates of the Calcutta University 
in March, 1683, which is generally believed to have led to its inaugu¬ 
ration two years later. Attention may be drawn to a few passages 
of this manifesto: 1. “Whether in the individual or the nation, all 
vital progress must spring from within.” 2. “They who would be 
free themselves must strike the blow.” 3. “Whether in the case of 
individuals or nations, self-sacrifice and unselfishness are the only un¬ 
failing guides to freedom and happiness.” These are noble sentiments 


573 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

but found no echo in the hearts of the leaders of the Con* 
gress if they are judged by their speeches and activities during the 
first twenty years. Instead of putting faith in the maxim that all 
vital progress must spring from within, the Congress looked to .the 
British Government for all improvements. Hume, in his mani¬ 
festo, appealed to the educated Indians to “make a resolute struggle 
to secure freedom for yourselves and your country”, and observed 
that if “fifty men cannot be found with sufficient power of self- 
sacrifice, sufficient love for and pride in their country, sufficient 
genuine and unselfish heartfelt patriotism to take the initiative, and. 
if needs be, devote the rest of their lives to the cause, then there is 
no hope for India”. It would be hardly an exaggeration to say that 
the Congress would have looked upon this programme almost with 
horror and would not touch it with a pair of thongs. 

The new nationalists felt whole-hearted sympathy with the 
ideals preached by Hume but ignored so far by the Congress. Their 
criticism against the Congress has been ably summed up by La j pat 
Rai, himself a distinguished nationalist leader 6 . Their main point 
of attack was that the Congress lacked the essentials of a national 
movement. “The Congress movement”, observed La j pat Rai, “was 
neither inspired by the people, nor devised or planned by them. It 
was a movement not from within”. ‘The Congress leaders had neither 
sufficient political consciousness nor faith. They had certain politi¬ 
cal opinions, but not beliefs for which they were willing to suffer. 
Nor were they prepared to bear persecution for the cause they under¬ 
took. Either they did not know that they had a cause, or they were 
wanting in that earnestness which makes men suffer for a cause.’ 

Whether these comments and criticisms were fully justified or 
not, they unerringly indicate the new political outlook of the natio¬ 
nalist school as distinguished from those who had hitherto led the 
activities of the Congress. But their most serious charge against the 
Congress was that “its leaders were not in touch with the people; they 
felt shy of the masses, made no efforts to reach them, and systemati¬ 
cally discouraged younger men from doing the same”. There is no 
doubt that this charge was fair and just. In this respect Hume 
and some other English friends of the Congress movement showed 
more earnestness than many of the Indian leaders. When the pray¬ 
ers and petitions to the Government produced no effect, Hume 
concluded that “in order to constrain the Government to move, , the 
leaders of the Indian people must adopt measures of exceptional 
vigour, following the drastic methods pursued in England by Bright 
and Cobden in their great campaign on behalf of the people’s food.” 
Hume decided that the next step was “to instruct the great English 

574 


THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT IN POLITICS 


nation and also the far greater nation of India, so that every Indian 
shall become a comrade and if need be our soldier in the great war 
that we will wage for justice, for our liberties and our right”. 6 Hume 
is said to have worked with his wonted energy, distributing tracts, 
leaflets and pamphlets, sending out lecturers and calling meetings 
both in large towns and in country districts. Over one thousand 
meetings were held and over half a million pamphlets were distri¬ 
buted. If this work had been continued, the history of the Congress 
would have been different. The movement in England failed for 
funds; the movement in India collapsed for want of vigour. 

It is thus apparent that although the organization envisaged by 
Hume might have developed into a truly national movement, the 
leaders of the Indian National Congress proved unequal to the task. 
Their activities in and outside the Congress and the Legislative 
Councils, however useful and praiseworthy in other ways, did not 
advance the cause of the national movement, whose origin and 
nature have been described above. 

This, however, did not in any way deflect the national move¬ 
ment from its course, or retard its further development. As a 
matter of fact, the Indian National Congress lost the leadership 
of the national movement shortly after its birth, and did not re¬ 
capture it until Mahatma Gandhi came to preside over its des¬ 
tiny. During this long interval the real national movement ran 
its course outside the Congress pandal and the legislative cham¬ 
bers. The same factors which gave birth to it and sustained it so 
far, were not only still at work, but, as mentioned above, some of 
them grew more and more intense with the progress of time, and 
gave a new shape and form to Indian nationalism. 

This newly developed nationalism began to exercise consider¬ 
able influence upon Indian politic* towards the close of the nineteenth 
century. Those who were imbued with this new spirit gradually 
drifted apart from the policy and ideals of the Congress, and formed 
a new group, first inside and then outside it. This process was 
fully in evidence before 1905, the closing year of this volume, but 
had not run its full course, nor fully developed its philosophical 
background, till two or three years later. It would be convenient, 
however, to discuss its main characteristics and fundamental prin¬ 
ciples at this formative stage so that the events at the opening of the 
next period may be studied in their true perspective. 

The high priest of this new nationalism was Arabinda Ghosh 
whose criticism of the Congress has been quoted above. The following 
extract from one of his articles in his organ, the Bande Mataram, 
gives an insight into his philosophical interpretation of nationalism: 

575 




THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

‘It is not in human nature to rest eternally contented with a 
state of subordination or serfdom. God made man in his own image, 
essentially and potentially free and pure; shall man keep him in eter¬ 
nal bondage and sin? Freedom is constitutional in man, and when 
this freedom is curtailed by social and civil laws and institutions, 
it is done not to kill but to perfect this very freedom itself. This is 
the only rational end and justification of those necessary limitations 
that society imposes upon human freedom everywhere, and where 
this justification is absent, human nature revolts against these limi¬ 
tations, whether social, religious, or political, creating conflicts, strug¬ 
gles, revolutions, through which humanity realises its divinely ap¬ 
pointed destiny everywhere. The desire for autonomy is constitu¬ 
tional in man and not a mere functional disturbance such as the 
tyrant and the aggressor has always proclaimed it to be. Is it sinful 
to cherish that which is a necessary element in the very constitution 
of man’s mind and soul? Has not history preserved, as the most 
sacred relics of the race, the achievements of this natural and God- 
inspired impulse from its very birth? Has not art beautified it in a 
thousand lovely forms, in poetry, in painting, in music, and in 
sculpture? Has not religion, wherever and whenever it has not been 
able to free itself from the selfish control of priests and princes, 
sanctified this noble instinct, as the very breath of God? Shall we 
alone deem it a sin and be branded, for cherishing this divine desire, 
as criminals? 

“Tyrants have tried but have they ever succeeded in repressing 
this natural love of freedom in man? Repressed it has grown in 
strength; crushed under the heel of the tyrant, it has assumed a 
myriad forms and in successive incarnations gaining strength and in¬ 
spiration from repeated failures and endless suffering, it has risen 
finally, to overthrow its oppressor for good: this is the teaching of 
History, this is the message of Humanity. 

“But like the scriptural adder, tyrants have eyes but they see 
not, have ears but they hear not, and the universal teaching of history, 
and the eternal message of humanity, are both lost on them. And 
the car of progress has, through human folly and perversity, to wade 
through blood and ruin still on earth.” 7 

This is the rationale of the struggle for independence which was 
the keynote of the new school. 

The credit of leavening Indian politics with this national spirit 
undoubtedly goes to Tilak. Bal Gangadhar Tilak, a Chitpfivan 
Brahman of Poona, was the first among the Indian political leaders 
to emphasize, both by precept and example, the four distinctive fea¬ 
tures which characterized the new movement. The first is a sincere 


576 


THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT IN POLITICS 

faith in the glory and greatness of Indian culture in the past and 
the belief that all future development must be based upon this stable 
foundation. The second is a heartfelt conviction that the policy of 
mendicancy followed by the Congress would not lead to the desired 
goal, and that the Indians must rely on their own strength and assert 
their inalienable rights, even at the risk of great sufferings and sacri¬ 
fices, before they can hope to achieve any substantial measure of self- 
government. The third is the clear enunciation that the political 
goal of India is self-government or Swaraj rather than reforms in 
administration to which the Congress devoted its whole energy and 
attention during the early years of its existence. The fourth is the 
awakening of political consciousness among the people at large and 
the consequent need of political agitation among the masses. 

Tilak struck a new note in Indian politics when a terrible famine 
broke out in Bombay in 1896. His emissaries orally explained to 
the people the ‘relevant sections of the Famine Relief Code and dis¬ 
tributed leaflets or pamphlets containing abstracts of its important 
sections. Having thus educated the people in the knowledge of 
their rights, Tilak asked the people to take their stand on their rights 
and boldly demand the benefits offered by the Famine Relief Code. 
He asked them not to be cowards and not to pay the Government 
dues by selling their lands and cattle.’ Through his paper, the 
Kesari, he made stirring appeals to the people. “When the Queen 
desires that none should die, when the Governor declares that all 
should live,...will you”, he passionately exclaimed, “kill yourself 
by timidity and starvation? If you have money to pay Govern¬ 
ment dues, pay them by all means. But if you have not, will you 
sell your things away only to avoid the supposed wrath of subordi¬ 
nate Government officers? Can you not be bold, even when in the 
grip of death?” 7 * Week after week Tilak continued in this strain, 
denouncing in forceful language the lack of manliness among the 
“sheepish people”, and urging upon them lessons of self-reliance. He 
deplored and condemned food riots. “Why loot the bazars”, he 
used to say, “go to the Collector and tell him to give you work and 
food. That is his duty”. It is this activity of Tilak which the offi¬ 
cial circles regarded as “no-rent campaign” and has been described 
by them as such ever since. Tilak’s name was entered into the 
“Black List” of the Government as ‘Enemy' Number One’. The 
official circles never forgot or forgave him, and he was looked upon 
as one of those tall poppies which must be cut off to make India safe 
for British bureaucracy. 

Far more important was the inauguration of the Ganapati and 
Shiva] i festivals by Tilak which may be said to be an important 
landmark in the history of the new movement, Tilak’s object 


577 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

undoubtedly was to utilize the religious instincts and historical tradi¬ 
tions for the purpose of engendering patriotism and national spirit 
among the people. He also hoped that these festivals, organized 
on a popular basis, would bring together the masses and the classes, 
a much desired contact, the importance of which the Congress never 
realized. 

The Ganapati festival was an old religious institution in Maha¬ 
rashtra, but Tilak transformed it into a national festival and gave it 
a political character by organizing lectures, processions, melds, and 
singing parties. These were calculated to inculcate in the people 
a sturdy manhood, organized discipline and love of their country. 
Besides, it offered a common platform to the masses and classes and 
helped considerably in fostering national sentiment and promoting 
political education among large sections of people who kept aloof 
from organizations of a distinctive political character such as the 
Congress or Conferences. The festival, as reorganized by Tilak in 
1893, appealed instinctively to all classes of people and spread rapid¬ 
ly all over Maharashtra. 

Two classes of people were, however, seriously opposed to it. 
The liberal Hindus of the school of Ranade sneered at the old ortho¬ 
dox beliefs and practices underlying the ceremony, and the ortho¬ 
dox Congress politicians condemned it as an aggressive challenge 
against Muslims. Tilak defended his position in several articles in 
the Kesari in 1896. He emphasized the “wisdom of the policy of 
carrying forward, mutatis mutandis , those institutions which had 
been honoured by time and saved from the eternal silence.” He 
also quoted analogies from the history of Greece and Rome. “The 
great unifying and rousing effect of the Olympian and Pythian 
festivals, and also of the Circus was emphasized with convincing 
force”. Such festivals, he said, provided great opportunities for the 
educated classes to come into close contaet with the illiterate masses, 
to enter into their very spirit, to understand their needs and grievan¬ 
ces, and lastly, to make them co-sharers in the benefits of education 
and all other new notions of patriotism which education usually 
carried with it. To social reformers, he replied with bitter sarcasm: 
“Ranade, mixing with the people in the Ganesh festival and lecturing 
to them in front o* that God of learning, or participating freely in the 
anniversary celebrations of a saint like Ramdas and expatiating be¬ 
fore hundreds of people that gathered there on the national work of 
that mighty and heroic sage, would be inconceivably more useful to 
the nation than Ranade sitting in the prayer-hall of the social refor¬ 
mers with his eyes and lips closed in devoted contemplation of their 
idea of the Almighty”. 8 


578 


THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT IN POLITICS 


Tilak met the objections of the politicians by stating that “there 
was nothing wrong in providing a platform for all the Hindus of all 
high and low classes to stand together and discharge a joint national 
duty/ 7 On this occasion, as in later days, Tilak was charged with 
having a communal outlook and even accused of malice and hatred 
against the Muslims. But all this is belied, among others, by his 
magnanimous gesture at the Lakhnau Congress to which reference 
will be made later. Incidentally, reference may be made in this con¬ 
nection to another charge levelled against Tilak, namely, that he 
started an organization known as the Anti-Cow-Killing Society, which 
was intended to be, and actually served as, a direct provocation to 
the Muslims. This allegation was repeated in Valentine ChiroFs 
book, Indian Unrest , and formed one of the counts in the libel case 
instituted by Tilak against him. Chirol requested the Government 
of India to supply him evidence in justification of this and other accu¬ 
sations he had made against Tilak, for they were based on official re¬ 
cords. The Government of India appointed Mr. Montgomery, I.C.S., 
as a special officer for this purpose. After sifting all the available 
records, Montgomery was forced to come to the conclusion that 
“Tilak had nothing to do with the inception of an anti-cow-kilMng 
movement, nor is there any evidence to show that either before or 
after the Hindu-Muslim riots of 1803 he took any part in the manage¬ 
ment of the Anti-Cow-Killing Society or in furthering its aims’ 7 . 9 It 
is worth mentioning in this connection that even the All brothers 
acknowledged Tilak as their political guru. 

The origin of the Shivaji festival is to be traced to the dilapidated 
condition of the tomb of Shivaji at Raigarh, which was his capital. 
In an issue of the Kesari in April, 1895, Tilak referred to it and made 
an appeal for money to repair the monument out of gratitude to 
Shivaji, the liberator of Maharashtra and protector of Hinduism. This 
object was not achieved during the lifetime of Tilak, but there were 
two important side issues of highly important character. The first 
was a movement, mainly through Tilak’s efforts, to celebrate an annual 
festival at Raigarh in honour of Shivaji’s birth. In spite of official op¬ 
position, the first celebration was successfully held on 15 March, 1895, 
at Raigarh, and lasted for two or three days amid the greatest enthu¬ 
siasm of the people. Indeed, the festival took sdch a great hold over 
the public mind that it was held at many other places besides 
Raigarh. 

These celebrations led to another Important development, 
namely, a revision of the historical estimate of Shivaji. The idea 
gradually gained ground that Shivaji should he judged by the stan¬ 
dard of morality applicable to a great public benefactor; he had on 

579 





THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

his shoulders the responsibility of establishing Swaraj for the Mara- 
thas, and whatever he did, with the purpose of accomplishing this 
end, was done for national good and must, therefore, be deemed to 
be appropriate. 

The Shivaji festival was “national hero-worship, and round 
his name rallied all the newly aroused national pride and enthu¬ 
siasm of the Maharashtrian people”. As regards the new concep¬ 
tions of Shivaji which the Shivaji festivals held out before the 
people, the following description would give a fair idea. “Fiery 
speeches were made and Tilak himself said that a higher morality 
than that of the Indian Penal Code, in the usual ethical teachings of 
the East and the West, governs the life of nations; and Shivaji was 
fully justified in killing Afzal Khan, because it was a great un¬ 
selfish act for national self-preservation. 'God has not conferred 
on the Mlechha a grant of Hindustan inscribed on imperishable 
brass’. Another speaker said: 'Who dares to call that man a mur¬ 
derer who, when only nine years old, had received Divine inspira¬ 
tion not to bow down before a Mahommedan Emperor? Who dares 
to condemn Shivaji for disregarding a minor duty in the perfor¬ 
mance of a major one? Had Shivaji committed five or fifty crimes 
more terrible, I would have been equally ready to prostrate myself 
not once but one hundred times before the image of our lord Shivaji. 

.. .Every Hindu, every Mahratta must rejoice at this spectacle, for 
we too are all striving to regain our lost independence, and it is only 
by combination that we can throw off the yoke.” 10 

All these points of view found eloquent expression during the 
celebration of the Shivaji festival at Poona on 12 June, 1897. Learn¬ 
ed discourses were given on Shivaji, depicting him as a valiant 
fighter for the sake of his religion and motherland. In one of the 
meetings over which Tilak presided, Professor Bhanu defended 
Shivaji against the charge of murdering Afzal Khan. Professor 
Jinsivale also supported him by citing the similar doings of other 
historical empire-builders like Napoleon and Caesar. In his closing 
speech Tilak wound up the proceedings by “distilling out before the 
audience the inner patriotic motive of that deed and made a feeling 
appeal to the public to assemble at least for a day during the 364 
of the whole year to pay their tribute to the memory of that great 
nation-builder”. 11 A detailed report of the proceedings of this meet¬ 
ing was published in the Kesari with some editorial comments. A 
poem was also published in its columns in which the following verses, 
among others, were put in the mouth of Shivaji. 

“I delivered my country by establishing 'Swaraj' and saving re¬ 
ligion. I planted in the soil of Maharashtra virtues that may be 

580 


THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT IN POLITICS 

likened to the Kalpavriksha (one of the five trees of Indra’s Paradise 
that yields whatsoever may be desired), sublime policy based on 
strong foundations, valour in the battlefield like that of Karna, pa¬ 
triotism, genuine unselfishness, and unity, the best of all. Alas, alas, 
all I see now is the ruin of my country. Those forts of mine to build 
which I poured out money, to acquire which torrents of fiery blood 
streamed forth, from which I sallied forth to victory roaring like a 
lion—all those are crumbling away. What a desolation is this! 
Foreigners are dragging out Lakshml (the goddess of fortune) by the 
hands of persecution. Along with her. plenty has fled, and with 
plenty, health. 

“Say, where are those splendid ones who promptly shed their 
blood on the spot where my perspiration fell? People eat bread 
once in a day, and not even enough of that. They toil through hard 
times by tightening up their bellies... The cow... is taken daily to the 
slaughter house and ruthlessly butchered by the unbelievers...... 

How can I bear this heart-rending spectacle? Have all our leaders 
become like helpless figures on the chess-board? What misfortune 
has overtaken the land?** 12 

There is no doubt that the Shivaji festival assumed a decidedly 
political character. The discourses on Shivaji were definitely in¬ 
tended to rouse patriotic feelings and awaken national consciousness 
among the people. But the festival was not confined to such discus¬ 
sions and discourses. Its regular features included, among other 
things, big public processions in which bands of volunteers showed 
their skill in fencing, music parties sang religious and patriotic 
songs, and stories and poems were recited to inculcate national sen¬ 
timents. Some of these were definitely revolutionary in character 
as will be shown later. 

Within ten days of the Shivaji festival held at Poona, Mr. Rand, 
the Collector of Poona, and another officer, Lieut. Ayerst, were shot 
dead while returning from the Government House at night. The 
murder was committed by the Chapekar brothers in order to avenge 
the atrocities perpetrated by the British soldiers employed in en¬ 
forcing preventive measures against the plague epidemic in the city 
of Poona. But Tilak was held indirectly responsible for the crime 
by the Anglo-Indian circles, and the Anglo-Indian Press demanded 
his prosecution. The Government yielded, and Tilak was arrested 
on a charge of sedition. The charge mainly rested on the speech 
of Tilak at the Shivaji festival, and in particular to that part of it 
in which he defended the murder of Afzal Khan by Shivaji. In 
reply, Tilak’s counsel referred to the festivities in memory of Robert 


581 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—-II 

Bruce and William Wallace, and pointed out that many persons, 
besides Tilak, took part in the controversy about Afzal Khan’s 
murder, and it was in the press long before Rand’s murder. Never¬ 
theless, Tilak was convicted of sedition. The trying judge admitted 
that there was no evidence to prove any connection between Tilak’s 
articles and Rand’s murder; but he put a new construction on 
the word ‘disaffection’ (occurring in Section 124A of the Penal Code), 
and took it to mean ‘absence of affection’. He held that absence 
of affection amounted to presence of hatred against the Govern¬ 
ment in a man’s mind, and as such fell within the purview of section 
124 A. 

Tilak was sentenced to 18 months’ rigorous imprisonment 
(July 22). This baptism of fire enhanced his reputation and ad 
vanced the national cause. Sympathy for Tilak was felt and ex¬ 
pressed all over India. All Indian newspapers, without exception, 
censured the Government and congratulated Tilak. A wave of dis¬ 
content and indignation passed over the whole country. Even the 
untutored mill-hands fasted in protest and struck work for six days. 
The colleges and schools were deserted and the students wore the 
black mark, indicative of the deep sorrow they felt in their hearts. 
The most impressive demonstrations were witnessed and the bazars 
(markets) were spontaneously closed. 12 ® 

People rightly held that Tilak was really persecuted for his 
sturdy spirit of independence, strong national sentiments, and fear¬ 
less criticism of unjust measures of the Government, particularly 
their anti-plague policy and repression practised by Mr. Rand and his 
myrmidons. The proud disdain with which Tilak refused to offer 
an apology to the Government after his conviction offered a marked 
contrast to the conduct of Gokhale who tendered an humbly apology 
to the Government for statements he had made in England with res¬ 
pect to the violent acts of soldiers during the plague epidemic. 13 
Much might be said in justification of Gokhale, but his abject sur¬ 
render to the Government, without any proper inquiry into alleged 
violences, completely whitewashed the vile and heinous doings of 
the British soldiers, whereas Tilak really suffered for his courage¬ 
ous protest against their conduct. 

This difference between Gokhale and Tilak, as well as the Con¬ 
gress session of 1897 (held at Amraoti), throws a lurid light on the 
growing cleavage between the old school of politics and the new 
spirit of nationalism. Although public sympathy for Tilak was 
being continuously expressed all over India, the proposal to pass 
a special resolution about him in the Amraoti Congress was thwarted 


582 


THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT IN POLITICS 


by the influence of the Moderate party. Eloquent tributes were, 
however, paid to Tilak by Sankaran Nair, the President of the Con¬ 
gress, Surendra-nath Banerji, and others. “When Babu Surendra- 
nath Banerji reached the peak of his superb oratory while speaking 
of Tilak, people in the Congress rose to their feet in reverence, trium¬ 
phantly cried out, echoed and re-echoed the name of Tilak, and 
clapped their hands with such a tremendous enthusiasm that even 
the stentorian voice of that renowned Demosthenes of India was very 
nearly drowned. Newspapers of the day described that magnificent 
scene in the Congress as unprecedented in its history”. 

The trial and conviction of Tilak may be regarded as a landmark 
in the history of Indian nationalism. Henceforth sacrifice and suf¬ 
ferings in the cause of the country, rather than eloquence and debat¬ 
ing skill, came to be regarded as the badge of honour and distinction. 
The martyrs replaced mere orators as acknowledged champions of 
liberty, and the homage of the nation was no longer paid to intellec¬ 
tual brilliance in politics, but was reserved for the sturdy spirit that 
bravely challenged autocracy without any fear. 

Though the charges against Tilak were substantiated by his 
writings and speeches in connection with the Shivaji festival, it sur¬ 
vived his incarceration. After the release of Tilak “huge festivals 
were again celebrated at Raigarh”. In spite of the bitter attacks of 
the Moderates and the hostile attitude of the Government, the Shi¬ 
vaji festival became a permanent feature of Maharashtra, and even 
travelled to distant Bengal. It inspired the great poet Rabindra¬ 
nath to write, in memory of the hero of Maharashtra, one of his finest 
poems, which made such a profound appeal to the national sentiment 
of Bengal that the Government had to proscribe it to prevent the 
spread of excitement against the British. 

The inauguration of Shivaji festival was a memorable contribu¬ 
tion of Tilak to the development of Indian nationalism. He rightly 
thought that round the personality of Shivaji, he could gather all 
the patriotic and national forces: “The inspiration which western 
democratic teachings gave to us was rather weak and essentially 
outlandish. But the worship of Shivaji was such as even the igno¬ 
rant villager could understand. The name of Shivaji was symbol of 
unity, courage, sacrifice. It connoted the highest patriotic fervour. 
It stood for complete political emancipation. Shivaji and Swaraj 
were synonymous words. By starting the Shivaji festival in 1895, 
Tilak stimulated the national instincts of the people. He gave a mes¬ 
sage to the people freed from the puzzling verbiage, of western demo¬ 
cracy and which being simple and direct went straight to their 
hearts.” 14 


583 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


There is scarcely any doubt that Ganapati and Shivaji festivals 
served well the purpose for which they were inaugurated by Tilak. 
They spread among the masses not only a feeling of pride and glory 
in their past, but also aroused in them an ardent desire for political 
freedom which was symbolised by the career and character of 
Shivaji. 

Tilak was twice 143 sentenced to imprisonment for his political 
views. He accepted the punishment—rare in those days—with calm¬ 
ness and equanimity, and expressed his belief that perhaps he would 
serve the national cause far better from within the prison wall than 
by remaining outside it. As in many other respects, so also in this 
matter, he set an example which inspired others to brave the wrath of 
the Government and undergo sacrifices for the national cause. 

Tilak’s views and career have been described at some length 
because he typified the new nationalist spirit which was gathering 
force and was destined ere long to sweep the whole country. He 
fully deserves the high tribute paid to him in the following passages: 

‘‘Like Socrates, Tilak brought political philosophy in India from 
heaven to earth, from the Council Hall or the Congress mandap to 
the street and the market. Politics so far was comparatively a feeble 
affair,—it lacked life. It is the great merit of Tilak that he put a 

new self-confidence, a new self-assertiveness into his people. 

It was reserved for Tilak to make both the Government and profes¬ 
sional politicians look for a new power, viz., the people. It was one 
of the standing arguments of the official party that the Congress did 
not represent the people. Tilak cleverly turned the tables on the 
Government by boldly identifying himself with the masses. Tilak’s 
attempt to democratise the political movement and bring it home 
vividly into the consciousness of the average man, infused a new life 
and vigour into the movement and gave it a very different character.” 15 

“To bring in the mass of the people, to found the greatness of the 
future on the greatness of the past, to infuse Indian politics with 
Indian religious fervour, are the indispensable conditions for a great 
and powerful awakening in India. Others—writers, thinkers, spiri¬ 
tual leaders—had seen this truth; Tilak was the first to bring it into 
the actual field of practical politics”. 16 

It has been truly remarked that “Tilak has contributed more by 
his life and character than by his speeches or writings to the making 
of the new nationalism”. His “selfless patriotism, indomitable 
courage and fierce determination,” and above all, “his supreme con¬ 
centration, without reservation, of his life to the one great aim, viz., 


584 



THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT IN POLITICS 

the freedom of his country”, may be said to mark a new epoch in the 
political struggle for India’s freedom. 17 

Tilak’s efforts were ably seconded by Bipin-chandra Pal, Ara- 
binda Ghosh, Lala Lajpat Rai, Khaparde and others. They raised 
the standard of revolt against what they called the mendicant policy 
of the Congress, and preached the cult of self-help in different parts 
of India through books, journals and lectures. The writings and 
speeches of these men breathed a new spirit of boldness and self- 
confidence. They instilled a reverence for the past and confidence 
for the future, and asserted the inalienable right of the Indians to 
shape their destiny without caring for the frowns or smiles of the 
alien rulers. 

Arabinda Ghosh was the most typical representative of the new 
type of nationalism in its most intense metaphysical and religious 
form. Nationalism with him was not a political or economic cry; 
it was the innermost hunger of his whole soul for the re-birth in him, 
and through men like him in the whole of India, of the ancient 
culture of Hindusthan in its pristine purity and nobility. 

“What is nationalism?” he asked. “Nationalism is not a mere 
political prograihme. Nationalism is a religion that has come from 
God. Nationalism is a creed in which you shall have to live. Na¬ 
tionalism is not going to be crushed. Nationalism is immortal; na¬ 
tionalism cannot die”. 18 “This nationalism is not a trick of the in¬ 
tellect; it is an attitude of the heart, of the soul; it springs from the 
deepest part of our nature which intellect can never fathom. What 
the intellect could not do, this mighty force of passionate conviction, 
born out of the very depths of the national consciousness, will be 
able to accomplish”. 19 Bipin-chandra Pal further elucidated the 
idea. “The new spirit”, said he, “accepts no other teacher in the art 
of self-government except self-government itself. It values freedom 
for its own sake, and desires autonomy, immediate and unconditioned, 
regardless of any considerations of fitness and unfitness of the people 
for it; because it does not believe serfdom in any shape or form to be 
-a school for real freedom in any country and under any conditions 
whatsoever. It holds that the struggle for freedom itself is the 
highest tutor of freedom which, if it can once possess the mind of a 
people, shapes itself the life, the character, and the social and civic 
institutions of the people, to its own proper ends. 

“The time has come when in the interests of truth and the civic 
advancement and freedom of the people, our British friends should 
be distinctly told that while we are thankful to them for all the kind 
things they have said all these years for us, and the ready sacrifices 
they have made to make our lot easy and their yoke light, we cannot 

585 


/ 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-II 

any longer suffice 19 ® to be guided by them in our efforts for political 
progress and emancipation. Their view-point is not ours. They 
desire to make the Government of India popular, without ceasing in 
any sense to be essentially British, we desire to make it autonomous, 
absolutely free of the absolute contror\ 20 

Eminent Moderate leaders have expressed the opinion that B. C. 
Pal’s articles in the New India gave rise to the extremist section in the 
Congress. 20 ® He preached in a popular form the philosophy of 
Vivekananda and Arabinda Ghosh to which reference has been made 
above. Laj pat Rai, Khaparde and others were, like Tilak, hard- 
grained practical politicians who strove to leaven politics with this 
new element. The combined efforts of these leaders and their fol¬ 
lowers ushered in an altogether new movement in Indian politics 
which developed distinct features of its own, fundamentally differ¬ 
ent from the Congress school of the day. Some of these basic differ¬ 
ences are noted below. For the sake of convenience, the two schools 
may be referred to as the Congress and the Nationalist School, without 
any further implication. 

The Congress School sincerely believed that India was not yet in 
a position to stand on her own legs, and needed British rule for many 
years to make her fit for self-government. This mentality is clearly 
reflected in the Presidential address in the Congress of 1897, the very 
year in which Tilak was imprisoned for sedition. Here is an extract 
from the speech of Sankaran Nair who presided: “We are also aware 
that with the decline of British supremacy, we shall have anarchy, 
war, and rapine. The Mahomedans will try to recover their lost 
supremacy. The Hindu races and chiefs will-fight amongst them¬ 
selves. The lower castes who have come under the vivifying influence 
of Western civilisation are scarcely likely to yield without a struggle 
to the dominion of the higher castes”. 

The Nationalists were not deterred by these considerations, and 
advocated liberty from foreign control on abstract principles. The 
whole position was summed up by Tilak in one sentence which has 
become classic: “Swaraj is my birth-right and I must have it.” Ara¬ 
binda Ghosh was an uncompromising champion of the same policy. 
“Can the wealth of the whole world,” passionately exclaimed La j pat 
Rai, “be put in the scales over against liberty and honour?” “A sub¬ 
ject people,” he continued, “has no soul, just as a slave can have 
none... A man without a soul is a mere animal. A nation without 
a soul is only a herd of dumb driven cattle”. 21 

It was further urged by many that the Indians were not yet fit 
for carrying on their own administration, and a period of political 


586 



THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT IN POLITICS 


apprenticeship was necessary for this purpose. It was also freely 
argued that freedom was a cry for tne moon so long as social abuses, 
religious superstitions, communal rivalry, and illiteracy of the people 
were not removed, and the Indians did not have sufficient military 
knowledge to defend their country. 

The Nationalists denied the logic behind these arguments and 
held that if India had to wait for the removal of these defects she 
would have to wait till doomsday. They further argued that a foreign 
rule was more likely to perpetuate those evils than remove thepi- 

The Congress School believed that the British rule in India was a 
divine dispensation, and piously hoped that under their guidance 
India would one day attain self-government. The Nationalists did 
not believe that a foreign ruler could ever have benevolent intentions 
towards the subject people, and pointed out that in all essential 
matters the British interests were bound to be in conflict with the 
true interests of the Indians. Far from believing in the providen¬ 
tial character of the British rule, the Nationalists represented the 
British conquest of India as achieved by fraud and chicanery, in¬ 
spired by greed, and maintained for purely selfish interests. 

Unlike the Congress School the Nationalists did not pin their 
faith on the benevolence of the Viceroys or the sense of justice of the 
British people or any British party. The change in the outlook is 
beautifully expressed in the following passage: 

“Our eyes have been turned away from the Government: away 
from the Houses of Parliament: from Simla and Calcutta; and our 
faces have turned now to the starving, the naked, the patient, and 
long-suffering 300 millions of Indian people, and in it we see a new 
potency, because we view them now with an eye of love which we 
had never felt before, and in the teeming, toiling, starving and 
naked populations of India, we find possibilities, potentialities, germs 
that have given rise to the movement namely, Faith in the people, 
Faith in the genius of the nation, Faith in God, Who has been guid¬ 
ing the genius of this nation through ages by historical evolution, 
Faith in the eternal destiny of the Indian people. With the deca¬ 
dence of our faith in the foreign Government and in the foreign nation, 
has grown up this higher, this dearer, this deeper, this more vital 
and more divine faith in Indian Humanity.” 22 

The followers of the Congress School accepted the position that 
the British Government was established by law in India, and were 
not prepared to go beyond the bounds of the law as promulgated 
by the Government from time to time, even though they might have 
thoroughly disapproved of it. Their only method of approach was 


587 


THE BRITISH PARAMCUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


therefore by constitutional agitation. The Nationalists believed in cer¬ 
tain inherent rights of man, and whenever any Government legisla¬ 
tion violated those rights they did not regard themselves as morally 
bound to obey it. To them constitutional agitation in India was 
meaningless because India had no constitution, and everything in 
the ultimate analysis was really a fiat of the executive authorities. 23 
Sir Ashu-tosh Chaudhuri gave expression to the same feeling when 
he said in 1904 that a “subject race has no politics”. This funda¬ 
mental difference in outlook distinguished the two Schools as regards 
the method of agitation against the Government and the general ap¬ 
proach to the whole political problem in India. 

A typical instance of fundamental difference is furnished by 
the conceptions of the two schools of political thought regarding the 
ultimate political goal of India. The Indian National Congress for¬ 
mulated various schemes of political advancement, but they mainly 
centred on reorganization of administrative machinery through such 
measures of reform as Indianisation of services, admission of Indians 
into the Legislative Councils in increasing numbers and entrusting 
them with greater powers and responsibility. But it had no definite 
conception of the ultimate political goal. Due to the influence of 
the new spirit of nationalism some prominent leaders of the Con¬ 
gress, at the very end of the period under review, vaguely looked 
upon Colonial self-government within the British Empire as a goal 
to be realised at a distant date. Gokhale, for example, expressed 
some such idea in 1905, but the Congress as a body did not accept 
that view. On the other hand, the Nationalists aspired after free¬ 
dom and this was pithily expressed by Tilak in his famous dictum, 
“Swaraj is my birth-right”, which caught the imagination of the 
new school and became its rallying cry. As a matter of fact, the ideal 
of freedom from British yoke was not new and was echoed in Indian 
literature even before the Congress was bom. But the Congress kept 
itself at a safe distance from this ideal which was, not without reason, 
regarded as inconceivable and dangerous by most of its leaders. This 
ideal of freedom, however, loomed large in the new Nationalist 
movement. 

The difference between the political thoughts and beliefs of the 
Congress and the new Nationalism was thus a fundamental one, both 
as regards ideal and method. It was a difference in kind and not 
merely of degree. The Nationalists were, consciously or unconscious¬ 
ly, the exponents of an altogether new ideal and spirit to which the 
old leaders of the Congress were strangers. This new development 
was undoubtedly of very slow growth, and was not clearly realized 
until the very end of the period under review. But it was manifested, 

588 


THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT IN POLITICS 


from the year 1905 onwards, by the sharp differences which arose 
between the official Congress party and its left wing—the so-called 
Extremists—on all important political questions and problems with 
which the country was confronted. 

But the Leftists in the Congress, led by Tilak, represented only 
the moderate section of the new Nationalist movement, which also 
had a left wing, bent upon achieving freedom by armed rebellion. 
The votaries of this new cult had no faith either in the constitutional 
agitation of the Congress or in the less legal means contemplated by 
Tilak. They sincerely believed that freedom of India could not be 
achieved save by violent means, for the very simple reason that his¬ 
tory did not record a single instance where foreign rule was liqui¬ 
dated by other means. In order to prepare grounds for open rebellion 
they formed secret societies with a view to manufacturing arms or 
importing them from outside. Although this movement did not come 
into prominence till after the end of the period under review, its 
origin goes back to the nineteenth century. It is generally referred 
to as ‘Terrorism* or ‘Anarchical Conspiracy’ in official parlance, but 
it should more properly be called ‘Militant Nationalism’, for there is 
no doubt that it was the product of the new Nationalist movement. 

II. BEGINNINGS OF MILITANT NATIONALISM 

Reference has been made above to the growth of amateur or 
mushroom secret societies in Calcutta, on the model of the Car¬ 
bonari in Italy, as far back as the seventies of the nineteenth cen¬ 
tury. 24 There are also stray references to the formation of similar 
societies, even in Patna. The credit of organising the first secret 
society, with the avowed object of overthrowing the British Govern¬ 
ment in India, goes to Wasudeo Balwant Phadke, whose activities 
have been described above. 26 For nearly twenty years after the tra¬ 
gic end of this great Maratha hero no further trace of this movement 
is found in Maharashtra. It is not till the close of the nineteenth 
century that we find the revival of the old spirit for which Phadke 
lived and died. Its first signs in Maharashtra may be traced to 
the expression of bitter hatred against the British Governmert 
and almost open incitement to rebellion against it. The Ganapati 
and Shivaji festivals, noted above, were utilised for preaching this 
new spirit. 26 During the ten days’ celebration of the Ganapati festi¬ 
val, “leaflets were circulated by schoolboys and others broadcast 
through the city calling the Hindus to arms, urging the Marathas 
to rebel as Shivaji did, declaring that the dagger of subjection to 
foreign rule penetrated the bosom of all, and urging that a religious 
outbreak should be made the first step towards the overthrow of the 


589 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-JI 

alien power.” 27 The Shivaji festival also provided suitable oppor¬ 
tunities for similar propaganda. A regular society was organised to 
give physical and military training to the Hindus. The life and soul 
of this society were the two brothers of a Chitpavan Brahman family 
of Maharashtra, named Damodar Chapekar and Balkrishna Chape- 
kar. The following verses were recited by them at the Shivaji and 
Ganapati festivals: 

1. The Shivaji Sloka 

“Merely reciting Shivaji’s story Idee a lord (?) does not secure 
independence; it is necessary to be prompt in engaging in desperate 
enterprises like Shivaji and Baji; knowing, you good people should 
take up swords and shields at all events now; we shall cut off count¬ 
less heads of enemies. Listen. We shall risk our lives on the 
battlefield in a national war; we shall shed upon the earth the life¬ 
blood of the enemies who destroy our religion; we shall die after 
killing only, while you will hear the story like women.” 

2. The Ganapati gloka 

Alas, you are not ashamed to remain in servitude; try therefore 
to commit suicide; alas, like butchers, the wicked in their monstrous 
atrocity kill calves and kine; free her (the cow) from her trouble; die 
but kill the English; do not remain idle or thereby burden the earth; 
this is called Hindustan, how is it that the English rule here?” 28 

On 22 June, 1897, the Chapekar brothers—-Damodar and Bal¬ 
krishna—murdered two British officers, Rand and Lieut. Ayerst, 
while they were returning from the Government House, Poona, 
after attending the Diamond Jubilee celebration of Queen Victoria’s 
Coronation. The Chapekars intended to kill only Rand, but the 
other, who was closely following in another carriage, was shot by 
accident or through mistake. The murder of Rand was meant to 
avenge the insults and oppressions committed under his authority in 
connection with the measures undertaken to prevent the spread of 
the plague epidemic. 

In order to understand the feelings which prompted the Chapekar 
brothers to commit this murder, and to take a proper perspective oi 
their action, it is necessary to give some idea of the state of things 
which prevailed in Poona. This may be gathered from the written 
complaint submitted to the Government by Natu, a leading Poona 
Sirdar. The following extract from the Presidential address of 
Sankaran Nair at the Indian National Congress of 1897 gives a 
summary of the complaints of this kind: 


590 


THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT IN POLITICS 


“This inspection of houses by soldiers seems to have been carried 
out without notice by forcing open, very often unnecessarily when 
there were other means of entrance, the locks of the shops and the 
houses when the owners were absent, and absolutely no attempt was 
made to protect the properties or the house. No notice was taken of 
complaints concerning them. A Hindu lady was assaulted by a sol¬ 
dier, and Mr. Natu reported the matter to the authorities producing 
the witnesses. No notice was vouchsafed. The soldiers were re¬ 
fractory, and any complaint against them was obstruction. When 
a man fell ill, many neighbouring families were taken to the segre¬ 
gation camp and left there without any covering to protect their body 
or any furniture, their property at home including horses, cows and 
sheep being left unprotected. A man was unnecessarily taken to the 
hospital and sent back as not being affected by plague to find his fur¬ 
niture destroyed and his poor wife and relatives forcibly removed and 
detained in the segregation camp. Temples were defiled by soldiers 
and his own temple was entered by them, on account, Natu believes, 
of his impertinence in making a complaint. An old man who succeed¬ 
ed in satisfying the search party that he was not suffering from plague 
was detained in jail some hours for having obstructed the search 
party, the obstruction apparently consisting in the delay caused by 
him. Insult was the reward for the services of volunteers, and their 
suggestions were treated with contumacy. You all know how sen¬ 
sitive our Mahomedan fellow-subjects are about the privacy of theii 
women. And when Mr. Natu suggested that the services of Maho¬ 
medan volunteers should be availed of to search the Mahomedan 
quarter, he was told that his conduct was improper and his services 
voluntarily rendered were dispensed with. Mr. Natu brought all 
this to the notice of the officials, pointed out that the operations were 
carried on against the spirit of the rules and complained that there 
was a great amount of unrest. The Indian newspapers gave pro¬ 
minence to these and similar complaints. They compared the English 
Government to other Governments very much to the disadvantage 
of the former. The Mahratta complained: ‘Plague is more merciful 
to us than its human prototypes now reigning in the city.* The tyranny 
of the Plague Committee and its chosen instruments is yet too brutal 
to allow respectable people to breathe at ease. And it was added 
that, ‘every one of these grievances may be proved to the hilt if His 
Excellency is pleased to enquire into the details**. 29 

The Chapekar brothers killed Hand as he was the President 
of the Plague Committee under whose instructions and authority 
the operations mentioned above were carried out. Whether all the 
charges were true or not is immaterial for our present consideration. 
The truth of these very serious charges was never investigated and 

591 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


they were believed to be true by the Indians. Even Gokhal-e, who 
was then in England, referred to these atrocities in the English press, 
but as soon as he came to India he offered an humble apology. The 
Natu brothers who were prepared to substantiate the charges were 
not given an opportunity to do so, but were deported without trial. 

The Europeans were thrown into a frenzy over the murder of 
two European officials, and “an attack was commenced on the Verna¬ 
cular Press and the educated Indians, perhaps unexampled in its 
virulence since the Mutiny.... It was suggested as a matter for regret 
that the native mind had forgotten the lessons of the last Mutiny, 
that a fresh mutiny would clear the air, particularly as the Mahrattas 
were not in the show of 1857”. 30 As stated above, it was mainly 
this outburst of European feeling that was responsible for the con¬ 
viction of Tilak, though, as the trying judge admitted, there was 
nothing to connect Tilak with the murder of Rand. 31 

The Chapekar brothers were hanged, but the two Dravid bro¬ 
thers, who had been rewarded by Government for information which 
led to the arrest and conviction of Damodar Chapekar, were murdered 
on 8 February, 1899, by the third Chapekar brother, Vasudev, and his 
friend. They were also hanged. Evidently the society founded by 
the Chapekar brothers survived their death; no other activities of 
this body are known, but two unsuccessful attempts on the life of a 
Chief Constable at Poona may be ascribed to it. 

It is, however, known from the autobiographical sketch of Ara- 
binda Ghosh 32 , that a secret society was started in Western India 
before the end of the nineteenth century with a Rajput noble at the 
head. This had a council of five in Bombay with several prominent 
Maratha politicians as its members. This Rajput leader was not a 
prince, that is to say, a ruling Chief, but a noble of the State with the 
title of Thakur. The Thakur was not a member of the Council in 
Bombay, but he stood above it as the leader of the whole movement, 
while the Council helped him to organize Maharashtra and the 
Maratha States. He himself worked principally upon the Indian 
army of which he had already won over two or three regiments. 
But no further information is available of the activities of this secret 
society. 

The next phase of revolutionary activity in Maharashtra centres 
round Vinayak Damodar Savarkar, who may be said to have 
been a born revolutionary. It is said that when the story of Chapekar 
brothers reached him, he, then a boy of fifteen, took a vow before 
the goddess Durga to fulfil the mission of the martyred Chapel, ars 
by driving out the British from India. In 1900 he started an Asso¬ 
ciation at Nasik called Mitra Mela. Its objective was political 


592 


THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT IN POLITICS 


independence of India, and it emphatically asserted that such an 
independence could be won, if need be, by armed revolt. In 1904 
this Association was developed at Poona and adopted the new name, 
‘Abhinava Bharata’, after Mazzini’s Young Italy. 33 

There were also some revolutionary activities in Madhya Pradesh 
organized by the ‘Arya Bandhav Samaj’. Its object was to drive 
the British out of India by collecting a secret army of thousands of 
batches of four, but no detailed account of its activities is known. 
The Samaj was probably started at the beginning of the twentieth 
century. 

About the same time revolutionary movement was also deve¬ 
loped in Bengal. 34 A revolutionary secret society, known as the 
‘Anusilan Samiti’, was organized in Calcutta under the leadership of 
P. Mitra, Bar-at-Law. A similar organization was planned by Ara- 
binda Ghosh, who was then at Baroda. He sent Jatindra-nath Ban¬ 
dy opadhyay, who set up a secret organization in Calcutta which was 
soon amalgamated with the Anusilan Samiti. 

The members of the Anusilan Samiti, mostly young students, 
were trained in military drill, sword and lafhi-play, boxing, wrest¬ 
ling and other kinds of physical exercise. They were also given 
moral and patriotic training through regular weekly classes and 
general conversations held by eminent men like Rabindra-nath Ta¬ 
gore, Guru-das Banerji, B. C. Pal and many others. The members 
practised worship of arms in place of the images of goddess Durga. 
There were various branches of the Anusilan Samiti, and there were 
probably also several other secret societies acting independently of 
one another. The main activities of the Anusilan Samiti were carried 
on by some clubs in Calcutta. Its members also committed dacoities 
to procure funds, though this was not liked by the President, P. Mitra. 

Barindra-kumar Ghosh, younger brother of Arabinda, also joined 
the Anusilan Samiti, but soon dissensions broke out among its diffe¬ 
rent branches. Arabinda came to Calcutta in order to unite the 
different secret societies in Bengal with a common programme and 
under a common direction. He spent a large amount of money for 
these societies, and funds were also subscribed by C. R. Das and 
others. Unfortunately, a quarrel broke out between Jatindra and 
Barindra, and Arabinda came to Calcutta a second time. He made 
extensive tours, visited the. different secret societies, and also met 
leading men of some districts. He found that in Bengal the pre¬ 
vailing mood was apathy and despair. He decided to bide his time 
and in the meanwhile to continue his political work in silence behind 
the scene, for the moment for public work had not yet come. The 

593 

B.lM.n.~88 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


Anusilan Samiti, however, continued, though in a languishing con¬ 
dition. How it was galvanized into activity by the Swadeshi move¬ 
ment will be related later. 


1. Cf. Vol. IX, p. 773. 

2. For the criticism of the Congress by Bankim-chandra and Aswini Datta, see 
p. 567. 

3. Published on 27 August, 1894. Essay on Bankimchandra Chatter ji by Arabinda 
(Pondicherry, 1954), p. 47. 

4. Published on 28 August, 1893; Mukherjee, Sri Aurobindo’s Political Thought, 
pp. 75-77. 

5. La j pat Rai, HI. 146. 

6. Ibid. 140-1. 

7. Buch-H, 83-5. 

7a. Ibid, 29; Athalye, Tilak, 84-5. 

8. Kelkar, Tilak, 284-6. 

9. Karmarkar, Tilak, 215. 

10. Buch-H. 28-9. 

11. Kelkar, Tilak, 368-9. 

12. Buch-IX, 30. 

12a. Athalye, Tilak, 209. 

13. Kelkar, Tilak, 374. 

14. Athalye, Tilak, 106. 

14a. In 1897 and 1908. Tilak had also been sentenced to simple imprisonment for 
four months in 1882 on a charge of defamation. 

15. Buch-H, 25. 

16. Ibid, 26. 

17. Ibid, 24. 

18. Ibid, 187. 

19. Ibid. 

19a. This seems to be a mistake for ‘suffer’. 

20. Buch-II, 90-1. 

20a. Chintamani, p. 54. He also refers to the fact that the Maharaja of Natore, as 
Chairman of the Reception Committee of the Congress held in Calcutta in 
1901, characterised the Congress agitation as political mendicancy. Such criti¬ 
cisms of the Congress and even strong condemnations were a common feature 
of Bengal politics long before 1908. H.P. Ghosh, who won renown as a great 
journalist later in life, wrote a trenchant criticism against the Congress in the 
New India (11 November, 1901). It is to be noted that Bipin-chandra Pal, the 
editor of the New India, repudiated the idea of Ghosh and supported the Con¬ 
gress. As a matter of fact, Bipin-chandra Pal held the views erf the Moderates 
till the proposal of the Partition of Bengal changed him into an ardent nationa¬ 
list or Extremist in 1904. Cf. Mukherji, Haridas and Uma, Bipin Chandra Pal 
and India's Struggle for Swaraj, pp. 11 ff. 

21. La j pat Rai-HI, 86. 

22. Buch-H, 93. 

23. Ibid, 113-4. 

24. See p. 484. Rabindra-nath Tagore, in his boyhood, was a member cf a secret 
society where, to use his own words, he was initiated into the vow of achiev¬ 
ing freedom of India. Rajnarain Bose was the guru of the society, and the 
elder brother of Rabindra-nath was also an enthusiastic member. Atmapari- 
chaya (in Bengali) by Rabindra-nath Tagore. 

25. Cf. Vol. IX, pp. 908-14. 

26. See pp. 578 ff. 

27. Sedition ( Rowlatt) Committee Report, p. 1. 

28. Ibid, p. 2. Quoted from the autobiography of Damodar Chapekar. 

29. Congress Presidential Address, Natesan, Vol. I, 331-2. 

30. Sankaran Nan’s Address, ibid, 337. Chintamani (p. 29) gives an account of the 
repressive measures that followed the murder of Rand. 

31. See p. 582. 

32. Sri Aurobindo on himself, later incorporated in a bigger book entitled Sri 
Aurobindo on himself and on the Mother, published by the Pondicherry Asram. 

33. Dhananjay Keer, Savarkar and his Times, pp< 6, 9, 24. 

34. The account that follows is based on the Bengali book Bharater Dvitiya 
Sv&dhinati Sahgrdma, Vol. I, by Bhupendranath Datta, pp. 179 ff., 190 fff. 

594 




CHAPTER XVII (LV) 

INDIAN SERFS AND SLAVES IN THE 

BRITISH EMPIRE 

I. IN INDIA 

TEA-GARDEN LABOURERS IN ASSAM 

9 

1. The history of the Coolies in Assam Tea Gardens 

The condition of the labourers in tea-gardens was in some res¬ 
pects much worse than those who suffered from the oppression of 
indigo-planters. The latter were legally free men, and the outrages 
on them were mostly committed before public gaze, or at least within 
public knowledge, save, of course, when the victims were kept in 
dark dungeons. But even then their confinement was a matter of 
public knowledge, though no remedy was available. 

The labourers in Assam tea-gardens, generally called coolies; 
though not born as slaves, formed a body of legalised serfs, and their 
lot was hardly less miserable than that of the negro-slaves in Ameri¬ 
can plantations. A poor ignorant coolie, bom a free man, was tricked 
by force and fraud tp leave his (or her) home and to register himself 
as a labourer under contract in a tea-garden; and once this was done, 
he was absolutely in the clutches of the manager. There, within the 
secret enclave of the garden, far away from public gaze, he had 
to live the life of a slave, at the absolute mercy of the two or three 
European managers and assistant managers who were practically 
under no restraint, and did as they pleased with the hundreds of 
illiterate and helpless men' and women. It was only occasionally, 
by mere accident, that outside public came to know how these wretch¬ 
ed men and women, ill-fed, ill-clad and ill-housed, were mercilessly 
caned, kicked or otherwise brutally assaulted, openly in the presence 
of other coolies, and how the female coolies had to minister to the 
Sahib's pleasure whenever he chose to send for her. If they tried 
to escape from the garden they were easily caught and subjected to 
still harsher treatment. Many of the coolies succumbed to the as¬ 
saults and injuries, but the criminal was hardly ever brought to trial. 
In the few cases where he had to stand a trial, he was acquitted or. 
received nominal punishment on the strength of a medical certificate 
that the death of the coolie was due to the rupture of enlarged spleen. 
These grave allegations were frequently brought to the notice of 

595 




THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

the Government, but no inquiry was ever instituted as was done in 
the case of the indigo-planters; the obvious reason being that the 
crimes in the tea-garden, mostly hidden from the public, did 
not excite the same interest. But the tales of the woes and miseries 
of the coolies were narrated by those few among them who had the 
good fortune to effect their escape or to come out alive after their 
period of contract was over. Besides, pathetic stories of outrages 
upon individual coolies were reported in the Indian newspapers. 
The general truth of these is proved by revelations made, uncon¬ 
sciously or in an unguarded moment, by some of the highest officials, 
including the Chief Commissioner of Assam. Public attention was 
drawn to the pitiable condition of the labourers in Assam tea-gardens 
by Pandit Ram-kumar Vidyaratna, a preacher of the Sadhaxan 
Brahma Samaj. His Bengali book, Kuli-Kdhini (Story of the Coolies) 
belongs to the same type as the Uncle Tom's Cabin, and is not much 
inferior to it in evoking pity and sympathy for a degraded and unfor¬ 
tunate class or community. A detailed account of the woes and 
miseries of the coolies will be given in section 3. 

The history of this community may be briefly told. 

Since the growth of tea-plantations in Assam during the forties, 
necessity was felt for recruiting labourers from outside. Local sup¬ 
ply was insufficient, and the conditions of work were not tempting 
enough to induce people to work in the garden of their own free 
will. So a network of agents was set up to secure recruits, preferably 
from distant places where the conditions of service in tea-plantations 
were hardly known. The tempting remuneration induced the agents 
to secure recruits by all possible means, fair or foul. They very often 
kidnapped men, even young girls, for the purpose, or induced them 
to leave home on false pretences of giving good appointments and 
then carried their helpless victims to the coolie depots. It soon 
became notorious that the system of recruiting was a fruitful source 
of oppression. It was regulated by Act XIII of 1859 by which the 
garden authorities had to enter into an agreement or contract with 
the coolie before he could be employed in a garden. But this was 
worthless as a safeguard, for the latter, being illiterate and ignorant, 
did not understand the purport of the contract he was induced to 
accept. The value of such a contract may be realized from the 
following extract of a Report by the Chief Commissioner of 
Assam. “A contract”, says the Chief Commissioner, “may be en¬ 
forced under this Act, though it is not in writing, though it is not 
stamped, though it is not registered, though it has not been presented 
for verification before any official, though there is no proof (other 
than what evidence is produced in the trial) that the labourer under- 


596 


INDIAN SERFS AND SLAVES 


stood the terms of the engagement, though the terms may be mani¬ 
festly unfair. A labourer cannot free himself by redemption, nor 
can he plead any misconduct of his employer as an excuse for non¬ 
performance. . . ,M 

The grave abuses of this Act, to which the attention of the Go¬ 
vernment was repeatedly drawn, induced Lord Ripon to enact the 
Inland Emigration Bill which became Act I of 1882. While the Bill 
was under consideration, the Indian Association of Calcutta made 
a representation which ‘exposed, in true colours, the pathetic condi¬ 
tion of the coolies in tea-gardens’. Referring to it Lord Ripon 
observed: 

‘T have before me a very fair and temperate representation 
which has been made by the Indian Association within the last two 
or three days. They have argued the subject very fairly, and they 
have put forward objections to certain parts of the Bill which are 
well entitled to consideration. They press upon us in their me¬ 
morial this point of the ignorance of the cooly and give a curious 
extract from a book published by a Missionary of the Brahmo Samaj 
(Ram Kumar Vidyaratna), to show how very ignorant the greater 
number of the coolies who engage to go to Assam are. I have no 
doubt that that is a perfectly fair statement of the knowledge of many 
of the coolies, but I do claim for the Bill that it takes the utmost 
possible care that the labourer should thoroughly understand the 
nature of the engagement he is about to enter into**. 2 

The hopes of Lord Ripon were not realized and the pitiable 
condition of the coolies was not much improved even after the pas¬ 
sing of the Act of 1882. The Bengali newspapers, particularly the 
Sanfivani, edited by Krishna-kumar Mitra, regularly published the 
heart-rending stories of the coolies. “These revealed a ghastly tale 
of horror and a condition of things which practically amounted to 
a species of slavery thriving under the protection of British laws and 
sanctioned by the British Government”. 3 The Indian Association 
again took up the question. In 1886 they sent their Assistant Secre¬ 
tary, Dwaraka-nath Ganguli; to inquire personally into the condition 
of the tea-garden labourers in Assam. “As an emissary of the Indian 
Association, its Assistant Secretary Dwarkanath toured the tea dis¬ 
tricts of Assam, entered and stayed at tea-gardens incognito to see 
personally the condition of the labourers—men, women and children. 
He discovered dungeons in the gardens where recalcitrant men and 
women were kept as punishment. Physical torture of various kinds 
was the order of the day. The Brahmo Missionary, Pandit Shiva 
Nath Sastri, was also at the time on a religious tour in these districts. 


597 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

Dwarka-nath accompanied him to Dhubri, Goalpara, Tejpur, Naogaon, 
Shibsagar, Dibrugarh and other places. 

“Shiva Nath Sastri has given us a graphic description of how 
selfless and heroic Dwarka-nath faced all the difficulties in then- 
way with utmost resignation, and how even the religious meetings 
organised for him were attended by Government officials, even of the 
rank of Deputy Commissioner, to note down anything that might be 
said by Dwarka-nath to the public. Dwarka-nath wrote Bengali arti¬ 
cles for the SanfLvanx and English articles for the Bengalee, narrating 
the slave condition of the Assam labourers and the harrowing tales 
of their life-long misery/’ 4 He placed before the Committee of the 
Indian Association all the facts and figures gathered from personal 
inquiry. On the basis of these as well “as the judgements of several 
cases against the recruiters, Government officials and tea-garden 
managers, the Committee were in a position to prepare a long and 
documented memorial on the subject of the tea-garden labourer and 
place it in the hands of the Government and the public on 5th May 
1888. The memorial dealt with the entire ‘coolie’ question, and the 
conclusions of the Committee were supported by extracts from official 
documents. The memorial was warmly supported by the Indian 
Press 5 ’. 6 

The following account is mainly based on this memorial. For 
the sake of convenience the main items of complaint against the 
system may be discussed seriatim . 

2. System of Recruiting Coolies 

The following extract from the memorial sums up the position 
regarding recruits: “In the representation which the Committee of 
this Association made to the Government of Lord Bipon when the 
Bill which subsequently became Act I of 1882 was under considera¬ 
tion, they pointed out that the system of recruiting was liable to 
grave abuses arising from the ignorance of the labourers and their 
utter helplessness and inability to protect their interests against the 
arts of unprincipled recruiters who deceived them by false hopes 
and delusive promises to enter into contracts, the real nature of 
which they did not often sufficiently understand. The facts which 
have subsequently been brought to light and which have from time 
to time been published in the newspapers confirm the gravest appre¬ 
hensions that ever were entertained with regard to the working of 
this part of the law”. 6 In support of their contention the Committee 
quoted the judgment of the Deputy Magistrate of Berhampur in a 
case where three recruiters were punished with rigorous imprison¬ 
ment for having enticed a minor girl for employment as coolie Without 


598 


INDIAN SERFS AND SLAVES 


her mother’s knowledge and consent. The Committee then refer 
in detail to the case of Kessur Sing Nepali, a postal peon drawing 
a monthly salary of Rs. 10. Being assured that one Lachman Sing 
of Assam could easily secure for him a suitable appointment there 
on a salary of Rs. 15 or Rs. 20 per month, Kessur and his wife 
met Lachman at Jalpaiguri, and were taken to Dhubri coolie depot. 
While on board the steamer Kessur Singh created a commotion by 
refusing to drink water drawn from the river by the Muhammadan 
crew. This attracted the notice of a kind-hearted passenger, 
and when the steamer reached Tezpur he persuaded a local lawyer 
to institute a suit for their release. Kessur Sing, on solemn affir¬ 
mation, stated before the Deputy Commissioner of Darrang: “Soon 
after we were lodged in the depot, a Babu took down our names 
and gave us a blanket, two coortas (shirts) and two dhotis and a 
tin mug. I did not wish to accept these things, but the Jamadar 
Dutchman Sing said they are given us as present by the Sirdar and 
returned me the Rs. 5 I had given as my railway fare. We got no 
other money and this was my own. I never saw any agreement and 
I never signed any agreement. I can sign my own name. No saheb 
asked me any question. A saheb came on horse-back to the depot 
once, but left without saying anything. It was not till I got on board 
the steamer when the doctor said you must drink here and not there, 
that I found out I was an emigrant”. 7 After making a reference to 
the Deputy Commissioner, Dhubri, the Deputy Commissioner of 
Darrang passed the following order: “Read letter 266E, dated 7th 
August, from the Deputy Commissioner, Dhubri. From the state¬ 
ments contained in this letter it is quite clear Kessur Sing and his 
wife entered into agreements, and his petition to the effect that he 
was deceived, cannot be entertained. He must therefore proceed 
to the garden for which he was recruited”. 8 The Committee made 
the following comment on this order: “Even if it be admitted, that 
Kessur Sing and his wife had entered into any agreement, it is quite 
clear that they did so under misrepresentation and were according 
to law justly entitled to have their contracts cancelled. No man in 
his senses would have ever resigned a comparatively lucrative and 
respectable post for the purpose of being employed as a coolie in a 
tea-garden far away from his home on half his original pay, unless 
some kind of fraud had been practised upon him. Yet their appli¬ 
cation was dismissed”. The Committee next referred to the cases 
of three women of respectable classes. Two of these, Ahladi, the 
daughter of a Brahman, and Shashi, a Boishtam woman, were bathing 
in the Ganges in Calcutta when the former told the latter that she 
would very much like to go to a relative’s house in Baranagar but did 
not know where it was located. “Hearing this, some one near them 


599 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


volunteered to show them the place, and another woman corroborated 
what this man said. Thereupon the volunteer brought a hackney, 
took Ahladi and Shashi therein, and drove them off. This was at about 
10 a.m. After driving from place to place, at last, at about 5 p.m. 
they were brought into a house where they were confined for some 
5 or 6 hours, and afterwards again put into a coach and brought to 
the Sealdah Station, where, to their utter astonishment, they were 
locked up in the train, which then left for Goalundo and Dhubri. 
Breaking their journey now by train and then by steamer, they at 
last arrived, as they said, at a place (Dhubri) and were taken to some 
houses where they were thrust into the company of innumerable rag¬ 
ged, half-clad, dirty men, women and children. The next day they 
were conducted to the river ghaut and filed before a Sahib, and then 
put on board a steamer which after five days arrived at this place 
(Dibrugarh). It was on board the steamer that Ahladi and Shashi 
got acquainted with Deologni, who told them that she was a Rajput, 
and had two children at her home; one day, quarrelling with some 
one at home, she, in the heat of anger, came out to the road, where 
she was accosted by a man who, pretending to console her, put her 
into the train and conveyed to where God knows. Deologni was in her 
senses, but always crying for her children, till the second day after 
they were shipped, when suddenly she became mute and showed 
signs of insanity. For eleven days they did not eat anything.” The 
correspondent, who heard the story from Ahladi and Shashi—Deo- 
lagni having become insane and died—-continues: “The tears of 
these poor women would move the heart of anybody: they would 
cling round the legs of any one who would kindly ask them their 
circumstances. Our kind-hearted Deputy Commissioner detained 
them for some two days till the receipt of their contracts, but when 
these showed nothing to authorise his interference, they were taken 
to their destination, the Khobong Garden, in the district”. 9 

One might well wonder how such things were possible when 
the Act of 1882, in the words of Lord Ripon, “takes the utmost pos¬ 
sible care that the labourer should thoroughly understand the nature 
of the engagement he is about to enter into”. As this is a very per¬ 
tinent question and is likely to make many suspect the truth of the 
above story, though it was reported in several newspapers and never 
contradicted, the following lengthy extract is quoted from the 
memorial by way of explanation. 

“The law provides that an emigrant should ‘understand the 
contract as regards the locality, period and nature of the service, the 
rate of wages and the price at which rice is to be supplied to him, 
that the terms thereof are in accordance with the law, that he has 

600 


INDIAN SERFS AND SLAVES 


not been induced to agree to enter thereunto by any coercion, undue 
influence, fraud, misrepresentation, and that he is willing to fulfil 
the same’. Before a labourer is registered it is therefore necessary 
that the registering officer should satisfy himself that he understands 
the drift of his contract as regards the points referred to above. But 
the manner in which this part of the registering officer’s duty is 
performed precludes the possibility of the terms of the contract being 
clearly explained to the coolie or being understood by him. Like 
regiments of soldiers, the coolies are made to stand in groups before 
the registering officer. When they thus stand in regular lines, one 
after another, the registering officer begins his examination, and they 
are examined en masse. The questions that are usually put and the 
answers that are usually given are appended below: 

“Questions of the registering officer. 

1. Where do you go? 

2. For how many years do you go? 

3. What work will you do? 

4. What will be the rate of your wages? 

5. At what price will rice be supplied to you? 

6. If the price of the rice be more than three rupees who will 
pay the difference? 

Answers given by the coolies (men and women in one voice). 

1. We go to Assam. 

2. For five years. 

3. Men—We will hoe. Women—We will pick up tea-leaves. 

4. Men—Five rupees for the first three years and six rupees for 
the last two years. Women-—Four rupees for the first three 
years and five rupees for the last two years. 

5. At three rupees a maund. 

6. The Sirkar (meaning the employer) will pay. 

“The enquiry then comes to a close. It is obvious, the Committee 
submit, that an enquiry conducted in such a fashion and under such 
conditions must defeat the purpose which the law has in view, viz., 
to provide the necessary safe-guards for the protection of the coolie. 
The stereotyped answers given to stereotyped questions by a crowd of 
ignorant people do not imply that they have really all taken part in 
the replies that are given, or that even those who have taken part in 
them have understood their drift. It would be absurd to hold that 
unless the necessary explanations were forthcoming they would even 
understand where Assam was—whether it was a Province or a town, 


601 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—IT 

or how far distant it was from their homes, or the sort of work which 
they would have to undergo in the tea-gardens. If the account 
which they have received regarding the manner in which the con¬ 
tract is explained to the coolies is correct, the Committee have little 
hesitation in affirming that it is an empty form which is gone through, 
that while the letter of the law is preserved, its spirit is completely 
broken, and that the coolies are not much wiser after their being 
brought before the registering officer than they had been before that 
event. Indeed the Committee of the Indian Association have been in¬ 
formed that in many cases the coolies, before they are brought before 
the registering officer, are regularly taught by the officers attached to 
the depots to return the stereotyped answers to the stereotyped 
questions which have been quoted above, and that those who in any 
way prove refractory are either kept back in the depots and there 
shut up as prisoners till they consent to sign the agreement, or if 
they are brought before the registering officer they are pushed back 
towards the rear, so that from behind other people they may not 
have an opportunity of speaking to him. The Committee are aware 
that these are grave allegations to make; and they have ventured to 
put them forward upon the evidence which they have been able to 
collect by enquiries made in Assam and by their agents, and they 
hope that the Commission of enquiry which they will have prayed 
for in this letter will sift this and other matters connected with 
coolie emigration into Assam and suggest the remedy,*’ 10 

The hope of the Committee was never realized, for in spite of 
their challenge no commission of inquiry was appointed to inquire 
into the system of recruiting. 

3. Condition of the Coolies in the Assam Tea-Gardens 

The Deputy Surgeon-General and Sanitary Commissioner of 
Assam, the highest medical authority in Assam, makes the following 
observations in his Report of 1884: “The condition of the emigrant 
labourers alters greatly for the worse immediately he is landed from 
the river-steamers and discharged from Government sanitary pro¬ 
tection. In many important respects he is thenceforward left to 
his own resources; in others he receives only modified and often 
injudicious care; in all the conditions of life he is less favourably 
placed than before. His food is no longer dietetic and carefully 
cooked; his clothing and bedding (beyond a blanket) is left to him¬ 
self to provide; his lodging is often inadequate against the varia¬ 
tions of climate; his work exposes him to all weathers, and often to 
dangerous disease-causes; he is unprotected against drinking to 


602 


INDIAN SERFS AND SLAVES 


excess; nay, he is, in many instances, almost tempted to it; even if he 
falls ill, the hospital is a name only, he may receive medicine either 
by daily attendance at a dispensary or given to him in his hut; but 
the care of suitable food and adequate restoratives and nursing are, 
generally speaking, unknown. It is no wonder therefore that the 
rate of sickness and mortality among the tea-garden labourers as a 
class has been always very great; that in many gardens it is above 
what is counted a frightful epidemic in civilised countries.” 11 

The death-rate, referred to in the Report, was 37.8 per thousand, 
in 1882, when the new Act for safeguardihg the interests of the 
coolies came into force. It rose to 41.3 in 1883, and 43.2 in 1884, 
and, according to the Sanitary Commissioner, nothing occurred 
during 1885 which would induce him to modify his Report quoted 
above. 

The infant mortality was also very high, rising from 39.7 per 
thousand to 44 per thousand in 1884. “Neglect on the part of the 
women who are unable to do their daily task and at the same time 
look after the children and who cannot afford to do no work and stay 
at home accounts in a great measure for the high mortality among 
children/’ 12 So the condition of labour was such that a coolie- 
woman had to neglect the duties of the mother in order to meet 
the demands of her employers. The lot of the coolie-child was 
thus described by the Civil Surgeon of Dibrugarh: “The conditions 
of child life in a tea-garden are altogether so unfavourable that the 
wonder is how so many children succeed in passing childhood’s 
stage. A coolie woman gets a variable amount of leave for her 
confinement. After that if the infant is not strangled at birth, she 
must either take it out to her work, or leave it behind with no one 
to look after it. In the former case, tied to its mother’s back or 
left in the nearest drain, it is exposed to the extremes of heat and 
cold, to wind and rain; in the latter the child gets half-starved and 
so paves its way to a death from some bowel-disorder or succeeds 
in cutting short its career by a fall or a roll into the open fire. So 
alive are coolie women to these facts that to avoid the trouble of 
bringing up their children under such circumstances, abortion is 
frequently resorted to, and dais (female quacks) who produce it, 
often find their business a very profitable one”. In noticing the 
excessive mortality among the children he again observes in his 
report of 1886: “Turning to an actual analysis of the figures, two 
facts are noticeable, and one more than another. This is the large 
number of death among the children. Of fifteen reported deaths 
among the non-Act coolies, fourteen are of children. This is directly 
traceable to the first of the causes of sickness I have mentioned. 


603 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-rll 


Women are most needed during the plucking season, which is at the 
same time most sickly. It is not to be wondered at, therefore, that 
they are not allowed the time they need to look after their children, 
or that the latter are neglected*’. 13 This provoked the very just com¬ 
ment of the Committee: “A more revolting and at the same time a 
more painful admission, it is difficult to conceive.... No state of recog¬ 
nized slavery could be worse”. 14 

The heavy mortality among the coolies was also largely due to 
the hard work imposed upon them. “Under Section 115 of the 
Emigration Act, the schedule of work is framed by the^planters 
themselves, and though subject to revision by the Inspector, the 
visits of that officer are few and far between, and he can scarcely 
be expected to exercise any effectual check over the work which 
the planters in their interests may think fit to allot.” 16 

The punishment meted out to the coolies beggars description. 
The following is an extract from the memorial: 

“The cane is too frequently employed in many of the tea gardens 
in Assam. A high officer of the Assam Government, while on an in¬ 
cognito visit to a garden, saw th$t the manager having tied the hands 
of a coolie to a tree was caning him most unmercifully. In 1884 
Mr. Francis, Manager of the Dygoroon tea-garden, was tried on a 
charge of grievous hurt, for having struck a coolie woman with a cane 
which caused her death. Dr. Conceicao, the Civil Surgeon of Gola- 
ghat, who made a post-mortem examination said that ‘death was the 
result of congestion of the kidneys, which he was of opinion had been 
set up by violence applied to that part of the body where the 
kidnevs are situated*. But Francis called a witness to' show 
that he did not strike the woman, but only lifted his cane and 
threatened to strike her. Francis was eventually acquitted. 

“The next mode of punishment which is sometimes resorted to 
is the lock-up. The Committee have been given to understand that 
it is the fermenting-house which is generally used for the purpose. 
In 1884 two officers of the Dum-Duma tea-estate in the District of 
Dibrugarh named Babus Kedar Nath Ghosh and Sasadhar Barua 
were charged with the offence of keeping a man under illegal re¬ 
straint, and in this case the existence of dungeon in many tea- 
gardens was proved by the witnesses for the defence. The Assis¬ 
tant Commissioner Mr. Greenshield who tried the case expressed 
in his judgment great surprise and strong disapproval of such con¬ 
duct on part of the planters. 

“In December 1886, the following telegram appeared in the 
newspapers which goes to support the view which the Committee 
have here put forward:— 


604 


INDIAN SERFS AND SLAVES 


‘Having been systematically maltreated, some 110 coolies, men 
and women, came in a body on the 9th instant from the Kajabarie 
tea-garden, and made complaint before the Assistant Commissioner, 
Mr. McLeod, who immediately sent out Lieutenant Gordon to the 
garden, and asked him to report about the coolies’ complaints. 
Lieutenant Gordon has found some of the serious charges to be 
correct, namely, the existence of a dungeon, where absconders and 
other recalcitrant coolies are confined and tied down with ropes. 
The Manager, Mr. Eyre, admitted having the dungeon, and having 
cut a coolie with a cane”. 16 

Reference has been made above 17 to the statement of Sir Bam- 
pfylde Fuller, Chief Commissioner of Assam, that “on some gardens 
there was a good deal of flogging”, and also to two actual cases cited 
by him, in one of which a woman was stripped and flogged and in 
another a coolie was killed as a result of flogging with a stirrup 
leather. The first case is very important. The penalty—fine 
amounting to a month’s salary—inflicted for such a heinous crime, at 
the suggestion of the Chief Commissioner, and maintained by the 
High Court judge, an Englishman, shows the little value that even 
highest British officials put on the honour of Indian women. % After 
this it would be difficult to refuse credence to the stories of outrage 
on coolie women by the officials of the gardens. These stories, 
repeated in newspapers and widely circulated from various reliable 
sources, seem to indicate that such outrages were taken to be the nor¬ 
mal lot of every coolie woman. As in the case of indigo-planters, it 
is difficult to prove such cases, but the probability in the case of tea- 
planters is much greater, as the temptation and opportunities of com¬ 
mitting the crime were much greater. 

The Committee pointed out in detail how the provisions of the 
Act of 1882, framed for the special protection of the coolies, were 
systematically violated or not given effect to, and in some respects 
it was done with the full concurrence of the authorities in Assam. 
This was true with regard to two very important safeguards, name* 
ly, the prompt registration of a contract and its verification pro¬ 
vided in section 111 of the Act of 1882. The Committee made the 
following comment on the subject: 

‘“It will thus be seen that a provision of the law which by 
ensuring prompt registration of contracts affords some sort of pro¬ 
tection to the coolie is rendered nugatory by the manner of its appli¬ 
cation which again is contrary to law. Then with regard to that 
part of Section 111 which requires that contracts should be verified, 
the Chief Commissioner observes in the Emigration Report for 1883, 


$05 




THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

that ‘the number verified is extremely disproportionate to the num¬ 
ber registered, and it seems that only in Cacher and Sibsagar have 
any strenuous efforts been made to perform this important duty 5 * 
The duty of verification is not only not regularly but also not pro¬ 
perly performed. The Chief Commissioner in the report for the 
year 1883 admits that ‘It is in itself a much more satisfactory thing 
that the terms of the engagement should be explained to the coolie, 
before he signs it, by an officer of Government. But this is not 
always possible/ 

“Out of 25,457 local contracts executed in 1884, only 9,492 were 
verified during the year, and out of the number, 117 contracts were 
cancelled ‘as a punishment on managers for transgressing the rules.’ 
That the provisions of Section 111 of the Act operate to the injury 
of the coolie is a fact which is admitted by high official authority. 
Thus in 1883, Mr. Porteus, the sub-divisional officer of Karimgunge, 
wrote:— 

‘There is not the smallest security that the coolie, when he is 
brought up to go through the form of touching the pen, in company 
with some dozens of others at the garden, understands in the least 
what he is signing to. There is no provision that his agreement 
should be first explained to him, nor is it very likely that any objec¬ 
tion he might make would be listened to. He is expected to sign 
with the rest. As shown above, it is not uncommon for coolies to 
try to repudiate their agreements afterwards, and it is very difficult 
to decide whether their objections afford sufficient ground for 
cancellation/ 

“Mr. Stevens, the Deputy Commissioner of Syihet, endorsed 
these remarks. He said: 

‘In the above remarks of the sub-divisional officer of Kjarim- 
gunge on the liability of abuse of the Section 111 procedure I fully 
concur. In this matter the law appears entirely one-sided. Every 
thing is in favour of the employer. A labour contract, purporting 
to have been signed by the coolie, but either not executed by him 
or if executed, executed under a misapprehension, is sent in for regis¬ 
tration under Section 111 and is registered. It may not be verified for 
a year afterwards; and suppose it is then cancelled, what compensa¬ 
tion does the unfortunate coolie receive? He has been, one may 
say, in wrongful confinement for a year, forced to labour for a year, 
forced to labour for a master who had no claim to his services and 
liable, if he tried to escape from his state of quasi-slavery, to be 
pursued, arrested, and sent up for trial like a common criminal, or 
worse, as these even cannot in all cases be arrested without a 


606 


INDIAN SERFS AND SLAVES 


warrant”. 18 It is important to note that the Deputy Commissioner 
describes the status of a coolie as one of quasi-slavery. 

The following statement made by a garden-manager, Gibbons, 
before the Inspecting Officer is most revealing:—“Several coolies’ 
agreements were written out on the first December last. They were 
written by Gopal Chandra. They were signed by me. They were 
not signed by the coolies on the first December. I did not bring up 
the coolies to my bungalow on the first December. They never 
executed the agreements now placed before me. I however sent 
them in to be registered.” In reply to an exclamation of surprise 
on the part of Mr. Lyon, the Inspecting Officer, at this statement, 
Gibbons said that there was nothing extraordinary in this—that it 
was the custom and was always done. The High Court in review¬ 
ing this case observed: 

“It is difficult to conceive a grosser case. The helplessness and 
ignorance of the labourers and the superior intelligence and position 
of the accused aggravates the offence which but for the intervention 
of the Inspector would have entailed grievous injustice on the 
labourers.” 19 

The Committee observed with regret that “in cases between 
planters and coolies, too often the interests of justice and the inte¬ 
rests of the weaker party are not sufficiently cared for.” This may 
be regretted but need hardly cause any surprise after what has been 
said above regarding the attitude of the English officers towards 
their fellow-countrymen, the indigo-planters. 20 The same reason 
operated with the same effect. The Committee described several 
instances in detail, but two may be briefly cited. “On the 10th of 
October, 1885, one Sheikh Sukari petitioned the Magistrate of Sib- 
sagar for a discharge certificate under section 141 of Act I for the 
release of his son Sheikh Khodadin from the garden of one 
Mr. Hosack of Diron tea-estate. The Assistant Commissioner, 
I4eut. H. R. Browne, who was the trying Magistrate, wrote a letter 
to Mr. Hosack giving him the substance of the application and calling 
upon him to make his defence. But Mr. Hosack, without sending 
him a reply, wrote to the Deputy Commissioner”. He complained 
against Mr. Browne, stated that Sheikh Khodadin was not a coolie 
but his domestic servant, and finally requested the Deputy Commis¬ 
sioner to oblige him by looking into the case. 

“On receipt of this letter, the application of the father was sum¬ 
marily dismissed on the 28th October without even calling for 
evidence”. But Khodadin, having managed to escape from the 
garden and “applied on the 2nd November to Lt. Browne to grant 

607 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

him a discharge certificate, the same day the following order was 
passed:— 

‘Mr. Hosack has already written to say that complainant has 
no contract; complainant is told that he can leave the employ if he 

wishes to.’ 

“But on the next day, the 3rd November, one Pator Gogoi on 
behalf of Mr. Hosack made an application under Section 175 to Lt. 
Browne for the arrest of Sheikh Khodadin on a charge of desertion. 
A warrant was immediately issued, and the man having been arrest¬ 
ed was put on his trial the same day and was summarily convicted 
to undergo a sentence of seven days’ rigorous imprisonment; it ap¬ 
pears from the judgment that if Mr. Hosack had not asked for the 
accused ‘to be lightly treated,’ he would have been more severely 
punished.. .The judge forgot that this sentence passed on the 
accused completely upset his order of the previous day. It was he 
who had told the accused ‘that he can leave the employ if he wishes 
to,’ and the next day he upsets the order on the strength of a docu¬ 
ment whose existence Mr. Hosack himself was not aware of! 

“In another case a coolie, Bhola Kachari by name, was con¬ 
victed by Mr. Arbuthnot, the Assistant Commissioner of Jorhat, 
although the contract was not drawn up in conformity with the re¬ 
quirements of Section 9, Clause C of Act I of 1882 and its schedule, 
and of Section 111 as to registration. The High Court in setting 
aside the conviction observed:—‘It appears to the judges that ow¬ 
ing to Mr. Arbuthnot’s mistake the accused in this case has under¬ 
gone several months’ imprisonment for which there were no legal 
grounds’. The learned Judges, Justices Cunningham and Chandra 
Madhab Ghose, called for an explanation from Mr. Arbuthnot.” 21 
Reference may be made in this connection to the two cases men¬ 
tioned above, of failure of justice and executive interference in judi¬ 
cial affairs noted by Sir Bamfylde Fuller, the Chief Commissioner 
of Assam. 22 

The memorial of the Indian Association ended with a prayer 
for inquiry couched in the following words:— 

“The Committee of the Indian Association have now submitted 
their representation; and they venture to hope that they have made 
it clear that the system by which coolies are recruited, their treat¬ 
ment in the tea-gardens, and the imperfect nature of the protection 
afforded them by the Act are such as should engage the earnest 
attention of the Government. The coolies themselves are voiceless; 
they have no organization to represent them. All the more, therefore, 


608 


INDIAN SERFS AND SLAVES 

the Committee submit, is the duty incumbent upon the Gov¬ 
ernment to look to their grievances and to redress them. The Com¬ 
mittee would earnestly appeal to the Government for the appoint¬ 
ment of an independent Commission to enquire into the facts which 
have been here urged and generally into the condition of the coolies 
in the Assam tea-gardens. A thorough and exhaustive inquiry is 
all that the Committee seek for as the basis for any future action 
which the Government may think fit to take, and the Committee 
earnestly hope that the Government will have no difficulty in com¬ 
plying with this request. The Committee have learnt with satis¬ 
faction that His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal has ap¬ 
pointed a special officer to enquire into certain complaints of kid¬ 
napping and other criminal offences made by persons engaged in 
free recruiting outside the provisions of Act I of 1882. No enquiry, 
however, into the working of Act I of 1882 and Act XIII of 1859 has yet 
been ordered, and the necessity for it clearly exists in view of the evi¬ 
dence which has been set forth in this letter and indeed of the action, 
of Government of Bengal itself.” 23 To this the Government vouchsaf¬ 
ed the following reply. “The Government of India, in communication 
with the Chief Commissioner of Assam, is taking measures for a full 
enquiry into the practical working of the emigration system in Assam 
with a view to introducing such amendments as may be found neces¬ 
sary. The reconsideration of the existing rules and regulations in the 
light of the practical experience gained was fixed, some time ago, 
for January, 1890, and meanwhile the points raised in the letter of 
the Indian Association will be carefully investigated”. 24 

But the Indians outside Bengal also had not much more sym¬ 
pathy for the coolies. Attempts were made to discuss the subject 
in the Indian National Congress, both in 1887 and 1888. But on 
both occasions the proposal was turned down on the ground that the 
subject 'vfras ‘provincial’ rather than ‘national’. This indicates the 
general apathy on the subject, outside Bengal. It is said that this 
refusal on the part of the Indian National Congress induced the Ben¬ 
gal leaders to call a Provincial Conference. It was first convened 
mainly for the discussion of the coolie question, but became a regu¬ 
lar annual institution. The Conference passed the following reso¬ 
lution: 

“The Conference is of opinion that it has become essential 
alike in the interests of the coolies, and for the credit of the Govern¬ 
ment, to appoint an independent Commission to enquire into the 
condition of the coolies in the tea-gardens in Assam, and the general 
working of Act XHI of 1859 and Act I of 1882” 26 

609 

B.P.I.R.—8© 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

The Government, however, never appointed such a commis¬ 
sion. Perhaps the revelations made by the Commission on Indigo- 
plantation served as a warning. But the ‘ruptured spleen’ of Assam 
coolies became a bye-word of reproach to the tea-planters as well as 
to the Government. 

4. Brutality of the T ea-planters admitted by the highest British 
officials 

The brutal outrages committed with impunity by the European 
planters upon the helpless Indian coolies are so incredible that it 
seems necessary to quote some official correspondence on the subject 
in order to depict their true nature. The following extracts from 
letters 26 would convey some idea of the tragic situation, though the 
actual state of things was much worse than such official admission. 

a. General Review. 

Curzon to Hamilton, 5 August, 1903 

“Fuller has now returned to Assam.I also propose to add¬ 

ress him about relations between tea-planters and their coolies in his 
Province, which seem to me to be entering upon a more acute and 
dangerous phase. The coolies are learning to combine, and very 
often, upon any provocation, they are apt to gather together and 
assault the European manager of the plantation. These managers 
are drawn from a most inferior class of Englishmen and Scotchmen; 
they do not know the language, they have a profound contempt for 
the Natives and they are sometimes guilty of serious acts of lust and 
oppression. The planters actually allege in public meetings that 
they can be certain of no justice, though what they mean by this is 
that they regard it as the greatest of hardships if a planter is fined 
Rs. 100/- for an assault that terminates in the death of a coolie, while 
the coolie gets a term of rigorous imprisonment of from three to six 
years if he so much as lifts his hands against a European. In 
my view this unfortunate state of affairs is likely to continue, 
and even to develop as long as the present Labour Law remains in 
Assam. The Labour Law is really a penal contract, and the 
coolies may almost be described as slaves. They cannot run away 
except at the cost of being arrested and thrown into prison. As 
long as these conditions exist, the masters will continue to bully 
their slaves, and the slaves will resent the tyranny of the masters. 
Some day we shall abolish the penal contract altogether, and the 
planters will have to go to the open market for their labour. A good 
many concerns will smash altogether and disappear from view, 
but the stronger and better-managed gardens will survive, and the 
planters will then have to treat their coolies with humanity, because 
otherwise they will not be able to retain them at all.” 


610 



INDIAN SERFS AND SLAVES 

b. Miscarriage of Justice. 

1. Curzon to Hamilton, 17 October, 1900 

“I have discussed with you, in many letters, the difficulties that 
have to be encountered in this country in the endeavour to secure 
even justice as between Europeans and natives in the Courts. I have 
shown you successively how Magistrates, District Judges, Juries and 
Court-martials all fail, when it is a question of sentencing a European 
for an injury to a native. I am sorry now to have to report that 
even the High Court of Calcutta is not exempt. There occurred, 
recently in Assam, a case of the most gross and aggravated assault 
by an Englishman in a tea plantation upon one of his coolies. The 
district .magistrate who tried it sentenced the culprit to a fine of 
Rs. 50/-. The Local Government in great anger at this utterly inade¬ 
quate sentence took the case to the High Court, on a motion for 
enhancement. The two Judges who tried the case rejected the appeal 
on the flimsiest grounds, which could scarcely impose upon anyone. 
One of their number was the individual before whom was recently 
tried at Calcutta the soldier who successfully feigned madness in 
order to escape the consequences of his murderous deed.” 

2. Curzon to Hamilton, 24 July , 1901 

“Much the same is true also of Assam. I have had three cases 
before me during the past weeks in which the English Magistrates, 
who are entirely in the hands of tea-planters, have given the most 
partial and unjust sentences in cases between the planters or man¬ 
agers of the tea gardens and their coolies. If a coolie threatens, or 
commits a technical assault upon an Englishman, he is given a 
year’s rigorous imprisonment. The Englishman may thrash a coolie 
almost to death, or may criminally assault his daughter or wife, and 
he only gets a fine of Rs. 50/-. Now I learn it is the fashion for the 
Magistrates, when a case of this character comes before him, to send 
out to the tea-planters for their opinion, and if this be unfavourable 
to action, a great many of the cases are burked altogether. Cotton 
interns himself in his office, and writes long letters and resolutions, 
but knows next to nothing of his officers or of his people. The 
administration has therefore become very feeble in his* hands, and 
will want a good deal of bracing up when he goes.” 

II. OUTSIDE INDIA 
I. The Indenture System 

The Industrial Revolution and the development of large-scale 
production in Europe had a great repercussion on those European 
countries which had colonies in various parts of the world. They 


611 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE— II 

had vast territories and capital, but their man-power was not suffi¬ 
cient to exploit the material resources of the colonies to the fullest ex¬ 
tent. They at first used slave labour, but the abolition of slavery in 
the British empire in 1833 raised a great problem. Sufficient native 
labour was not available for the developing plantations, and the 
substitution of white labour was out of the question, because of the 
unsuitable climate and heavy expenditure involved. It was this pre¬ 
dicament that forced the European planters and colonial govern¬ 
ments to turn to India for the supply of labour. 

The ruin of industry in India, brought about by the British rule 
and the Industrial Revolution in Britain, had rendered millions of 
Indian workers in various arts and crafts destitute without any means 
of earning livelihood. The poverty of the cultivators was increased 
by the heavy land tax. The cumulative effect of these and other 
factors was seen in the recurring famines during the 18th and 19th 
centuries. “It was in such a predicament that the planters from foreign 
countries approached the Indian Government through the imperial 
and colonial governments for a steady and continuous supply of Indian 
labour. The earnest entreaties and the rosy promises held out by the 
colonial planters and governments at a most psychological moment 
proved decisive. And organized emigration of Indian labour to the 
British colonies began from Bengal in 1838 under the supervision and 
direction of the Government of India. The active sympathy of the 
Government of India accelerated the pace of emigration. The 
colonial governments appointed professional recruiters who visited 
Indian villages stricken with failure of crops, or pilgrim centres 
during days of huge religious congregations, and entrapped poor 
Indians by dangling before them hopeful pictures of prospects in 
the colonies. They fulfilled the legal formalities with official conni¬ 
vance of the recruiting depots and then took them over for indentured 
service. With the success of the British planters, the other colonial 
planters also became interested in Indian labour. Indian emigra¬ 
tion was later extended to the French and the Dutch colonies.” 27 

The heavy cost involved in recruiting and transporting labourers 
across the seas to distant colonies led the planters to devise the inden¬ 
ture system which practically chained the labourer to the employer. 
“The chief features of this system were five years of State regulated 
labour, denial of the right to change the employer or employment, 
and the denial of increased wages in spite of increased prices and 
profits. The employer was under a legal obligation to provide fixed 
wages, free housing, medical attendance and other amenities.” 
But the planters adopted all means, fair or foul, to prevent the 
Indian emigrants from returning home. 


612 


INDIAN SERFS AND SLAVES 


Many colonies such as Jamaica, Trinidad, British Guiana, and Fiji 
had regular recruiting agents in India who adopted most fraudu¬ 
lent practices for inducing the Indians to sign the contract, and in 
many cases men and women were enticed by deceit or falsehood, 
and even abducted by force. The mode of transportation was hor¬ 
rible. They were herded together like Negro slaves of the eighteenth 
century without any proper arrangement for food and sanitation, 
and a large percentage died on the way. Those who survived had 
to work under a vicious system and were subjected to fines, floggings 
and imprisonment. Many labourers went mad or committed suicide. 
There were also grave moral evils, mainly due to the housing of 
Indian labour. Andrews and Pearson who personally visited the 
coolie lines of Fiji stated that these were mostly responsible for 
prostitution and immorality among the Indian immigrants. Tyson 
reported that in Jamaica the housing, with a few exceptions, was 
deplorable. The Royal Commission of 1897 made a scathing criti¬ 
cism of the housing of Indian labour in Trinidad. There was no 
change in the wages in British Guiana between 1871 and 1922, in 
Trinidad between 1845 and 1920, and it remained constant for 40 
to 50 years in many other places. 28 

It would be hardly an exaggeration to say that the indenture 
system suffered from almost all the evils of slavery with the only 
change that Indian subjects of Britain were substituted for Negroes 
of Africa. Sir William Hunter stated that the indenture system was 
perilously near slavery. Gokhale and Gandhi described it as ‘semi¬ 
slavery’. Lord Olivier said: “It is notable that the West Indian Negro 
thinks the coolie (i.e., the Indian labourer) more of a slave than we 
do.” 2 ^ 

2. The Island of Mauritius 30 

A typical example is furnished by Mauritius, an island in the 
Indian Ocean, 550 miles east of Madagascar. Known as He de 
France, while in French possession, it passed into the hands of the 
British during the Napoleonic War, and became a crown colony. 
But it was a colony of slaves, having 87,000 slaves in 1815, and 76,000 
in 1835, when the slaves were officially emancipated in Mauritius. 
It was the first British colony to import free labourers on a large 
scale from India. The system began in 1830, and by 1838 there 
were 24,000 Indian labourers in Mauritius. These immigrants suf¬ 
fered terribly during the journey and fared no better when they 
landed. The planters of Mauritius, being long accustomed to coer¬ 
cive methods applied to the slaves, treated the Indian labourers also 
in the same manner. They had no idea that Sunday work, unlimited 
hours and corporal punishments were illegal. The Government of 


613 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

Mauritius legalised such conduct by passing Ordinances 16 and 17 of 
1835. They were so brutal that even the British Government vetoed 
them on the ground that they established a system of slavery. 

The agitation in the Calcutta Press and the reports of their own 
officers induced the Government of India to pass the Act V of 1837, 
which, supplemented by the Act XXXII of 1837, regulated the re¬ 
cruitment of Indian labourers for Mauritius. These two Acts may 
be said to have formulated the system of Indenture whose main fea¬ 
tures have been described above. The evils of this system were ex¬ 
posed by scathing criticism, even in the British Parliament, in 1837-8, 
and Lord Brougham referred to the iniquitous measure as having 
given legal sanction to a future slave trade. There was also strong 
agitation in Calcutta, and at a public meeting in the Town Hall, held 
on 10 July, 1838, the prevailing malpractices in the export of coolies 
from Calcutta were strongly condemned. The Government of India 
suspended emigration from India to Mauritius, British Guiana, and 
other places with effect from 11 July, 1838, and appointed a com¬ 
mittee to go into the matter. This Committee of six—one Indian 
and five Englishmen—were not unanimous in their recommendations. 
Two Englishmen and the solitary Indian submitted the majority re¬ 
port with two dissentient notes, the sixth member having left India 
before the Committee could complete the work. According to the 
majority report the “coolies were generally induced to come to Cal¬ 
cutta by fraud and deceit, practised upon them by subordinate agents 
employed by Europeans and Anglo-Indians, who were mostly 
aware of the frauds. In many instances the coolie was incapable 
of understanding his contract. Kidnapping had prevailed to a very 
great extent, the coolies, while kept in Calcutta itself and its neigh¬ 
bourhood. being actually in a state of close imprisonment.” As a 
result of this Report the emigration of labourers from India, sus¬ 
pended in 1838, was prohibited in 1840 by the Government of India, 
and the British Parliament ratified the decision. 

This spelt utter disaster to the planters, traders, and merchants 
of Mauritius who sent a joint petition against the prohibition to the 
British authorities in London. The exoected result followed. The 
Government of India, under pressure of the Colonial Office and the 
Board of Control, passed the Act XV of 1842, permitting emigration 
of labourers from Calcutta, Bombay and Madras, the ostensible just- 
fication of this volte-face being furnished by the promises, on the 
part of the Mauritius Government, of better conduct in future, 
followed by an ordinance which, however, did not abate by a jot 
the sufferings of the Indian indentured labourers. 


614 


INDIAN SERFS AND SLAVES 


Far from effecting any improvement, the authorities made the 
position of the labourers much worse by Ordinance XXII of 1847 
which imposed new hardships upon them. Under this Ordinance it 
was no longer binding upon the employers to provide residence for 
the labourers; monthly wages of certain categories were reduced to 
four shillings; absence without leave was punished by forfeiture of 
wages and rations; and penalties, including imprisonment, were pre¬ 
scribed for various other offences. 

The death of 284 out of 697 labourers, due to gross negligence 
during the voyage to Mauritius, led the Government of India to sus¬ 
pend for a short time the emigration of labourers in 1856 and to 
pass the Act XIII of 1864, incorporating therein the existing laws— 
19 in all—and adding several measures to improve the lot of labourers. 
But though it partially removed some of the malpractices at the 
time of making contracts, it did not improve the condition of: the 
Indian labourers in Mauritius. There was an officer with the pom¬ 
pous name of the ‘Protector of Immigrants’. But, as the Governor 
of Mauritius admitted in 1860, that officer was more a colonial agent 
than a protector. The immigrants were actually subjected to severe 
ill-treatment by the Protection Department. “On numerous occa¬ 
sions when they had to sleep overnight in the depot of the Immigra¬ 
tion Department, they were beaten and pushed out on the road.” On 
one occasion Joseph, a clerk, made a labourer, whose replies to his 
queries did not satisfy him, stand with a large register placed on his 
head while his peon “gave the labourer a few smart lashes with a 
cane”. A report of this incident in a local daily was turned down 
with ridicule by the authorities, but the ‘Protector’ had to admit its 
truth before the Royal Commission. 

The Act XIII of 1864, and the Ordinance XXXI of 1867 passed 
by the Government of Mauritius, effected some improvements in the 
position and “lifted the indentured labourers at least theoretically 
from the slough of slavery.” But the benefits derived from them 
were more than counterbalanced by a number of reactionary laws 
which followed them. 

A labourer found little relief even after the period of contract 
was over. If he refused to work for the planters and tried to earn, 
his living independently, he was treated rather like a convict. He 
had to take a license and wear a badge on his arm, and was fined for 
failure to do either. £ 20,060 were realised in fees and fines 
from this class of persons between 1867 and 1872. Many vexatious 
law;;—almost brutal in some cases—were rendered still more brutal 
by the way in which they were applied by an “unsympathetic police 
and a no more sympathetic magistracy”. In 1889 more than 30,000 

615 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


persons were arrested for failure to produce on demand any of the 
various documents they were liable to carry with them. Of these 
7,000 were released as they were illegally arrested, more than 11,000 
received light punishments, while more than 12,000 were sentenced 
to various terms of imprisonment. These had the desired effect, 
namely, to force the indenture-expired Indian labourers to re-inden¬ 
ture. The Government of India denounced the oppressive laws, and 
a Royal Commission was appointed in 1872 to inquire into the matter. 
The Commission admitted the complaints and allegations to be sub¬ 
stantially true, and regarded the condition of immigrant labour as 
deplorable. But the British colonial office felt greater sympathy for 
the perpetrators of the brutal acts noted by the Commission than for 
those who were their victims. For, the former belonged to the white 
ruling race, and the latter, to the black subject-race. As in the cases 
of the indigo-planters and tea-planters in India, so in Mauritius and 
other colonies, weak and helpless Indian labourers were at the ab¬ 
solute mercy of the white planters, who knew that they could com¬ 
mit the worst outrages on their labourers with impunity, or with a 
nominal punishment. In India the planters were backed by the Gov¬ 
ernment and European Police and Magistrates, while in Mauritius 
and other colonies the planters were backed by the Colonial Office in 
London. 

A somewhat detailed account has been given of the lot of Indian 
labourers in Mauritius, because it was not an isolated case but typical 
of what took place in other colonies. 

It is a sad commentary on the economic condition of the masses 
in India under British rule that, in spite of such horrible conditions, 
more and more labourers from India immigrated into Mauritius and 
other colonies. This illustrates, as nothing else could, the extreme 
poverty of the Indian people, and the apathy of the British rulers to 
their welfare when it came into conflict with the interest of the 
British planters. What this interest amounted to was very briefly 
indicated by Jackson, the Colonial Governor, when he said in 1935: 
“Mauritius owes much to the Indians. More than two-thirds of the 
people of Mauritius are of Indian descent and it is their presence in 
the colony which has made possible the intensive development, which 
places Mauritius among the most highly productive areas in the 
(British) Empire.” 

In support of the above statements we may quote the following 
figures to indicate the rapid increase in the number of immigrants in 
Mauritius: 


616 


INDIAN SERFS AND SLAVES 


Year 

Total Population 

Number of Indians 


(in thousands) 

(in thousands) 

1846 

158 

56 

1851 

180 

77 

1861 

310 

192 

1881 

359 

248 

1891 

370 

255 

1901 

371 

.259 


3. The Indians In South Africa 31 

The Indians in South Africa fell under two broad categories, 
namely, (i) Indentured labourers; (ii) Free, unindentured Indians. 

Indians were first imported into South Africa in 1860 as inden¬ 
tured labourers to till the British-owned sugar, tea and coffee plan¬ 
tations. They came as serfs under a contract for five years. A 
large number of labourers, however, chose to remain in South Africa 
even after the contract was over. But a law, passed in Natal in 1894, 
compelled these indentured labourers to return to India or renew 
their indenture. An Act of 1895 permitted an ex-indentured 
labourer to remain in South Africa on payment of an annual tax of 
three pounds for himself and each of his dependants. But few could 
meet this exorbitant demand. 

Free immigrants from India also visited South Africa. They 
earned their livelihood as hawkers, tradesmen and artisans, and fol¬ 
lowed various other professions. In some Colonies, as in Natal, 
there were free Indians of this class, including ex-indentured 
labourers, as well as indentured labourers. But in the Transvaal 
there were no indentured Indian labourers. The Indians went there 
as free citizens of Her Majesty’s Empire to trade in the Colony. But 
these Indians, being frugal in food, dress, and habits, could undersell 
the European traders who, being jealous and afraid of their compe¬ 
tition, tried to keep them down by unfair means. The process began 
in Transvaal, chiefly at the instigation of the British merchants, 
though the Dutch—the Boers—controlled the administration. 

The British had annexed the Transvaal in 1877, but the Boers 
rose in rebellion in 1881 and routed a small British force which had 
occupied the Majuba Hill. The British thereupon came to terms 
with the Transvaal Government and these were elaborated in a 
Convention signed at Pretoria, the capital of the Transvaal, in August 
1881. By this instrument the Transvaal was . granted self-govern¬ 
ment subject to British suzerainty. 


617 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


The clause 26 of the Pretoria Convention guaranteed full rights 
of citizenship to “all persons other than natives”. Whether these 
‘persons’ included Indians might have been in doubt, for there were 
no Indians in the Transvaal in 1881. They settled there in large 
number between 1881 and 1886. In 1884 the British and the Trans¬ 
vaal Governments signed a convention at London. Article XIV of 
the Convention reaffirmed the contents of clause 26 of the Pretoria 
Convention as follows: 

“All persons, other than natives, conforming themselves to 
the laws of the South African Republic (a) will have full liberty, 
with their families, to enter, travel or reside in any part of the 
South African Republic; (b) they will be entitled to hire or 
possess houses, manufactories, ware-houses, shops and premises; 
(c) they may carry on their commerce either in person or by 
any agents whom they may think fit to employ; (d) they will 
not be subject, in respect of their persons or property, or in res¬ 
pect of their commerce or industry, to any taxes, whether general 
or local, other than those which are or may be imposed upon 
citizens of the said Republic”. 

As many Indians were then living in the Transvaal, their rights 
of citizenship were thus fully protected by the Convention of London. 
In fact, the early Indians actually enjoyed this protection; their pre¬ 
sence and freedom were not objected to, as they stepped on the soil 
of the Transvaal, or established themselves there, as traders. 

Shortly there commenced an agitation against the Indian and 
other Asiatic settlers who were mostly store-keepers, and the British 
merchants sent petitions to the Transvaal Government against them. 
Another petition was sent by the merchants of European descent 
with a suggestion to stop the immigration of the Asiatics, including 
the Indians, as these, in the opinion of the petitioners, were not 
covered by the Article XIV of the London Convention. 

The Transvaal Government was fully sympathetic to the peti¬ 
tioners but was doubtful about the interpretation put upon section 
XIV by them. So its Secretary sent a full report to Lord Derby, the 
Colonial Secretary of the Home Government, on 6 January, 1885, and 
asked his opinion on the question. “I beg to request”, said he, “that 
your Lordship will be so good as to acquaint this Government as to 
the views of Her Majesty’s Government on the subject, that is, whe¬ 
ther according to the opinion of Her Majesty’s Government, this 
Government is at liberty, under the Convention now in force, to 
frame such regulations relative to the coloured persons referred to 
as may appear to them to be in the interests of the inhabitants of this 


618 


INDIAN SERFS AND SLAVES 


Republic, and h not, whether Her Majesty’s Government by its 
consent will empower this Government to meet either entirely or 
partly the wishes of the petitioners of European descent”. 

Sir Hercules Robinson, the British High Commissioner in the 
Transvaal, forwarded the letter of the Transvaal Government to the 
Colonial Secretary with the following observation: 

“As it was doubtless not the intention of Lord Kimberley to 
prohibit the Transvaal Government from adopting, if necessary, 
special legislation for the regulation of Indian or Chinese coolie 
immigrants, I should be disposed to recommend that the Govern¬ 
ment of the South African Republic be informed that Her 
Majesty’s Government will be willing to amend Article 14 of the 
Convention... (so as to read) as follows: All persons other than 
African -natives or Indian or Chinese coolie 'immigrants con¬ 
forming themselves to the law of the South African Republic 
will have full liberty with their families to enter, travel, or 
reside, etc., etc./’ 

The Earl of Derby agreed with the recommendation of Sir 
Hercules Robinson and intimated his consent to be communicated to 
the Transvaal Government as follows: 

“I have carefully considered your suggestion as to the amend¬ 
ment of the Convention, and, if you are of opinion that it would 
be preferable and more satisfactory to the Government of South 
African Republic to proceed as you propose, Her Majesty’s Go¬ 
vernment will be willing to amend the Convention as.suggested. 
It seems to deserve consideration, however, whether it would 
not be more correct for the Volksraad to legislate in the proposed 
sense, having received an assurance that Her Majesty’s Govern¬ 
ment will not desire to insist upon any such construction of the 
terms of the Convention as would interfere with reasonable 
legislation in the desired direction”. 

Sir Hercules Robinson communicated the above to the Transvaal 
Government in a letter dated 17 April, 1885. It led to the enact¬ 
ment of Law No. 3, 1885, on 10 June, 1885. The main provisions 
of the Act were as follows: 

(1) The Act applied to the persons belonging to one of the abo¬ 
riginal races of Asia, among whom “the so-called coolies, Arabs, Ma- 
layas and Mohammedan subjects of the Turkish empire” were 
included. 

(2) Persons falling in these classes were subjected to various 
disabilities. They could not acquire the rights of citizenship and 
could not be owners of landed property. Besides, those who settled 


619 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—-II 

in the Republic for trade, or otherwise, must be registered within 
eight days of their arrival on payment of twenty-five pounds sterling. 
Non-registration was declared to be a penal offence. 

(3) The Government would have the right to point out proper 
streets, wards and locations to persons falling in this category for 
purposes of residence. 

After the passing of the Act, Chamberlain, the British Co¬ 
lonial Secretary, made a protest on 24 February, 1886, to the Trans¬ 
vaal Government and asked for its revision, ‘‘as it is in direct opposi¬ 
tion to the views of Her Majesty's Government, and in its present 
form is a contravention of the Convention of London". 

The Government of the Transvaal now modified their stand and 
justified the measure on the ground of sanitary considerations in a 
despatch dated 6 September, 1886. This was, of course, a subterfuge, 
but they made slight amendments to the Act in that light. 

This amendment made two major concessions: the registration 
fee was reduced from £. 25 to £. 3 and the Indians were allowed to 
acquire fixed property within the areas set apart for their residence 
by the Government. But “the Government required certain Indian 
merchants not only to live but also to conduct their business in the . 
prescribed locations. Licences were not issued to trade outside the 
locations. Thus € habitation* was extended to include ' trade’ also". 
The British Colonial Secretary protested against it and wrote as fol¬ 
lows: “The right of residing, trading, etc., under the London Conven¬ 
tion appears to be restricted, as regards Asiatics, by the law of 1885, 
amended in 1886, by requiring residence in certain localities selected 
for sanitary reasons and by registration, but not otherwise, and if trad¬ 
ing licences are granted to other persons on application, Indian traders 
have clearly a right to obtain them. Moreover, the law only pres¬ 
cribes locations for ‘habitation’ and there does not appear to be any 
prohibition as to ‘trading’, in places other than locations". But, as 
before, the Transvaal Government triumphed, and it was decided 
“that all Asiatics and other persons coming under the said law shall 
have to limit themselves, both in respect to residence as well as to 
trade, to the localities appointed". 

Though the Acts were passed ostensibly on grounds of health, it 
was too thin a disguise to deceive anybody. In this connection re¬ 
ference may be made to the following statement of Dr. Krause on 
behalf of the Transvaal British Association before Asiatic Enquiry 
Commission on Friday, 16 April, 1920: 


620 


INDIAN SERFS AND SLAVES 


“The painful question of Indian undesirability and trade jea¬ 
lousy was initiated as far back as 1886 by several chambers of com¬ 
merce. It is interesting to note that in a discussion in the Volksraad 
of 1886 arising out of a petition presented by a number of white trades¬ 
men to oust the Indians from Johannesburg a statement was recorded 
to the effect that ‘the European store-keepers charged poor people 
very high prices for the staff of life, while the coolies charged much 
less.’ Following upon the petition a deputation of white store¬ 
keepers waited upon the late President Kruger to urge him to enforce 
the petition and to do away with the Indian hawkers. The President 
flatly refused to listen to any such suggestions on the ground that 
hawkers were ‘very useful’ to his people. 

“....Having failed in this attempt, the white traders, small 
store-keepers principally, supported another petition with the plea 
that the Indian was likely to spread leprosy, syphilis and similar 
loathsome diseases which the white community owing to the pre¬ 
sence of the Asiatics were likely to contract. As against this, two 
counter-petitions were presented to the President, one signed by 
1340 Europeans including a large percentage of European whole¬ 
sale firms declaring that the sanitary habits of the Indian traders 
and those who resided in Johannesburg and other principal towns, 
were not inferior to those of the European and that the agitation 
was due purely to trade jealousy.... Having failed in this, the 
Indians’ rivals then adopted the plea of unfair competition.” 

There were other restrictions imposed by law on Indians. These 
may be summed up as follows: 

“Firstly, on entering the South African Republic, Indians were 
required to pay a licence fee of £. 3 and this exempted them from 
any other special tax, while they were domiciled in the State. 

“Secondly, hawkers had to take out a licence of 10 sh. every 
month. This was not a special tax on Indians as hawkers of all 
nationalities had to pay this. 

“Thirdly, Indians and other Asiatics were not allowed to be out 
after 5 p.m. without a pass. In the beginning there was no such 
regulation against Indians. The rule was introduced and consecrated 
by custom so far as the Natives of South Africa were concerned, and 
was presumably extended by analogy to the representatives of the 
coloured races of other countries. In June, 1888, certain Indians in 
Johannesburg presented a memorial to the Volksraad asking to be 
exempted from the operation of this rule, but their request was not 
granted. 


621 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

“Fourthly, the railway regulations prevented Indians from tra¬ 
velling in first or second class. ‘Classed as coloured persons, Indians 
were not allowed to walk on side paths, though there was no specific 
restriction to this effect in their name*. The Indian traders pro¬ 
tested against these restrictions early in 1898 and thereupon the 
State Secretary of the Transvaal Government gave an assurance to 
the effect that Indian traders of the better class would not be inter¬ 
fered with and thus the Transvaal Government agreed only to apply 
their various regulations to the poor class of Indians. 

“Lastly, section 92 of the Gold Law No. 15 of 1898 imposed ad¬ 
ditional restrictions on the occupation of proclaimed land by Asiatics. 
Under this Act a white man alone could acquire a leasehold right 
in a stand. He was prohibited from transferring or subletting the 
leasehold right to a coloured person or permitting such person to 
reside on or occupy ground held under such right. It was further 
provided that in the mining district of Witwatersrand no coloured 
person should be permitted to reside on proclaimed land except in 
bazars, locations, mining compounds and such other places as the 
Mining Commissioner might set apart. 

“No coloured person (including Indian) may be a licence holder, 
or in any way be connected with the working of the diggings, but 
shall be allowed only as a workman in the service of whites”. 

“The effect of the foregoing clauses was to make illegal in future 
the leasing of stands for occupation by people from Asia in the 
mining districts even for purposes of trade except in specified loca¬ 
tions or bazars”. Thus the Transvaal Government would tolerate 
Indians as labourers but not as free traders. 

This painful episode of the Indians in the Transvaal may be 
fittingly closed with the following observations of Lord Lansdowne: 
“A considerable number of the Queen’s Indian subjects are to be 
found in the Transvaal, and among the many misdeeds of the South 
African Republic, I do not know that any filled me with more indig¬ 
nation than its treatment of these Indians. And the harm is not 
confined to the sufferers on the spot; for what do you imagine to be 
the effect produced in India, when these poor people return to their 
country and report to their friends that the Government of the 
Empress, so mighty and irresistible in India with its population of 
300,000,000, is powerless to secure redress at the hands of a small 
South African state.” 

But the Transvaal did not stand alone. Soon Natal followed 
suit. Here, too, the Europeans viewed with alarm the rapid growth 


622 


INDIAN SERFS AND SLAVES 

of the Indian population about 1S90. An Act of 1895 imposed an 
annual tax on Indian labourers who refused to reindenture after the 
first contract was over. The Act No. 8 of 1896 deprived the Indians 
of the r;ight to vote for Parliamentary elections. 

An Indian Immigration Restriction Act was passed in 1897. A 
second Act with the same title was passed in 1903 which, among 
other things, permitted the exclusion of all would-be immigrants 
unable to write in any European alphabets. Under this Act thou¬ 
sands of Asiatics were refused permission to land. Thus Natal did 
in a series of Acts what the Transvaal had done in 1885 by a single 
Act, and deprived the Indians of “political, vocational and property 
rights together with freedom of movement”. But Natal did some¬ 
thing more. It sought to stop the immigration of Indians and took 
various oppressive measures against the Indians to which reference 
will be made in the next volume. 

It is interesting to recall in this connection that it was at the 
earnest request of the white settlers of Natal that the Governor of the 
Cape had arranged for the importation of Indian labourers, and the 
first batch of these landed on 17 November, 1860. What these Indians 
did for Natal was described by Sir Liege Hulett in the Legislative 
Assembly of Ratal in July, 1908, in the following words: 

“The condition of the Colony before the importation of Indian 
labour was one of gloom; it was one that then and there threatened 
to extinguish the vitality of the country; and it was only by the 
Government assisting the importation of labour that the country 
began at once to thrive. The Coast had been turned to one of the 
most prosperous parts of South Africa. They could not find in the 
whole of the Cape and the Transvaal what could be found in the 
Coast of Natal—10,000 acres of land in plot and in crop—and that 
was entirely due to the importation of Indians. Durban was abso¬ 
lutely built up on the Indian population.” 32 

The miserable lot of the Indians in South Africa roused great 
indignation in India and evoked strong protests from the Indian 
National Congress. Resolutions protesting against the disabilities 
actually or about to be imposed on Indian settlers in South Africa, 
and praying to \ Her Majesty's Government and the Government of 
India to guard their interests and remove their grievances were pas¬ 
sed in almost each session since 1894. The following resolution, 
passed in 1903, may be taken as a fair specimen: 

“That this Congress views with grave concern and regret the 
hard lot of His Majesty’s Indian subjects living in the British 


623 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


Colonies in South Africa, Australia and elsewhere, the great hardships 
and disabilities to which they are subjected by the Colonial Govern¬ 
ments, and the consequent degradation of their status and rights as 
subjects of the King, and protests against the treatment of Indians 
by the colonies as backward and uncivilized races; and it prays that 
in view of the great part the Indian settlers have played in the de¬ 
velopment of the colonies and the economic advantages, which have 
resulted both to India and to the Colonies from their emigration to 
and stay in the latter, the Government of India will be pleased to 
ensure to them all the rights and privileges of British citizenship in 
common with the European subjects of His Majesty by enforcing, if 
necessary, such measures as will render it impossible for the colonies 
to secure Indian immigrants except on fair, equitable and honourable 
terms; and that in view of the great importance of the principle of 
equal treatment of all, His Majesty’s Government should devise ade¬ 
quate measures to ensure that position to Indian emigrants in all 
the British Colonies”. 

The British Government had declared war against the Transvaal 
for securing commercial interests of Englishmen, but not only connived 
at, but sometimes even encouraged, the legislation seriously curtail¬ 
ing the rights and status of the Indians. This provoked the Congress 
to pass the following resolution in 1905: 

“....In particular, this Congress records its most emphatic 
protest against the threatened enforcement, in an aggravated form, 
of the anti-Indian legislation of the late Boer Government of the 
Transvaal by the British Government. In view of the fact that one 
of the declared causes of the recent Boer War was the treatment 
meted out to the Indian subjects of the King-Emperor by the Govern¬ 
ment of that Republic, and in view also of the admitted loyalty of 
Indian settlers in South Africa and the help rendered by them during 
the war, this Congress fervently prays that the British Parliament 
will insist on a just and equal treatment being secured to Indian 
settlers in that Crown Colony”. 

But the British Government ignored all these pathetic appeals. 


1. Bagal, J. C., History of the Indian Association, Appendix, p. XLV. 

2. Ibid, 53. 

3. Ibid, 104. 

4. Ibid, 103. 

5. Ibid, 104. 

6. Ibid, Appendix, p. XXXIII. 

7. Ibid, XXXV. 

8. Ibid, XXXV-XXXVI. 

9. Ibid, XXXVI-XXXVII. 

10. ibid, xxxvn-xxxvm. 

11. Ibid, XXXVIII-XXXIX. 


624 



INDIAN SERFS AND SLAVES 


12. Ibid, XXXIX. 

13. Ibid, XXXIX-XL. 

14. Ibid, XL. 

15. Ibid, XL. 

16. Ibid, XLII. 

17. See pp. 364-5. 

18. Bagal, op. cit., XUII-XUV. 

19. Ibid, XLIV-XLV. 

20. Cf. Vol. IX, pp. 922-25. 

21. Bagal, op. cit., XLI-XLII. 

22. See above, pp. 364-5. 

23. Bagal, op. cit., XLV-XLVI. 

24. Ibid, 104. 

25. Ibid, 106. 

26. Unpublished documents in QRO, London. The italics are not in the original. 
The letters haVe since been published. Of. Advent of Independence by Dr. A.K. 
Majumdar, pp, 323-6. 

27. C. Kondapi, Indians Overseas , p. 5. 

28. There is a vast literature on the woeful condition of the Indentured labourers. 
Gokhale described it as a monstrous system ( Speeches , 520). For a vivid 
description of the evils and fraudulent practices, cf. Report of Messrs. Andrews 
and Pearson on Indentured Labour in Fiji. Also cf. the speech of Madan-mohan 
Malaviya in the Imperial Legislative Council on March 20, 1916. 

29. C. Kondapi, p. 8. 

30. The account of Mauritius is mainly based on The Indenture System in Mauritius , 
1837-1915, by S. B. Mookherji. The quotations are also from that work. 

31. The major part of this section, dealing with the Transvaal, is based on the 
article “Indians in the Transvaal” by Iqbal Narain, published in the Uttar a 
Bharati , Vol. IV, No. 2 (March, 1958), pp. 67-94. The official documents quoted 
will be found in this article with full references. 

32. IAR, 1924, II. 329. 


625 




BIBLIOGRAPHY 


(This Bibliography is arranged on the same plan as that adopted 
in Vol. IX, with the omission of Sections I and II which are unneces¬ 
sary and Section IV, A and B, which is common to the two volumes). 


I. GENERAL HISTORICAL WORKS 


Abdulla, Yusuf Ali 

Ajbhedananda, 

SWAMI 

Aga Khan 
Agarwal, L. N. 
Andrews, C. F. 
Bagal, J. C. 


Banerji, A. (Ed.) 
Banerji, B. N. 


Basu, B. D. 


Basu, P. N. 
Besant, Annie 

Blunt, W. S. 


* 

A Cultural History of India during British 
Period, Bombay, 1940. 

India and Her People, New York, 1906. 

India in Transition, Bombay, 1918. 

Indian Nationalist Movement. 

The Renaissance in India, London, 1912. 

I. Bharatbarsher Svadhinata (in Bengali), 
Calcutta, B.S. 1354. 

II. Jativaira va amader Desatmabodh (in 
Bengali). 

III. Jatiyatar Navamantra va Hindumelar 
Itivritta. 

IV. Vidroha o Vairita. Calcutta, B.S. 1356. 

V. History of the Indian Association, 1876-1951, 
Calcutta, 1953. 

VI. Muktir Sandhane Bharat (in Bengali), 
Third Edition, Calcutta, B.S. 1367. 

VII. Unabinsa Satabdir Bangla (in Bengali) 
Calcutta, B.S. 1348. 

Speeches by Lai Mohan Ghose, Calcutta, 1883. 

I. Sambadpatre Sekaler Katha, 3 Vols., (in 
Bengali), Calcutta, 1950. 

n. Bangla Samayik Patra, 2 vols. (in Bengali), 
Calcutta, 1947-51. 

I. Rise of the Christian Power in India, Cal¬ 
cutta, 1933. 

n. India under the British Crown, Calcutta, 
1933. 

History of Hindu Civilization during British 
Rule, Calcutta, 1897. 

I. England 8s India, Harrogate, 1903. 

II. India-—a nation, Adyar, 1930. 

I. India under Ripon, a Private Diary. London, 
1909. 

n. Ideas about India, London, 1885. 


Bombay Association, Minutes of the Proceedings of 

Bose, C. N. England’s Administration of India, Calcutta, 

1907. 


626 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Bose, N. S. 

Bose, Sudhindra. 
Bradley-Birt, F. B. 

Buch, M. A. 


Buckland, C. E. 


Burne, 0. T. 
Campbell, G. 

Chailley, J. 

Chintamani, C. Y. 
Chirol, Sir V. 

Colvin, Sir 
Auckland 

Cotton, Sir Henry 


Cotton, H. E. A. 


Coupland, Sir 
Reginald 
Cromer, Lord 

Cunningham, H. S. 
Curzon, Marchio¬ 
ness of 
Kedleston 
Danvers, F. C, 


Das Gupta, Anil 
Chandra 

Datta, B. N. 
Datta, K. K. 


Digby, William 
Dodwell, H.BL (Ed.) 


The Indian Awakening and Bengal, Calcutta, 
1960. 

Some Aspects of British Rule in India. 

Twelve men of Bengal in the Nineteenth Cen¬ 
tury, Calcutta, 1910, 

I. Rise and Growth of Indian Liberalism, 
Baroda, 1938. 

II. Rise and Growth of Indian Militant 
Nationalism, Baroda, 1940. 

III. Rise and Growth of Indian Nationalism. 
Baroda, 1939. 

I. Bengal under Lieutenant Governors, 2 vols., 
Calcutta, 1901. 

II. Dictionary of Indian Biography, London, 
1906. 

Memories, London, 1907. 

I. Memoirs of my Indian Career, 2 Vols., Lon¬ 
don, 1893, 

II. India as it may be, London, 1853. 
Administrative Problems of British India, 

London, 1910. 

Indian Politics since the Mutiny, London, 1940. 

I. Indian Unrest, London, 1910. 

II. India : Old and New, London, 1921. 

If it be Real what does it mean? 

I. New India, London, 1907. (First published 
in 1885). 

II. Indian and Home Memories, London, 1911. 

The Century in India, 1800-1900, Calcutta, 
1901. 

India, A Re-statement, Bombay, 1945. 

Political and Literary Essays, London, 1913. 

British India and its Rulers, London, 1881. 
Reminiscences, London, 1955. 


An index to events relating to India and the 
East referred to in The Times , 1850-89, 
London, 1897. 

Selections from Calcutta Gazette Vol. VI 
(1824-1832). 

Bharater Dvitiya Svadhinata Sangram (in 
Bengali). 

I. Education and Social Amelioration of 
Women in Pre-Mutiny India, Patna, 1936. 

II. Dawn of Renascent India, Nagpur, 1950. 

‘Prosperous 7 British India, London, 1901. 

The Cambridge History of India, Vol. V (1929), 
Vol. VI (1932). 


627 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-11 


Dubois, Abbe, J. A. 

Dutt, K. N. 

Dutt, R. C. ^ 

Dutt, Sukumar 
Eden, Emily. 
Edwards, L. 

Eoebes, J. 

Fraser, Sir Andrew 
Ganesh& Co. (Pub.) 

Garratt, G. T. 

Ghosal, J. 

Ghose, Aurobindo 


Ghose, 

Barindrakumar 
Ghose, M. N. 

Ghose, N. N. 

Ghose, Ramgopal 

Ghosh, Binay 

Gilchrist, R. N. 
Goonaratne, C.D.S. 

Gopal, Ram 
Graham, A. 

Griffiths, Sir 
Percival 
Gupta A. (Ed.) 

Gupta, S. K. 

Hamilton, Lord 
George 
Heber, R. 

Holland, W. 


Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies, 
Oxford, 1953. 

Landmarks of the Freedom Struggle in Assam, 
Gauhati, 1958. 

England and India, 1785-1885, London, 1897. 
Problem of Indian Nationality, Calcutta, 1926. 
Letters from India, 2 vols., London, 1872. 
Reminiscences of forty-three years in India, 
London, 1874. 

Oriental Memoirs, 2 Vols., London, 1834. 
Among Indian rajas and ryots, London, 1912. 

I. Indian Nation Builders, Madras, 1921. 

II. India’s claim for Home Rule, Madras, 1917. 

I. An Indian Commentary, London, 1928. 

II. The Legacy of India (Edited), Oxford, 1937. 

Celebrated Trials in India, Calcutta, 1902. 

I. The Need in Nationalism and other Essays, 
Madras, 1923. 

II. The Renaissance in India, Calcutta, 1946. 
in. The Spirit and Form of Indian Polity, Cal¬ 
cutta, 1947. 

IV. Speeches, Calcutta, 1948. 

V. Bankim-Tilak-Dayananda, Calcutta, 1947. 

VI. Bharater Navajanma (Rebirth of India), 
(in Bengali), Calcutta 1925. 

Wounded Humanity, Calcutta, 1934. 

Sekaler Lok (in Bengali), Calcutta, B.S. 1346. 
England’s Work in India, Calcutta, 1909. 

Public Speeches and Remarks on the Black 
Acts, Calcutta, 1871. 

Samayik Pat re Banglar Samajachitra, (in Ben¬ 
gali), 3 Vols. Calcutta, 1962-4. 

Indian Nationality, London, 1920. 

The Development of Political Consciousness in 
India, 1757-1793. 

British Rule in India, Bombay, 1963. 

The means of ameliorating India, Glasgow, 
1835. 

The British Impact on India, London, 

1952. 

Studies in the Bengal Renaissance, Calcutta, 
1958. 

Unabinsa Satabdite Banglar Nabajagaran (in 
Bengali), Calcutta, 1959. 

Parliamentary Reminiscences, 1886-1906, Lon¬ 
don, 1922. 

Narrative of a Journey through the Upper Pro¬ 
vinces of India etc., 2 Vols., London, 1828. 

Asian Nationalism and the West, New York, 

1953. 


628 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


IIougii, W. 

Houston, J. 
Hunter. W. W. 


Hutchinson, Lester 
Hyde, H. B. 

Ikram, S. M. And 
Spear, P. (Ed.) 

Iyengar, S. S. R. 
Karkaria, R. P. 

Kohn, II. 

Lahari, D. 

Lawrence, W. 

Long, Reverend J. 
Luard, R. D. 

Lyall, Sir A. C. 
Macdonald, J. R. 
Macnicol, N. 

Majumdar, B. B. 
Majumdar, J. K. 

Majumdar, R. C. 


Malabari, B. M. 
Marshman, J. C. 

Marx, Karl 
Mathew, Arthur 

Mazumdar, A. C. 
Mehta, Ashok, and 
Patwardhan, 
Achyut 

Merney, Viscount 
Miles, A. 

Monier-Williams, 
Sir M. 

Morley, Viscount 


India as it ought to be under the new Charter 
Act, London, 1853. 

Representative Men of Bombay Presidency, 
1897. 

I. The India of the Queen and other Essays, 
London, 1903. 

II. Report of Education Commission appointed 
by Lord Ripon (Hunter Commission), 1882. 

III. The Imperial Gazetteer of India, 9 Vols., 
London, 1881. 

The Empire of the Nabobs, London, 1937. 

Parochial Annals of Bengal, Calcutta, 1901. 

The Cultural Heritage of Pakistan, Karachi, 
1955. 

Memorandum on the progress of the Madras 
Presidency, Madras, 1893. 

India, Forty years of Progress and Reform, 
London, 1896. 

A History of Nationalism in the East, London, 
1929. 

Swadhinatar Itihas (The History of the Free¬ 
dom Movement), Calcutta, 1909. 

The India we served, London, 1928. 

Handbook of Bengal Missions, London, 1848. 

Reconstruction of our Indian Empire. 

Asiatic Studies, London, 1907. 

The Awakening of India, London, 1911. 

The Making of Modern India, Oxford, 1924. 

History of Political Thought, Calcutta, 1934. 

Indian Speeches and documents on British rule, 
1821-1918, Calcutta, 1937. 

I. History of the Freedom Movement in India, 
Vol. I, Calcutta, 1962. 

II. Glimpses of Bengal in the Nineteenth Cen¬ 
tury, Calcutta, 1960. 

The Indian Problem, Bombay, 1894. 

The Life and times of Carey, Marshman and 
Ward, 2 Vols., London, 1859. 

Articles on India, Bombay, 1945. 

Christianity and the Government of India, 
London, 1929. 

Indian National Evolution, Madras, 1917. 

The Communal Triangle in India, Allahabad, 
1942. 

The Viceroys and Governors-General of India, 
1857-1947, London, 1949. 

The Land of the Lingam, London, 1933. 

Modern India and the Indians, London, 1879. 

Recollections, 2 Vols., London, 1917. 


629 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-11 


Mukerjee, 

Hirendranatii 

Mukherjee, 

Haridas and Uma 


Muller, Max 


India struggles for Freedom, Bombay, 1946. 

I. Sri Aurobindo’s Political Thought, Calcutta, 
1958. 

II. Sri Aurobindo and the New Thought in 
Indian Politics, Calcutta 1964. 

III. Bipin Chandra Pal and India’s Struggle for 
Swaraj, Calcutta, 1958. 

Rammohan to Ramkrishna, Calcutta, 1952. 


Mutiny and the Congress by an Old Bengali, Serampore, 1891. 

Noel, B. W. England and India, an essay on the duty of 

Englishmen towards the Hindoos, London, 
1859. 


O’MALLEY, L, S, S. 


Oswell, G. D. 

Pal, Bepin Chandra 


Pal, Krxstodas 


Parekh, C. L. (Ed.) 

Pillai, G. P. 
PjtADHAN, R. G. 
Prasad, Rajendra 
Prinsep, H. T. 
Prtnsep, V. C. 

Rax, Lajpat 


Rawlimson H. G. 
Reynolds/R. 
Rqutledge, J. 


L History of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa under 
British rule, Calcutta, 1925. 

II. The Indian Civil Service, 1901-1930, Lon¬ 
don, 1931. 

III. Indian Caste Customs, London, 1932. 

IV. India’s Social Heritage, London, 1934. 

V. Modem India and the West, London, 1941. 
Sketches of Rulers of India, 3 Vols., Oxford, 

1908-09. 

I. Memoirs of My Life and Times, 2 Vols., Cal¬ 
cutta, 1932 and 1951. 

II. Brahmo Samaj and the Battle of Swaraj in 
India, Calcutta, 1926. 

III. Indian Nationalism, Madras, 1948. 

IV. Nationality and Empire, Calcutta, 1916. 

V. The New Spirit, Calcutta, 1907. 

VI. Character Sketches, Calcutta, 1957. 

VII. Nabajuger Bangla (in Bengali), Calcutta, 
B.S. 1362. 

I. Young India Vindicated, a Discourse read at 
the Hare Anniversary Meeting, Calcutta, 
June 1856. 

II. Young Bengal Vindicated, Calcutta, 1856. 
Eminent Indians on Indian Politics, Bombay, 

1892. 

Representative Indians. London, 1897. 

India’s Struggle for Swaraj, Madras, 1930. 
India Divided, Bombay, 1946. 

The India Question in 1853, London, 1853. 
Imperial India, London, 1878. 

I. The Arya Samaj, London, 1915. 

II. Unhappy India, Calcutta, 1928. 

III. Young India, New York, 1917. 

IV. England’s Debt to India, 

The Legacy of India, Oxford, 1937. 

White Sahibs in India, London, 1946. 

English Rule and Native Opinion in India, 
London, 1878. 


630 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Sandemann, Hugh 
Sanyal, RamGopal 

Sarkar, Indira 
Seeley, Sir J. R. 
Sen, Amit 

Sen, P. (Ed.) 

Seton, Sir M. 
Seton-Carr, W. S. 
Shore, F. J. 

Singh, G. N. 

Smellie, K. B. 

Smith, dr. G. 

Spear, T. J. P. 

Stokes, Whitley 
Strachey, Sir John. 
Sunderland, J. T. 
Tagore, Raja 
Saurindramohan 

Tayler, W. 

Temple, Sir R. 
Thornton, Edward 


Topa, I. 


Trevelyan, C. E. 
Trevelyan, Sir 
G. O. 

Trotter, L. J. 

Tupper, C. L. 
Twining, T. 

Wadud, Kazi Abdul. 
Ward, W. 

West, A. 

Whitehead, dr. H. 

Wilson, Lady A. C. 
Zacharias, H. C. E. 


Selections from Calcutta Gazette, Vols. IV-V. 

A general bibliography of Bengal Celebrities, 
both living and dead, Calcutta, 1889. 

Social thought in Bengal, Calcutta, 1949, 

The Expansion of England, London, 1883. 

Notes on the Bengal Renaissance, Calcutta, 
1957. 

Florence Nightingale’s Indian Letters, 1878-82, 
Calcutta, 1937. 

The India Office, London, 1926. 

Selections from Calcutta Gazettes, Vols. I-III. 

Notes on Indian Affairs, 2 vols., London, 1837. 

Landmarks in Indian Constitutional and Na¬ 
tional Develdpment, Benares, 1933. 

A hundred Years of English Government, Lon¬ 
don, 1948. 

Twelve Indian Statesmen, London, 1897. 

I. The Nabobs, London, 1932. 

II. India, A Modem History, Ann Arbor, 1961. 

The Anglo-Indian Codes, Oxford, 1886. 

India, London, 1888. 

India in Bondage, Calcutta, 1928. 

Hindu Loyalty, Calcutta, 1883. 

Thirty-eight years in India, 2 Vols., London, 
1881. 

India in 1880, London, 1880. 

I. India : its state and prospects, London, 1835. 

II. A Gazetteer of the territories under the 
Government of the Viceroy of India, London, 
1886. . 

I. The Growth and Development of National 
Thought in India, Hamburg, 1930. 

II. Our Cultural Heritage, Allahabad, 1940. 

III. Facts about India, Allahabad, 1944. 

Papers transmitted from India, London, 1830. 

Life and Letters of Lord Macaulay, 2 Vols., 

London, 1895. 

History of India under Queen Victoria, London, 
1886. 

Our Indian Protectorate, London, 1893. 

Travels in India a hundred years ago, London, 
1893. 

Creative Bengal, Calcutta, 1950. 

A View of the History, Literature and Religion 
of the Hindoos, 2 Vols., Serampore, 1818. 

Private Diaries, London, 1922. 

Indian Problems in Religion, Education, and 
Politics, London, 1924. 

Letters from India, London, 1911. 

Renascent India, London, 1933, 

631 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


II. BIOGRAPHICAL WORKS 


Banerji, Surendra 
Nath 


Bentinck, Lord 
William 
Besant, Annie 


Bonnerjee, W. C. 

Bose, Anandamohan 
Bose, Rajnarain 

Bright, John 
Carey, William 


Curzon, Lord 


Datta, 

Akshayakumar 

Dayananda 

Saraswati 


Derozio, Henry 


I. Speeches of, by Raj Jogeshur Mitter, Cal¬ 
cutta, 1890. 

II. Speeches and Writings of, by G. A. Natesan, 
Madras 1918 

HI. Speeches of, by R. C. Palit, Calcutta, 1880. 

IV. The Gospel of, Ed. by J. C. Roy, Calcutta, 
1912. 

V. The Trumpet Voice of India : Speeches in 
England, Madras, 1919. 

VI. A Nation in Making, by himself, Calcutta, 
1925. 

Life of, by D. Boulger, Oxford, 1892. 

I. An Autobiography, London, 1893. 

II. A Sketch of her life, etc., Madras, 1913. 

III. Speeches and Writings of, by G. A. Nate¬ 
san, Madras, 1921. 

IV. Life of. by B. C. Pal, Madras, 1917. 

V. Life of, by Sri Prakasa, Bombay, 1954. 

Ed. by Manmatha Nath Ghose, 2 Vols., Calcutta 
1944. 

By Hem Chandra Sarkar, Calcutta, 1910. 

I. Life of. by J. C. Bagal, Calcutta, 1955. 

II. Atmacharit (in Bengali), Calcutta, 1952. 

A sketch of his life and services to India, by 
G. A. Natesan, Madras. 

I. By S. P. Carey. London, 1934. 

II. By George Smith, London, 1885. 

III. By F. D. Walker, London, 1926. 

IV. By Sajanikanta Das (in Bengali), B.S. 
1349. 

I. India under Curzon and After, by Lovat 
Fraser, London, 1912. 

II. The Life of, by the Earl of Ronaldshay, Lon¬ 
don, 1928. 

III. Lord Curzon in India, by Sir Thomas Ra¬ 
leigh (Selections from Speeches), London, 
1928. 

IV. Lord Curzon’s Administration of India, by 
Ali Khan Sardar, Bombay, 1905. 

Jibani, (in Bengali) by Mahendranath Vidya- 
nidhi. 

I. Life of, by C. Y. Chintamani, Allahabad, 
1917. 

II. The Man and his work, by Aurobindo 
Ghose, Allahabad, 1917. 

III. Sankara and Dayananda, by Harbilas 
Sarda, Ajmer, 1944. 

Derozio, the Eurasian Poet, Teacher and Jour¬ 
nalist, by Thomas Edwardes. Calcutta, 1884. 

Vidrohi Derozio (in Bengali), by Binoy Ghosh 


632 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Dev, Raja 
Radhakanta 
Dlit, Alexander 
Dufferin Ax t d Ava, 
The Marquis of 


Fawcett, Henry 
Ghosh, 

GiRISCH AXDRA 

Ghosii, Motilal 
Ghosh, Ramgopal 

Ghosh, Sisirkumar 

Gokhale, Gopal 
Krishna 


Hare, David 

Hume, Allan 
Octavian 

Kiian, Syed Ahmad 

Lahirt, Ramtanu 
Macaulay, Lord 


Malaviya, Madan 
Mohan 


Mehta, Sir 
Preroze Shah 


Metcalfe, Lord 


Mitra, Dig a mh a r 
Mttra, Kisorichand 


By J. C. Bagal, Calcutta, 1951. 

Life of, by G. Smith, London, 1879. 

I. By Black, C.E.D., London, 1903. 

II. Viceregal Life in India, by Marchioness 
of Dufferin, 2 Vols., London, 1889. 

III. The Life of, by Sir Alfred Lyall, 2 Vols., 
London, 1905. 

A sketch of his life and services to India, by 
G. A. Natesan, Madras. 

I. Selections from the Writings of, Ed. by Man- 
mathanath Ghose, Calcutta, 1912. 

II. Life of, by Manmathanath Ghose, Calcutta, 
1911. 

Memoirs of, by Paramananda Dutta, Calcutta, 
1935. 

I. Speeches of, by A. L. Basu, Calcutta, 1835. 

II. His Life and Speeches, by C. C. Mitra, Cal¬ 
cutta, 1868. 

Life of, by Anathnath Bose, Calcutta, 1920. 

I. Life of, by T. K. Sahani, Bombay, 1929. 

II. Life of, by J. S. Hoyland, Calcutta, 1946. 

III. Life of, by T. V. Parvate. 

IV. Speeches of, by G. A. Natesan, Madras, 
1916. 

V. Speeches and Writings of, Ed. by R. P. Pat- 
wardhan, Bombay, 1962. 

Biographical Sketch of, by Peary Chand Mitra, 
Calcutta, 1949. 

Biographical Sketch of, by W. Wedderburn, 
London, 1913. 

The Life and Work of, by G.F.I. Graham, 
London, 1885. 

Ramtanu Lahiri o Tatkalin Banga Samaj (in 
Bengali), by Shivnath Sastri, Calcutta, 1955. 

I. Life and Letters of, by G.O. Trevelyan, 2 
vols., London, 1895. 

II. A sketch, by G. A. Natesan, Madras, 1923. 

I. Commemoration Volume, Benares, 1932. 

II. His Life and Speeches, by Ganesh and Co., 
Madras, 1910. 

III. Speeches and Writings of, by G. A. Natesan, 
Madras 1919 

I. Speeches and Writings of, by C. Y, Chinta- 
mani (ed.), Allahabad 1905. 

II. A Political Biography, 2 Vols., by H. P. 
Mody, Bombay, 1921. 

Life and Correspondence of, by Sir John Kaye, 
2 Vols., London, 1854. 

Raia Digambar Mitra—His Life and Career, by 
Bholanauth Chunder, Calcutta, 1893. 

Karmavir, by Manmathanath Ghosh. 

633 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


MiiTiiA, Raja 
Rajendralal 

Mukherji, Harish 

Mukhopadhyaya, 

Dakshinaranjan 

Munro, Thomas 


Naoroji, Dadabhai 
Pal, Bipin Chandra 

Pal, Krishtodas 

Prasad, Rajendra 

Rai, Lala Lajpat 
Rama Krishna 


Ranade, M. G. 


Roy, Raja 
Rammohan 


Speeches of, Ed. by Raj Jogeshur Mitter, Cal¬ 
cutta, 1892. 

Writings of, Ed. by Dr. N. C. Sengupta. 

Life of, by Manmathanath Ghosh. 

I. Selections from Minutes and Official Writings 
of, by John Bradshaw, Oxford, 1894. 

II. Life of, by G. R. Gleig, 3 vols., London, 1930. 

Biographical Sketch of, by R. P. Masani, Lon¬ 
don, 1939. 

I. Memoirs of My Life and Times, 2 vols., Cal¬ 
cutta, 1932, 1951. 

II. Writings and Speeches of, Yugayatri (Pub.), 
Calcutta, 1954. 

I. Speeches and Minutes of, Ed. by Ramchan- 
dra Palit, Calcutta, 1882. 

II. A Study, by N. N. Ghose, Calcutta, 1887. 

Autobiography, Bombay, 1957. 

By G. A. Natesan, Madras. 

I. Muller, F. Max. Rama Krishna—His Life and 
Sayings, 

II. Life of, by Romain Rolland, Calcutta, 1931. 

III. Life of, by Swami Saradananda (in Ben¬ 
gali). 

I. Ranade, The Prophet of Liberated India, by 
D. G. Karve, Poona, 1942. 

II. Life of, by J. Kellock, Calcutta, 1926. 

III. Religious and Social Reform—A collection 
of Essays and Speeches, compiled by A. B. 
Kolaskar, Bombay 1902. 

IV. Life of, by T. V. Parvate, Bombay 1963. 

I. English Works of, Ed. by J. C. Ghosh, 
2 Vols., Calcutta, 1887. 

II. English Works of, by Panini Office, and 
Sadharan Brahmo Samaj, Calcutta. 

III. The Life and Letters of, by S. D. Collet. 
London, 1900. Ed. by D. K. Biswas and P. C. 
Ganguli, Calcutta, 1962. 

IV. Rammohan and Progressive Movements in 
India-—A Selection from Records (1775- 
1875). Ed. by J. K. Majumdar, Calcutta, 1941. 

V. Rammohun Roy, Ed. by Amal Home and 
published under the Auspices of the Ram¬ 
mohun Roy Centenary Committee, Calcutta, 
1933. 

VI. Rammohun and the last Moguls—Selec¬ 
tions from Official Records (1803-1859), Ed. 
by J. K. Majumdar, Calcutta, 1939. 

634 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Roy, Raja 
Rammohan 


Sarasvati, 

Dayananda 


VII. Selection from Official letters and docu¬ 
ments relating to the life of (1791-1830), Ed. 
by R. K. Chanda and J. K. Majumdar (Per¬ 
sonal and Private affairs), Calcutta, 1938. 

VIII. Life of, by Iqbal Singh, Bombay, 1958. 

IX. The Last Days in England of, by Mary 
Carpenter, Calcutta, 1915. 

X. Biographical Sketch of, by Brajendranath 
Bandyopadhyay, Calcutta, 1946. (In Bengali 
B. S. 1349). 

XI. Mahatma Raja Rammohan Rayer Jiban 
Charit (in Bengali), by Nagendranath Chat- 
topadhyay, Calcutta, 1897. 

XII. Life of, by Kisori Chand Mitra, Calcutta, 
1866. 

XIII. A Review of the labours of, by L. Car¬ 
penter, London, 1833. 

XIV. Rammohun Roy and Modern India, by 
Ramananda Chatterji, Calcutta, 1911. 

See Dayananda. 


Sastri, Sivanath 
Savarkar, V. D. 

Sen, Keshab 
Chandra 


Tagore, 

Dwarakanath 


Telang, Kasinath 


Thakur 

Devendranath 


Three Departed 
Patriots 


Tilak, 

Bal Gangadhar 


Atmacharit (in Bengali), Calcutta, B.S. 1359. 

Savarkar and his Times, by D. Keer, Bombay, 
1950. 

I. Life and Teachings of, by P. C. Mazumdar, 
Calcutta, 1931. 

II. Biographical Sketch of, by Bepin Chanui 
Pal, Calcutta, 1893. 

III. Life of, by J. C. Bagal, Calcutta, 1958. 

Memoirs of, by Kisorichand Mitra, Calcutta, 
1870. 

♦ 

Bengali Translation (With Notes) by Dwijen- 
dralal Nath, Edited by Kalyankumar Das- 
gupta, Calcutta, 1962. 

I. Selected Writings and Speeches of, introd. 
by D. E. Wacha, Bombay, 1916. 

II. Legislative Council Speeches of, Bombay, 
1895. 

III. Centenary Memoir, Bombay, 1951. 

I. Atmajibani (in Bengali), Ed. by Satis Chan¬ 
dra Chakravarty, Calcutta, 1927. 

II. Svarachita Jiban-Charit (in Bengali), Ed. 
by P. Sastri, Calcutta, 1898. 

III. Biography, by J. C. Bagal, 

Anand Mohan Bose, Badruddin Tyabji and 
W. C. Bonnerjee, (By G. A. Natesan, Mad¬ 
ras). 

I. Writings and Speeches of, with an apprecia¬ 
tion by Aurobindo Ghose, Madras, 1919. 

II. Life and Times of, by N. C. Kelkar (in Mara- 

635 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RSNAISSANCB-II 



Thompson, George 


VlDYASAGAR, 

ISHWARCHANDRA 


VlVEKANANDA, 

SWAMI 


thi), Translated by D. V. Divekar, Madras, 
1928. 

III. The Life of, by D. Y. Athalye, Poona, 1921. 

IV. The Life of, by V. G. Bhat, Poona, 1956. 

V. A Study, by D. P. Karmakar, Bombay, 1956. 

VI. Life of, by D. V. Tahmankar, London, 1956. 

VII. Life of, by T. V. Parvate, Ahmedabad, 
1958. 

VIII. Reminiscences and Anecdotes of, Ed. by 
S. V. Bapat, Poona, 1924. 

IX. Biographical Sketch of, by Ram Gopal, 
Bombay, 1956. 

X. Tilak and Gandhi : a comparative sketch, by 
M. J. Kantkar, Nagpur. 1935. 

XI. Life of, by D. Keer, Bombay, 1959. 

XII. Landmarks in Lokmanya’s Life, by N. C. 
Kelkar, Madras, 1924. 

XIII. Full and Authentic Report of his trial, 
by N. C. Kelkar, Bombay, 1908. 

XIV. The Legacy of, by T. L. Shay, Bombay, 
1956. 

XV. Speeches of, by R. R. Srivastava, Fyzabad, 
1917, 

Speeches of, Ed. by Raj Jogeshur Mitter, Cal¬ 
cutta, 1895. 

Biographies (in Bengali); 

I. by Chandicharan Bandyopadhyaya, Allaha¬ 
bad, 1909. 

II. by Biharilal Sarkar, Calcutta, 1895. 

in. by Sambhuchandra Vidyaratna, Calcutta, 
n.d. 

IV. Vidyasagar Prasanga (in Bengali), by Broj- 
endranath Bandyopadhyaya, Calcutta, 1931. 

V. Vidyasagar o Bangali Samaj (in Bengali), 
3 Vols., by Binoy Ghosh, Calcutta, 1957-59. 

VI. Vidyasagar Parichay (in Bengali), by J. C. 
Bagal, Calcutta, 1960. 

I. Vivekananda, Patriot-Prophet, by B. N. 
Datta, Calcutta, 1954. 

II. The Life of Vivekananda and the Universal 
Gospel, by Romain Rolland, Almora, 1947. 

ni. Eastern and Western Disciples, Life of 
Swami Vivekananda, 4 Vols., Mayavati. 

IV. Biography, by Swami Nikhilananda, New 
York, 1953. 

V. Centenary Memorial Volume, Calcutta, 
1963. 

VI. Complete Works in Eight Volumes, Advaita 
Ashram and Udbodhan Office, Calcutta. 

VII. Vivekananda in America, New Discove¬ 
ries, by Marie Louis Burke, Advaita Ashram, 
Calcutta, 1958. 

636 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


VIII. Vivekananda, A Historical Review, by 
R. C. Majumdar, Calcutta, 1965. 

Wedderburn, Sir YV. I. Speeches, Ed. by Raj Jogeshur Mitter, Cal- 

cutta 1899 

II. Life of, by S. K. Ratcliffe, London, 1923. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY TO DIFFERENT CHAPTERS 


CHAPTER I 


THE INDIAN PEOPLE AT THE BEGINNING OF THE 

NINETEENTH CENTURY 

See also General Bibliography under Bagal-I and VII; B. N. Banerji, 
I; B. D. Basu, I; N. S. Bose, Chailley, Hsber, Seeley, and Long. 
Also Biographical Works under Dwarakanath Tagore and Rammohan 

Roy (Mil). 

Reports on Vernacular Education in Bengal, 
and Bihar, 1835, 1836, and 1838, Calcutta, 
1868. 

Bengal Subah, Calcutta, 1936. 

Bengal in 1756-7, 3 Vols., London, 1905. 

The Siyar-ul-Mutakherin (Trans.), London, 
1832. 


CHAPTER II 
ENGLISH EDUCATION 


Adam, \Y. 


Datta, K. K. 
Hile, S. C. 
Khan, Giiulam 
Hussain 


See also General Bibliography, under Carey, Chirol-II, K. K. Datta, 
Griffiths, Dubois, Heber. Hunter-II, Oswell, Shore, Trevelyan.Wood, 
and Whitehead. Also Biographical Works under Rammohan Roy-VII, 

Munro, and Curzon-UI. 


A Collection of Despatches from the Home Department on the 
subject of Education in India, 1854-68, Calcutta, 1870. 


Ballhatchet, K. 

Baman Behram, 
B. K. 

Banerjea, K. M. 

Banerji, S. N. 

Basu, A. N. 

Basu, B. 1). 

Besant, Annie 
Bevan, E. 

Bose, C. N. 


Social Policy and Social Change in Western 
India, London, 1957. 

Educational Controversies in India. 

A Prize Essay on Native Female Education, 
Calcutta, 1841. 

Lord Macaulay and High Education in India, 
Calcutta, 1878. 

Indian Education in Parliamentary Papers, 
Calcutta, 1952. 

History of Education in India under the rule 
of the East India Company, Calcutta, 1935. 

Higher Education in India, Madras, 1932. 

Thoughts on Indian discontents, London, 1929. 

High Education in India, an essay read at the 
Bethune Society on 25 April 1878, Calcutta, 
1878. 


637 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


Bose, Rajnarain 

Bilgrami, 

Sayyid Amir Ali 
Carpenter, M. 
Chapman, P. 
Coupland, Sir R. 
Duff, Alexander 

Dutt, Harchunder 

Howell, A. 


Hindu Athaba Presidency Colleger Itibritta 
(in Bengali), Calcutta, 1875. 

Education in India, London, 1902. 

Six Months in India, London, 1868. 

Hindu Female Education, London, 1839. 

Wilberforce, A Narrative, Oxford, 1923. 

State of Education in Bengal and Bihar, Cal¬ 
cutta Review , 1844. 

An Address on Native Female Education, Cal¬ 
cutta, 25 July, 1855. 

Education in British India prior to 1854 and 
in 1870-71, Calcutta, 1872. 


Hundred Years of the University of Calcutta, Calcutta University 

1957. 


Leitner, W. 

Lyall, Sir A. C. 
Mahmood, Syed 

Mayhew, Arthur 
Mitra, 

Kishori Chand 
Parulekar, R. V. 


History of indigenous education in the Punjab, 
Calcutta, 1883. 

Asiatic Studies, London, 1907. 

History of English Education in India, 1781- 
1893. Aligarh, 1895. 

The Education in India, London, 1929. 
Education in India, Calcutta, 1859. 

I. Survey of indegenous education in the Pro¬ 
vince of Bombay. 

II. Selections from the Records of the Govern¬ 
ment of Bombay (Education). 


Report of the Indian Universities Commission, 1903. 

Sattianadhan, S. History of Education in the Madras Presidency, 

Madras, 1894. 

Sharp, H. and Selections from the Educational Records of the 

Richey, J. A. Government of India, 2 Vols., Calcutta, 

1920-22. 


Thomas, F. W. The history and prospects of British Education 

in India, London, 1891. 

Trevelyan, C. E. On the Education of the People of India, Lon¬ 
don, 1838. 


Selections from Educational Records of the Government of India, 
2 Vols., Published by the National Archives of India, 1960 and 1963. 


CHAPTER III 

IMPACT OF WESTERN CULTURE 

See General Bibliography under B. N. Banerii-I, Rajnarain Basu, 
Buch-I, Griffiths, O’Malley-V, B. C. Pal-II, Zacharias. 

Das Gupta, H. N. Studies in Western Influence on Nineteenth 

Century Bengali Poetry, 1857-1887, Calcutta, 
1935. 

Sen, Priyaranjan Western Influence on Bengali Literature, Cal¬ 
cutta, 1932. 


638 




BIBLIOGRAPHY 


CHAPTER IV 
NEW RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


See General Bibliography under Long, Mayhew, Lajpat Rai-I, Ward, 
Whitehead, and Zacharias. Also Biographical Works under Ram- 
mohan Roy-III and X, Besant-I, Vivekananda, Ramakrishna, B. C. 
Pal, Ranade-III, Sen, Thakur and Dayananda. 


Bose, B. C. 

Duff, A. 

Edwakdes, Sir H. B. 
Farquiiak, J. N. 

Gambhiran an da, 
SWAMI 
Kaye, Sir J. 
Leonard, G. S. 
Lovett, R. 

Mukhopadhyaya, 
Bhudev 
Natesan, G. A. 

(Pub.). 

Paton, W. 

Richter, J. 

Ross, Sir E. D. 
Roysmith, W. 

Sastri, Sivanath 

Sattianadhan, S. 
Sharrock, J. A. 

Sheering, M. A 

Smith, G. 
Somerville, A. 

Stock, E. 

Thomas, P. 


Wilson, H. H. 


Rational Religion, Calcutta, 1934. 

India and Indian Missions, Edinburgh, 1839. 

Prospect of the triumph of Christianity in India, 
London, 1866. 

Modern Religious Movements in India, New 
York, 1918. 

History of the Ramakrishna Math and Mission, 
Calcutta, 1957. 

Christianity in India, London, 1859. 

A history of the Brahmo Samaj, Calcutta, 1879. 

History of the London Missionary Society, 
1795-1895, 2 Vols., London, 1899. 

Banglar Itihas (in Bengali). 

Chaitanya to Vivekananda, Madras, 1928. 

Alexander Duff, Pioneer of Missionary Educa¬ 
tion, London, 1923. 

History of Missions in India (Transl. ), Edin¬ 
burgh, 1908. 

Hindu-Muhammadan Feasts, Calcutta, 1914. 

Nationalism and Reform in India, New Haven, 
1938. 

History of the Brahmo Samaj, 2 Vols., Calcutta, 
1911, 1912. 

Missionary work in India, Madras, 1884. 

Hinduism, ancient and modern, Westminster, 
1913. 

The History of Protestant Missions in India, 
London, 1884. 

I. Life of Alexander Duff, London, 1879. 

II. Christianity in India, Edinburgh, 1864. 

Crime and religious beliefs in India, Calcutta, 

1931. 

History of the Church Missionary Society, 
London, 1899. 

I. Christians and Christianity in India and 
Pakistan, London, 1954. 

II. Hindu Religion, Customs and Manners 
Bombay, n.d. 

An account of the Religious Sects of the 
Hindus, Calcutta, 1899. 

639 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 

CHAPTER V 


LITERATURE 


See also the P.E.N. Books of ‘The Indian Literatures’—Series. 


Ahmad, Z. 
Bandyopadhyay, 
A.K. 

De, Susiiil Kumak 
D lKSHITAR, V. R. 

Dutt, R. C. 

Frazer, R. W. 

Grierson, Sir, G. A. 
Majumdar, B. C. 

Sahitya Akademi. 
Saksena, Babu Ram 


Sen, Priyaranjan 


Sen, Sukumar 


India’s Contribution to Arabic Literature. 

Unabinsa Satabdir Bangali o Bangla Sahitya, 
Calcutta, B. S. 1363. 

History of the Bengali Literature in the Nine¬ 
teenth Century, Calcutta, 1962. 

Studies in Tamil History and Literature, Mad¬ 
ras, 1936. 

The Literature of Bengal, London, 1895. 

A Literary History of India, London, 1915. 

The Modern Vernacular Literature of Hindus¬ 
tan, Calcutta, 1889. 

Typical Selections from Oriya Literature, Cal¬ 
cutta University, 1925. 

Contemporary Indian Literature, New Delhi, 
1959. 

I. A History of Urdu Literature. 

II. Evolution of Awadhi, a branch of Hindi, 
Allahabad, 1938. 

I. Modern Oriya Literature, Calcutta, 1947. 

II. Western Influence on Bengali Literature, 
Calcutta, 1932. 

History of Bengali Literature, Sahitya Akade¬ 
mi, Delhi, 1960. 


CHAPTER VI 
THE PRESS 


See also General Bibliography under Bagal-I, B. N. Banerji, K. K. 
Datta-II and Sanyal. Also Biographical Works under Munro-II, 

Metcalfe, Tilak-II, and B. C. Pal. 


Barns, M. 
Ghose, H. P. 


Lovett, P. 
Natarajan, J. 


Sanial, S. C. 

Stanhope, 

Liecester 


The Indian Press, London, 1940. 

I. The Newspaper in India, Calcutta, 1952. 

II. Press and Press Laws in India, Calcutta, 
1930. 

Journalism in India, Calcutta, 1928. 

History of Indian Journalism, Published by 
the Publications Division, Government of 
India, Delhi, 1955. 

History of the Press in India, Calcutta Review , 
1911. 

Sketch of the History and Influence of the 
Press in British India, London, 1823. 

640 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


CHAPTER VII 


SOCIAL REFORM 

See General Bibliography under Buckland-I, K. K. Datta-I, Dubois, 
Griffiths, Malahari, and Miles. Also Biographical Works under 

Ranade-III. 


Adam, W. 

Banaji, D, R. 
Bhaynani, Enakshi 
Basu, 

Rajnaeayan 
Bose, B, C. 
Ckattopadhyay, 
Kamaladevi 
Chintamani, C. Y. 
COLOMB, P, H. 

Coupland, Sih R. 

Leonard, G. S. 

Mala bari, B. M. 

Meadows-T^ylor 
Mitter, S. C. 

Mody, C. R. 

Moore, W. R. 


Mukhopadhyaya, 

Amitabha 

Natarajan, S. 

Peggs, J. 


Ratcliffe, S. K. 
Roysmith, W. 
Sasthi, Sibnatii 
Sorabji, Cornelia 

Stark, H. A. 
Tattabhusan, 

SlTANATH 


The Law and Custom of Slavery in British 
India, London, 1840*. 

Slavery in British India, Bombay, 1933. 

Women of India. 

Sekal o Ekai (in Bengali), Bangiys Sahitya 
Parishad, Calcutta, B.S. 1358. 

Hindu Customs in Bengal, Calcutta, 1929. 

The awakening of Indian Women, Madras, 
1939. 

Indian Social Reform, Madras, 1901. 

Slave catching in the Indian Ocean, London, 
1873, 

The British Anti-Slavery Movement, London, 
1933. 

A History of the Brahmo Samaj, Calcutta, 
1879. 

Infant Marriage and Enforced Widowhood in 
India, Bombay, 1877. 

Confessions of a Thug, London, 1839. 

A Discourse on the Domestic Life and Condi¬ 
tion of the Bengali Society, Calcutta, 1856. 

Female Infanticide, Bombay, 1849. 

Female Infanticide in the Benares Division, 
Calcutta, 1868. 

Movement for the Abolition of Sati in Bengal 
(Article in the Bengal Past and Present, 
Vol. IXXVII, Jan.-Dee. 1951). 

A Century of Social Reform in India, Bombay, 
1954. 

I. India's Cries to British Humanity, London, 
1830. 

II. The Infanticides’ Cry to Britain, London, 
1844. 

IH. Slavery in India, London, 1840, 

IV. The Suttee’s Cry to Britain, London, 1828. 

Sir William Wedderbum and the Indian Re¬ 
form Movement, London, 1923. 

Nationalism and Reform in India, New Haven, 
1938. 

History of the Brahmo Samaj, Vols. I and II, 
Calcutta, 1911, 1912. 

“Position of Hindu Women Fifty Yeats Ago”, 
Our cause. 

Calcutta in Slavery Days, Calcutta, 1917. 

Social Reform in Bengal, Calcutta, 1904. 


B.P.I.H,—41 


641 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN KENAISSANCE-II 


Telang, K. T. 

Thomas, P. 

Thompson, E. 
Thornton, E. 

Wilson, J. 


Notes on the Age of Consent Bill, Calcutta, 
1891. 

Indian Women Through the Ages, Bombay, 
1964 

Suttee, London, 1928. 

Illustrations of the History and practices of 
the Thugs, London, 1837. 

History of the Suppression of Infanticide in 
.Western India, 1855. 


CHAPTER VIII 


MUSLIM COMMUNITY 


See ^General Bibliography under Aga Khan, Asok Mehta, Rajendra 

Prasad. 


Ali, Syed Amir 
Ambedxar, B. R. 
Aziz, A., 

Aziz, K. K. 
Bahadur, Lal 

Basu, P. N. 

Bose, B. C. 

Burman, Devajyoti 
Gumming, Sir J. 
Ghosh, P. C. 

Gibbs, H. A. R. 
Gopal, Ram 

Graham, G. F. I. 
Herklots, G.A. (Ed.) 
Hunter, Sir W. W. 
Karim, R. 

Khan, Syed Ahmad 


Krishna, K. B. 
Macmunn, G. F. and 
Lovett, A. C. 

Mir Hasan Ali, Mrs. 

Nates an and Co. 
Noman, M. 

Peggs, J. 

Sayyid, A. F. 

Sen, Sachin 
Smith, J. C. 

Symonds, R. 


The Spirit of Islam, London, 1923. 

Pakistan, Bombay, 1946. 

Discovery of Palustan, Lahore, 1957. 

Britain and Muslim India, London, 1963. 

The Muslim League, its History and Achieve¬ 
ments, Agra, 1954. 

Hindu-Musam Amity, Calcutta, n.d. 
Mahomedanism, Calcutta, 1931. 

Indo-Muslim Relations, Calcutta. 

Political India, 1832-1932, London, 1932. 

The Development of the Indian National Con¬ 
gress, Calcutta, 1960. 

Mohammedanism, London, 1949. 

Indian Muslims, A Political History (1858- 
1947), London, 1959. 

Syed Ahmad Khan, London, 1885. 

Islam in India, Oxford, 1921. 

The Indian Musulmans, London, 1876. 
Bankimchandra o Musalman Samaj (In Ben¬ 
gali), Calcutta, 1944. 

I. Review on Dr. Hunter’s Indian Mussalmans. 
London, 1872. 

n. On the Present State of Indian Politics, 
Allahabad, 1888. 

The Problem of Minorities, London, 1939. 

The Armies of India, London, 1911. 

The Mussulmans of India, London, 1917. 
Eminent Mussalmans, Madras, 1922. 

Rise and Growth of the All-India Muslim 
League, Allahabad, 1942. 

A Voice from India, London, 1847. 

On the Muhammadans of India, Calcutta, 1862. 

The Birth of Pakistan, Calcutta, 1963. 
Modem Islam in India, London, 1943. 

The Making of Pakistan, London, 1949. 

642 




BIBLIOGRAPHY 


CHAPTER IX 

SOCIAL RELATION BETWEEN ENGLISHMEN AND INDIANS 

See General Bibliography under Blunt-I, Chirol-I, Cotton-II, Digby, 
Garratt-I, B. C. Pal-II, Reynolds, Routledge, Shore, Sunderland, and 
Tupper. Also Biographies under Ripon-I, and Dwarakanath Tagore. 

Carey, W. H. The Good old Days of the Honourable John 

Company, 2 Vols., Calcutta, 1906-07. 

Eden, Emily Up the Country, 2 Vols., London, 1866. 

Garth, Sir Richard A Few Plain Truths about India, London, 

1888. 


Lord Ripon and the People of India: Proceedings of the Public 
Meeting held in Willis's Rooms London, 1 August, 1883. 


Majumdar, A. K. 
Mill, J. S. 

Morrison Sir T. 
Noel, B. W. 


Ratcliffe, S. K. 


Advent of Independence, Bombay, 1963. 
Considerations on Representative Government, 
London, 1861. 

Imperial Rule in India, Westminster, 1899. 
England and India. An Essay on the Duty of 
Englishmen towards the Hindoos, London, 
1859. 

Sir William Wedderburn, London, 1923. 


CHAPTER X 


BRITISH POLICY TOWARDS INDIA 


See General Bibliography under Digby, Ram Gopal, Griffiths, Law¬ 
rence, O’Malley-V, and Temple. Also Biographical Works under 

Curzon-II & HI, and Hume. 


Bryan, W. J. 
Frere, Sir H. B. 

Keith, A. B. 

Mazumdar, A. C. 
Morley, Viscount 
Morrison, Sir T. 
Naoroji, D. 

Peggs, J. 


On British Rule in India, London, 1915. 

* 

Means of ascertaining public opinion in India, 
London, 1871. 

Speeches and Documents "'on Indian Policy, 
Vol. I, London, 1922. 

Indian National Evolution, Madras, 1917. 

Recollections, 2 Vols., London, 1917. 

Imperial Rule in India, Westminster, 1899. 

Poverty and Un-British Rule in India, London, 
1901. 

India's Cries to British Humanity, London, 
1830. 

Letters from India, 1829-32, London, 1936. 
643 


Phillips, C. H. 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-II 


CHAPTER XI 


THE ATTITUDE OF INDIANS TOWARDS BRITISH RULE 

See General Bibliography under K. K. Datta-H, Digby, R. C. Dutt, 
and Lajpat Rai. Also Biography of Dadabhai Naoroji. 


Deuskar, S. G. 
Butt, R. Palme 
Ghose, N. N. 

Kalahari, B. M. 
Mi tea, S. M. 


Desher Katha (in Bengali). 

India To-day, Bombay, 1949. 

Indian Views of England, Calcutta, 1877. 

The Indian Eye on English Life, Westminster, 
1893. 

Anglo-Indian Studies, London, 1913. 


CHAPTER XII 


GROWTH OF POLITICAL IDEAS AND POLITICAL 
ORGANIZATIONS (UP TO 1858) 

See General Bibliography under Agarwal, B. N. Banerji, Sukumar 
Dutt, Griffiths, A. Gupta, B. B. Majumdar, A. C. Mazumdar, 
Pradhan, and Topa. Also Biographical Works under Devendra Nath 
Thakur, Dadabhai Naoroji, Dwarakanath Tagore, Rajendralal Mitra, 

and Harish Mukherji. 

Roysmith, W. Nationalism and Reform in India, New Haven, 

1938. 


CHAPTER XIII 
BIRTH OF NATIONALISM 


See General Bibliography under Besant-n, Cotton, Gilchrist, 
Griffiths, Macdonald, B, B. Majumdar, H. & Uma Mukherjee, 
B. C. Pal. Also Biographical Works under S. N. Banerji, Viveka- 

nanda, Gokhale, and Dayananda. 

Banerjea, D. N. India’s Nation Builders, London, 1919. 
Chatterjee, Anandamath (The Abbey of Bliss) Transl. 

Bankimchandra Ghose, Aurobindo and Barindra, Calcutta, 

1948. 


Desai, A. R. 

Raghuvanshi, 
V. P. S. 


Social Background of Indian Nationalism, 
Bombay, 1948. 

Indian Nationalist Movement and Thought, 
Agra, 1959. 


CHAPTER XIV 

DEVELOPMENT OF POLITICAL IDEAS AND ORGANIZATIONS 

(1858-1885) 

See General Bibliography under Bagal-V, Cotton, R. C. Majumdar, 
A. C. Mazumdar, and R. Sanyal. Also Biographical Works under 
S. N. Banerji, Dadabhai Naoroji, Dwarakanath Tagore, and Ananda- 

mohan Bose. 

Cotton, H. J. S. History of the Indian Association, Calcutta, 

1903. 


644 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


De Mello, F. M. The Indian National Congress, London, 1934. 
Journal of the Poona Sarvajanik Sabha. 

Ilbert Bill, The: A Collection of Articles, Memorials, Petitions etc., 

London, 1883. 

Khan, Syed Ahmad On the Present State of Indian Politics, Allaha¬ 
bad, 1888. 

Natesan, G. A. Indian National Congress, Madras, 1917. 

(Pub.). 

Nevinson, II. W. The New Spirit in India, London, 1908. 


CHAPTER XV 


THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 


See General Bibliography under Chintamani, A. Gupta, R. C. Majum- 
dar, A. C. Mazumdar, B. C. Pal-I. Also Biographical Works under 

S. N. Banerji, A. O. Hume. 

Andrews, C. F. and Rise and Growth of Congress in India, London, 
Mukherjee, G. 1938. 

Besant, A. How India Wrought for Freedom, Adyar, 1915. 

Chakraborty, D. Congress in Evolution, Calcutta, 1935. 

And 


Bhattaciiarya, C. 
Das Gupta, H. N. 
Ghose, H. P. 

Ghosh, P. C. 
Natesan, G. A. 


The Indian National Congress, Calcutta, 1940. 
Congress o Bangla (in Bengali), Calcutta, 1935. 

Indian National Congress, Calcutta, 1960. 
Indian National Congress, Madras, 1917. 


Report of the Regional Records Survey Committee for West Bengal, 

1957-58. 


Sastri, V. S. 
Sitaramayya, P. 

Wallace, D. M. 
(Edited). 


The Indian National Congress, Madras, 1911. 
The History of the Indian National Congress, 
2 Vols., Bombay, 1946. 

Buffering Speeches in India, 1884-88, London, 
1890. 


CHAPTER XVI 


THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT IN POLITICS 


See General Bibliograpy under Buch, B. N. Datta, Lajpat Rai. 


Ghose, Arabinda 


Lovett, Sir V. 

Natesan, G. A. 
Rai, Lajpat 


I. Rishi Bankim Chandra, Chandernagore, 
1923. 

II. On Himself and on the Mother, Pondicherry, 
1953. 

History of the Indian Nationalist Movement, 
London, 1921. 

Indian National Congress, Madras, 1917. 
Young India, New York, 1917. 


Sedition (Rowlatt) Committee Report, 1919. 


645 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


CHAPTER XVII 


INDIAN SERFS AND SLAVES IN THE BRITISH EMPIRE 


See also General Bibliography under Bagal-V. 


Andrews, C. F. 
Cumpston, I. M. 

Das, R. K. 

Gillon, K. L. 
Gunther, John 

Karunakaran, K. P. 
Kondapi, C. 

Mabel, P. 

Mayer, A. C. 

Mookherji, S. B. 


Narain, Iqbal 

Natesan, G. A. 
Netto, George 
Smuts, J. C. 
Tagore, 
Dwarkanath 


India and the Pacific, London, 1937. 

Indians Overseas in British Territories, 1834- 
54, London, 1953. 

Hindustani Workers of the Pacific Coast, Ber¬ 
lin, 1923. 

Fiji’s Indian Migrants, London, 1962. 

Inside Africa, London, 1955. 

India in World Affairs, Calcutta, 1952. 

Indians Overseas, 1838-1949, New Delhi, 1951. 
Natal’s Indian Problems. 

I. Peasants in the Pacific, London, 1961. 
n. Indians in Fizi, London, 1963. 

I. Indian Minority in South Africa, New Delhi, 
1959. 

II. The Indenture System in Mauritius, 1837- 
• 1915, Calcutta, 1962. 

Indians in the Transvaal (Uttara Bharati, Vol. 
IV, No. 2, March, 1958). 

Speeches of G. K. Gokhale, Madras, 1909. 
Indians in Malaya, Singapore, 1961. 

Africa and some World Problems. 

A History of Indians in British Guiana. 


646 


CHRONOLOGY 


1700 

1740 

1757 

1763 

1767 

1774 

1770 

1780 


1781 

1782 


1784 

1785 
1787 


1788 

1789 


1790 

1791 


1792 

1793 
1795 


Zeigenbalg, the first Christian Missionary 
arrives in India (p, 150). 

Birth of Muhammad Nazir, Urdu Poet (p. 214). 

Battle of Plassey (p. 1). 

Birth of Lalluji Lai, Hindi author (p. 182). 

Bolts makes an unsuccessful attempt to start 
a newspaper (p. 222). 

Birth of Rammohan Roy (p. 97). 

Warren Hastings—Governor General (p. 2). 

Birth of Dayaram, Gujarati poet (p. 190). 

James Augustus Hicky starts a weekly paper 

called Bengal Gazette or Calcutta General 
Advertise r (p. 223). 

The India Gazette published (p. 223). 

Calcutta Madrasa founded by Warren Hastings 
(p. 42). 

Hicky convicted of libel and his paper closed 
(p. 223). 

Syed Ghulam Husain writes the Seir-ul Muta - 
qherin (p. 340). 

The Calcutta Gazette published (p. 223). 

The Madras Courier published (p. 223). 

Court of Directors sanctions permanent annual 
grant for three schools in Madras (p. 72). 

Organized agitation against slavery in Eng¬ 
land (p. 280). 

Birth of Sadashiv Kashinath alios Bapu 
Chhatre, Marathi writer (p. 185). 

Birth of Muhammad Ibrahim Zauq, Urdu poet 
(p. 214). 

The Bombay Herald published (p. 224). 

Collection of persons for exportation as slaves 
declared illegal (p. 280). 

The Bombay Courier published (p. 224). 

The Quran translated into Urdu by Shah Ab- 
du’l Qadir (p. 147). 

Sanskrit College, Benaras, founded by Jona¬ 
than Duncan (pp. 42, 74). 

The Bombay Gazette published (p. 224). 

The Bombay Gazette amalgamated with the 
Bombay Herald (p. 224). 

Charter Act passed (p. 42). 

William Carey arrives at Calcutta (p. 151). 

Herasim Lebedeff stages a play in Calcutta 
(p. 175). 

The India Herald and the Weekly Madras Ga¬ 
zette published (p. 223). 

647 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—H 


1798 

1799 


1800 


1801 


1802 

1803 


1804 

1805 

1806 


1807 

1808 

1809 

1810 


1811 

1812 


1813-54 

1818 


Birth of Hansaraja, Marathi poet (p. 188). 

Birth of Parshuram Balwant alias Parashuram 
Pant Tatya Godbole, Marathi writer (p. 186). 

Wellesley passes a regulation for controlling 
the Press (p. 229). 

Madras Government imposes a pre-censorship 
on newspapers (pp. 223-24). 

Christian Missionaries establish a printing 
press at Serampore (p. 162). 

Foundation of Fort William College (p. 166). 

Birth of Muhammad Mu’min Khan Mu min. 
Urdu poet (p. 214). 

English School established at Bhawanipore, 
Calcutta (p. 31). 

William Carey publishes a Bengali grammar 
(p. 167). 

Ramram Basu's Pratapadityacharita, published 
(p. 167). 

Birth of Babar Ali Anis, Urdu poet (p. 214). 

Rammohan Roy writes the Tuhfat-ul-Muivah- 
hiddin (p. 97). 

Birth of Ranchodbhai Girdharbhai, Gujarati 
writer (p. 190). 

Birth of Salamat Ali Dabir, Urdu poet (p. 214). 

Birth of Hari Keshavji, Marathi author 
(p. 185). 

Rammohan joins service under Digby (p. 971. 

Publication of the Grammar of the Maratha 
Language (p. 184). 

Birth of Ghalib, Urdu poet (p. 214). 

Bdlbodhmuktdvali (Marathi), published 
(p. 187). 

Birth of Dasarathi Ray, Bengali poet (p. 172). 

Slave trade abolished in the British Empire 

(p. 280). 

Birth of Henry Louis Vivian Derozio (p. 434). 

Hindu-Muslim riot at Banaras (p. 326). 

Birth of Bal Gangadhar Jambhekar, Marathi 
writer (p. 185). 

Publication of the Marathi-English Dictionary 
(p. 184). 

Importation of slaves into India forbidden 
(p. 280), 

Birth of Isvar Chandra Gupta, Bengali poet 
(p. 172). 

William Carey writes the Itihasamdla in Ben¬ 
gali (p. 167). 

Visvanatha Simha Vaghela of Rewa, author of 
fifty works on Rama cult (p. 164). 

Charter Act passed. Grant of one lakh of 
Rupees per year for education (42-3). 

Charter Act permits Christian Missionaries to 
preach in British India (p. 153). 

648 


CHRONOLOGY 


1814 


1815 


1817 


1818 


1819 


1820 


Birth of Vithcba Annas Daftardar, Marathi 
poet (p. 188). 

Birth of Dadoba Pan^urang Tarkhadkar, Mara¬ 
thi grammarian (p. 185). 

Birth of Pyari-chand Mitra, Bengali author 
(p. 173). 

Rammohan Roy retires from service and settles 
at Calcutta (p. 08). 

A. Barnes founds “The Society for Promoting 
the Education of the Poor within the Govern¬ 
ment of Bombay” (Bombay Education 
Society) (p, 190). 

English School established at Chinsura (p. 31). 

William Carey composes a Bengali-English dic¬ 
tionary (p. 167). 

Rammohan founds the Atmlya Sabha (p, 98). 

Bombay Native Education Society formed 
(p. 70). 

Hitopadesa and Panchat antra (Marathi) Pub¬ 
lished (p. 187). 

Birth of Sir Syed Ahmad Khan (pp. 143, 305). 

A missionary opens two schools in Madras 
(p. 72). 

Hindu College, Calcutta, founded (p. 31). 

Establishment of the Calcutta School Book 
Society (p. 31). 

The Bangui Gejeti published (May) (pp. 169, 
224). 

Publication of the Samachara Darpmia (Ben¬ 
gali Weekly) (May 23) (pp. 169, 224). 

Publication of Digdariana (Bengali monthly) 
(pp. 169, 224). 

James Silk Buckingham publishes the Cal¬ 
cutta Journal (October 2) (p. 230). 

Legal restriction on the Indian Press with¬ 
drawn (p. 229). 

Serampore College established (p. 68). 

Death of Shah Rah‘uddin, Arabic scholar 
(p. 209). 

Calcutta School Society established (p. 32). 

Rammohan Roy defeats Subrahmanya £astrl in 
a debate on idol worship (p. 98). 

Death of Dildar ‘All, first Indian-born Shha 
Mujtahid (p, 209). 

Calcutta Female Juvenile Society founded 
(p. 285). 

Birth of Akshay-kumar Datta, Bengali writer 
(p- 176), 

Birth of Isvar-chandra Vidyasagar (p. 173). 

Muslims assault a Durga Puja procession at 
Calcutta (p. 326). 

Native School and School Book Society (Bom¬ 
bay) formed (p. 70). 

649 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


1821 


1822 


1828 


1824 


1825 

1826 


Rammohan publishes the Sambada Kaumudi 
(pp. 170, 224). 

Poona Sanskrit College (later Deccan College) 
opened (October 6) (p. 70). 

A British officer writes: “Divide et Impera 
should be the motto of our Indian adminis- 
tration...” (p. 321). 

Birth of Rajendra-lal Mitra (p. 176). 

Birth of Bholanath Sarabhai, Gujarati Writer 
(p. 192). 

Death of Muhammad Ghaus Sharf’ul Mulk 
bin Nizamuddin Ahmad, Arabic scholar 
(p. 209). 

Death of Munshi Kundan Lai alias Ashki , Per¬ 
sian poet (p. 209). 

The Government of India requests the Court 
of Directors to empower them to control 
the Press (p. 231). 

The Bombay Samdchdr (Gujarati) published 
(p. 225). 

The Samachdra-chandrikd (Bengali) published 
(March 5) (p. 225). 

Rammohan starts the Persian weeky Mirdt-ul 
-Akhbar (April) (p. 225). 

The Jam-i-Jahan Numa published (p. 225). 

The Sambdda-Kaumudi ceases publication 
(p. 225). 

Agra College established (p. 74). 

Sanskrit College, Calcutta, founded by Lord 
Amherst (p. 43). 

Birth of Aliya Linga Raja, Sanskrit and Kan¬ 
nada writer (p. 201). 

Birth of Ramalitiga Swamigal, Tamil poet 
(p. 196). 

Birth of Gopal Hari Deshmukh alias Lokhita- 
wadi, Marathi writer (p. 189). 

Press Ordinance passed (March 14) (p. 232). 

Sanskrit College, Calcutta begins to function 
(1st January) (p. 68). 

Birth of Michael Madhusudan Datta, Bengali 
poet (p. 172). 

Birth of Svami Dayananda (p. 108). 

First native girls* schools opened in Bombay 
(p. 72). 

The Court of Directors sends a despatch on the 
general principle of educational policy in 
India (p. 44). 

Rammohan Roy establishes the Vedanta College 
(p. 98). 

Oriental College established in Delhi (p. 74). 

Derozio appointed teacher in the Hindu College 
(p. 435). 

Birth of Raj-narayan Basu (p. 176). 

650 


CHRONOLOGY 


1827 


1828 


1829 


1830 


Birth of Bhudev Muhhopadhyay (p. 173). 

The Jury Act passed (p. 437). 

The Calcutta Chronicle suppressed (p. 234). 

The Book and Tract Society (Maharashtra) 
etablished (p. 186). 

Birth of Rahgalal Bandyopadhvay, Bengali poet 
(p. 172). 

Bammohan founds the first Samdj (August 20) 

(p. 100). 

Bapu Chhatre’s Aesop’s Tales published 
(p. 187). 

English introduced in Delhi College (p. 74). 

Birth of Amir Ahmad Minai, Urdu poet 
(p. 214). 

Mrs. Wilson (nee Miss Cook) takes charge of 
the Central School (p. 286). 

Death of Shah ‘Abd’ul ‘Aziz, Arabic scholar 
(p. 209). 

Satl abolished by Regulation XVII (December 
4) (pp. 100, 274). 

Rammohan publishes the Bengal Herald 
(English) and the Bangaduta (Bengali) 
(p. 170) 

Mrs. Wilson opens her first female school in 
Bombay (p. 72) 

Birth of Anandaram Dhekial Phukan, Assa¬ 
mese writer (p. 178). 

Swathi Thirunal becomes the Maharaja of 
Travancore (p. 203). 

Birth of Mahipatram Rupram, Gujarati writer 
(p. 192). 

British begins to import Indian labour in Mau¬ 
ritius (p. 613). 

Rammohan Roy opens his Church (January 23) 
(p. 100). 

Rammohan goes to England (p, 518). 

General Assembly’s Institution of the Church 
of Scotland founded by Dr. Duff (p. 68). 

G. S. Jambhekar and J. Shankarshet agitate 
for re-conversion of Christians (p. 265). 

Birth of Dinabandhu Mitra, Bengali play writer 
(p. 175). 

Kartabhaja sect founded by Ramsaran Pal at 
Ghoshpara (p. 139). 

The Parthenon published (pp. 40, 444). 

Arur Bhattatiri writes the Uttar a Naishadha 
(p. 164)'. 

Death of Sadashiv Kashinath alias Bapu Chha- 
tre (p. 185). 

Death of Muhammad Nazir, Urdu poet (p. 214). 

Death of Qazi Muhammad Isma’il, Arabic 
scholar (p. 209). 

651 


THE BRITISH PAKAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE— II 


1831 


1832 


1883 


1834 

1835 


1830 


Molesworth’s MarathuEnglish Dictionary pub¬ 
lished (p. 185). 

Birth of Baba Padmanji, Marathi novelist 
(p. 187). 

First Bengali stage set up by Prasanna-kumar 
Tagore (p. 175). 

Death of Henry Louis Vivian Derozio, Indo- 
Anglian poet (December 26) (pp. 216, 435). 

Kasi-prasad Ghose’s The Shair and other Poems 
(English) published (p. 216). 

Saiyid Ahmad, the Wahabi leader, dies at the 
Battle of Balakot (6th May) (p. 141). 

The Gyananneshun published (pp. 40, 444). 

Publication of Darpan, Marathi Journal 

(p. 186). 

Birth of Mirza Khan Dagh, Urdu poet (p. 214). 

Bodhakathd (Marathi) published (p. 187). 

Birth of Dr. Kirtikar B. D. Palande, Marathi 
poet (p. 188). 

The John Bull (later the Englishman) pub¬ 
lished (p. 242). 

Death of Rammohan Roy (p. 101). 

Birth of Narmadashankar Lalshahkar, Guja¬ 
rati writer (p. 191). 

Slavery abolished in Britain (p. 280). 

Wilson College (originally called General 
Assembly’s Institution) founded as a High 
School in Bombay (p. 71). 

The Sheriff of Calcutta calls a public meeting 
to protest against the Charter Act of 1833 
(January 5) (p. 438). 

Beginning of Elphinstone College, Bombay 
(p. 70). 

Calcutta Medical College opened (June) 
(p. 69). ' 

Press Law of Sir Charles Metcalfe passed 
(August 2) (p. 234). 

Birth of Nandshankar Tuljashankar, Gujarati 
writer (p. 192). 

Death of Lalluji Lai, Hindi writer (p. 182). 

Birth of Hem-chandra Barua, Assamese 
writer (p. 178). 

Birth of Bihari-lal Chakravarti, Bengali poet 
(p. 173). 

Adam’s report on Vernacular Education (I) 

(p. 60). 

Lord Bentinck’s Resolution on education 
(pp. 22, 48). 

Birth of &rl Ramakjnshna Paramahamsa 
(p. 116). 

The Board of Public Instruction reconstituted 
as the Committee of Native Education (Mad¬ 
ras) (p. 73). 

652 


CHRONOLOGY 


Adam’s Report on Vernacular Education (II) 

(p. 60). 

Birth of Navalram Lakshmiram, Gujarati 
writer (p. 192). 

Death of Imam Baksh Nasikh, Urdu poet 
(p. 214). 

1837 Calcutta Landholders decide to establish an 

association (p. 446). 

General Assembly’s Institution known as the 
Christian College founded (Madras) (p. 74). 

Two Acts passed for regulating the recruit¬ 
ment of Indian labour for Mauritius (p. 614). 

The Syed-ubAkhbdr published (p. 225). 

Birth of Gimabhiram Barua, Assamese writer 
(p. 178). 

Birth of Mirza Ghulam Ahmad founder of the 
Ahmadiya sect (p. 145). 

B'rth of Ranchodbhai Udayram, Gujarati play¬ 
wright (p. 192). 

Hindu-Muslim riot at Thana (Bombay. 
(p. 332). 

Birth of Altaf Husain Panipati alias Mali, 
Urdu poet (p. 215). 

1888 Birth of Bankim-chandra Chatterji (p. 173). 

Birth of Surendra-nath Majumdar, Bengali 
poet (p. 173). 

Birth of Hem-chandra Bandopadhyay, Bengali 
poet (p. 172). 

Devendra-nath Tagore becomes a Brahma 

(p. 101). 

The first hospital opened in Calcutta (p. 69). 

The Bombay Times (later the Times of India) 
published (p. 225). 

The Government of India suspends emigration 
of Indian labourers to Mauritius, British 
Guiana and other places (July 11) (p. 614). 

A public meeting at Calcutta condemns the 
malpractices in the export of Indian 
labourers (p. 614). 

The Delhi Akhbdr published (p. 225). 

Hooghli College established (p. 68). 

Adam’s Report on Vernacular Education (III) 
(p. 60). 

Zamindari Association later called Landhol¬ 
ders’ Society (Bengal) inaugurated (July) 
(p. 446). 

The Hindu Pioneer published (p. 40L 

Krishuamacharya’s Hosaganna^a Nudigfin^ia4i, 
a grammar of New Kannada, printed (p. 201). 

1880 Devendra-nath Tagore establishes the Tattva- 

bodhini Sabhd (p. 101). 

British India Society established in England, 
(p. 447). 


653 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


1840 


1841 


1842 


1848 


1844 


Lord Elphinstone recommends the establish¬ 
ment of a Collegiate Institution at Madras 
(p. 73). 

Birth of Dwijendra-nath Tagore (p. 173). 

Birth of Kall-prasanna Siriiha (p. 177). 

Birth of Sivanarayar^a Paramahaihsa (p. 137). 

Birth of V. J. Kirtane, Marathi playwright 
(p. 188). 

A female hospital begins to function in Cal¬ 
cutta (p. 69). 

The Committee of Native Education reconsti¬ 
tuted as the , University Board (Madras' 
(p. 73). 

Central School converted into a High School 
(Madras) (p. 74). 

Publication of Digdarian, Marathi Journal, 
by Jambhekar (p. 186). 

Publication of Prabhdkar, Marathi Journal, 
by Bhau Mahajan ’ (p. 186). 

British India Society publishes its Journal, 
the British India Advocate (p. 447). 

Birth of Mahadev Govind Ranade (p. 486). 

The Bengal Spectator published (p.p. 40, 444). 

Publication of J nanoday a, Marathi Journal by 
Missionaries (p. 186). 

The Government of India under pressure from 
British authorities passes an Act permitting 
emigration of Indian labour (p. 614). 

Slavery declared illegal in India (p. 280). 

Devendra-nath Tagore formally becomes a 
Brahma (p. 101). 

The Council of education replaces the Com¬ 
mittee of Public Instruction in Bengal 
(p. 49). 

Institution of the Free Church of Scotland 
established (p. 69). 

Bengal British India Society established 
(April 20). (p. 448). 

Hindu College students at a public meeting 
send a memorial to the Court of Proprietors 
‘praying for the bestowal of more offices on 
Indians' (April 18) (p. 442). 

Birth of Phakir-mohan Senapati (p. 179). 

Four Indians proceed to England for training 
in Medicine (p. 69). 

A class for training engineers opened in the 
Elphinstone Institution (Bombay) (p. 71). 

Educational Despatch of Lord Hardinge 
(p. 49). 

Birth of Girii-chandra Ghose, Bengali actor 
and playwright (p 176). 

Death of Abu Sulaiman Muhammad Ishaq. 
Arabic scholar (p. 209). 

654 


CHRONOLOGY 


1845 


1846 


1847 


1848 


1849 


Council of Education in Calcutta under the 
Presidentship of Charles Hay Cameron 
draws up a plan for a University of Calcutta 
(p. 49). 

Grant Medical College (Bombay) opened (Oc¬ 
tober) (p. 71). 

Birth of Keralavarma Valiya Koil Tampuran, 
Sanskrit poet (p. 164). 

Birth of Jogendra-nath Vidyabhushan, Bengali 
writer (p. 177). 

Birth of Bhdratendu Haris-chandra (p. 182). 

Christian Missionaries publish the Arunodaya 
Samvad Patra (Assamese) (p. 178). 

The firt regular session of Grant Medical 
College, Bombay, begins (June 16) (p. 71). 

St. Joseph’s College established at Nagapatam 
(p. 74). 

Death of Bal Gangadhar Jambhekar (p. 185). 

Death of Haidar ‘All Atish, Urdu poet (p. 214). 

Engineering College, Roorkee, founded (p. 52). 

Death of Swathi Thirunal, Maharaja of Travan- 
core. (p. 203). 

Death of Nawab Amir Hasan Khan of Kakori, 
Persian poet. (p. 213). 

The Council of Education, Bengal, stresses the 
necessity of combining vernacular with Eng¬ 
lish education (p. 68). 

A. Kmloch Forbes founds “The Gujarat Verna¬ 
cular Society” (now called Gujarat Vidya 
Sahha) at Ahmedabad (p. 190). 

The Jnanaprasarak Sabha (Maharashtra) esta¬ 
blished (p. 186). 

The Students’ Literary and Scientific Society 
(Maharashtra) established (p. 186). 

Thomason submits his scheme for re-organizing 
the educational system in U.P. (p. 75). 

Birth of Radha-nath Ray, Oriya poet (p. 179). 

Hindu Balika Vidyalaya founded in Calcutta 
by J. E. Drinkwater Bethune and I£var- 
chandra Vidyasagar (May) (pp. 66, 70, 291). 

The Roorkee Engineering College placed on a 
permanent footing (p. 76). 

Michael Madhu-sudan publishes his first work, 
the Captive Ladie (English) (p. 216). 

Publication of the Jnanaprak&6a (Marathi 
Journal (p. 186). 

Birth of Rajakrishna Ray, Bengali playwright 
(p. 175). 

Birth of Jyotirindra-nath Tagore (p. 175). 

Birth of Indra-nath Bandyopadhyay, Bengali 
author (p. 177). 

A female School opened at Baraset (p. 290). 

655 


i 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


1850 


3851 


1852 


1858 


1854 


Publication of the Hindi Journal Sudhdkar 
(p. 183). 

Death of Muhammad Mu’min Khan Mu’min, 
Urdu poet (p. 214). 

Bareilly College founded (p. 74). 

Birth of Vishnu Kjdsfana*4astribuwa Chiplun- 
kar, Marathi writer (p. 189). 

Publication of the BuddhiprakaS, Gujarati fort* 
nightly (p. 191). 

Dalpatram writes Hunnarkhdnni ChajM, Guja¬ 
rati poem (p. 191). 

British Indian Association (Calcutta) founded 
(October 29) (p. 448). 

Dadabhai Naoroji publishes the Hast Goftar 
(Gujarati) (p. 228). 

Jotiba Phule starts a girls’ school at Poona 
(p. 285), 

Madras Medical School raised to the status 
of College (p. 74). 

The Dakshina Prize Committee (Maharashtra) 
established (p. 186). 

Pr&sannardghava f the first Marathi play writ¬ 
ten (p. 188). 

Birth of Laia Srinivasadas, Hindi playwright 
(p. 183). 

Birth of Chintamani Pethkar, Marathi poet 

(p. 188). 

Hindu “Muslim riot in Bombay (p. 326). 

Publication of the Vichdralahari, Marathi 
Journal (p. 186). 

Dadabhai Kavasji publishes the Akhbar-o - 
Souddgar (p. 226). 

Death of Dayaram, Gujarati poet (p. 190). 

The Bombay Association inaugurated (p. 459). 

Harii-chandra Mukherji publishes the Hindoo 
Patriot (p. 225). 

A College Department added to the Central 
High School which later developed into Pre¬ 
sidency College, Madras (p. 74). 

Government schools founded at Cuddalore and 
Rajhamundry (p. 73). 

Birth of Amrita-lal Basu, Bengali actor and 
playwright, (p. 176). 

Birth of Madhu-sudan Rao, Oriya writer 

(p. 180). 

Educational Despatch, No. 49, dated July 19, 
drafted by Sir Charles Wood (p. 49). 

Department of Public Instruction formed 
(Madras) (p. 73). 

Parashurara Pant Tatya edits Navneet, an an¬ 
thology of Marathi' poetry (p. 186). 

656 


CHRONOLOGY 


Death of Abu ‘Abd’ullah Husain bin Dildar 
‘All, Arabic scholar (p. 209). 

Publication of the Vartamdndipikd Marathi 
Journal (p. 186). 

1855 Death of Hansaraja, Marathi poet (p. 188). 

The Maharaja of Burdwan petitions the Legis¬ 
lative Council for restraining polygamy 
among the Kulins in Bengal (p. 259). 

Birth of Govardhanram Madhavram Tripathi 
Gujarati writer ip. 192). 

1.85(5 Sri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa becomes a 

priest in the Dakshinesvara temple (p. 117) 

Hindu Widow’s Re-marriage Act passed (Julv 
26) (p. 278). 

Calcutta College of Engineering founded 
(p. 52). 

First female school in the Punjab opened at 
Rawalpindi (p. 77). 

Publication of the Buddhiprakds (Hindi) by 
Munshi Sadasukhlal (p. 183). 

Birth of Bal Gangadhar Tilak (p. 189). 

Birth of Principal Agarkar, Marathi writer 
(p. 189). 

1 857 University of Calcutta incorporated, 24 Janu¬ 

ary (p. 51). 

University of Bombay incorporated. 18 July 
(p. 51). 

University of Madras incorporated, 5 Sep¬ 
tember (p. 51). 

Baba Padmanji wites Yamuna Paryatari, first 
Marathi novel (p. 187). 

Keshab-chandra Sen joins the Brahma-Samaj 
(p. 102). 

Death of DasarathI Ray. the Bengali poet 
(p. 172), 

Death of Faiz Ahmad bin Hafiz Ghulam Ah¬ 
mad, Arabic poet (p. 209). 

Publication of the Stri-bodh , a journal for wo¬ 
men, in Bombay (p. 292). 

Hindu Muslim riot at Broach (p. 332). 

1858 Pyarl-chand’s Alaler-gharer Duldl published 

(p. 173). 

The Industrial School attached to the Gun 
Carriage Factory becomes the Guindy Col¬ 
lege of Engineering and is affiliated to the 
Madras University (p. 52). 

The Overseer’s School of Poona raised to the 
status of Poona College of Engineering and 
affiliated to the Bombay University (p. 52). 

The Somaprakasa (Bengali) published by 
Dwarka-nath Vidyabhushan (p. 243). 

Birth of ManiJal Nabhubhai Dvivedi, Gujarati 
writer (p. 193). 

657 




U.P.I.Rr—42 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-II 


1859 


1860 


1861 


1862 


Birth of Bhola-nath Das, Assamese writer 
(p. 178). 

Death of Hari Keshavji, Marathi writer (p. 185). 

Lord Elphinstone writes in a minute (May 14): 
“Divide et Impera was the old Roman motto 
and it should be ours” (p. 321). 

Death of Isvar-chandra Gupta, Bengali poet 
(p. 172). 

Death of Anandaram Dhekial Phukan, Assa¬ 
mese writer (p. 178). 

Birth of Narsinhrao, Gujarati Writer (p. 193). 

Dinabandhu Mitra’s drama, Nila-darpana, 
published (p. 175). 

Rev. Long imprisoned for the publication of an 
English translation of the Nila-darpana 
(p. 175). 

University education begins in U. P. by affiliat¬ 
ing the Colleges with the Calcutta Univer¬ 
sity (p. 76). 

Lahore Medical School founded (p. 78). 

Indian Councils Act passed. 

Birth of Rabindra-nath Tagore (p. 177). 

Alexander Cunningham begins regular ar¬ 
chaeological exploration (p. 466). 

Michael Madhu-sudan Datta composes the 
Meghnada-vadha-kavya (p. 172). 

Radha-Soami-Satsarig founded by TulsI Ram 
(p. 138). 

The Bombay Times changes its name to Times 
of India (p. 242). 

The Indian Field published by Kishori-chand 
Mitra (p. 241). 

The Muknerji’s Magazine published by Sfeam- 
bhu-chandra Mukhop5dhyaya (p. 241). 

Keshab-chandra Sen becomes a whole time 
missionary of the Brahma Samaj (p. 102). 

Birth of Kali-prasanna Kavyavtearad (p. 177). 

Death of Harii-chandra Mukherji, editor, 
Hindoo Patriot (p. 241). 

Death of Muhammad Fazl-i-Haqq, Arabic 
Scholar (p. 210). 

Keshab-chandra Sen becomes the Acharya of 
the Brahma Sam§j (p. 102). 

Devendra-nath Tagore publishes the Indian 
Mirror (p. 241). 

Lahore University College incorporated as a 
University (p. 78). 

The Bengalee published by Girish-chandra 
Ghosh (p. 241). 

First M.A. degree conferred by the Calcutta 
University (p. 69). 

Publication of the InduprakaSa, Marathi Jour¬ 
nal (p. 186). 

658 


CHRONOLOGY 


1863 


186 £ 


1863 


1866 


Ranchodbhai Udayram writes the first modern 
Gujarati play *JayakumdrV (p. 192). 

Birth of Rev. N. V. Tilak, Marathi poet (p. 189). 

Birth of SvarnI Vivekananda (January 12) 
(p. 123). 

Patna College established (p. 68). 

U mesh-chan dr a Datta starts the Bamabodhini , 
a Journal for Women, in Bengal (p. 65). 

Birth of Dwijendra-lal Ray. Bengali playwright 
<p. 173). 

Birth of V. K. Raj wade, Marathi writer 
(p. 189). 

Bankim-chandra Chatterji publishes his first 
work, the Rajmohan’s Wife (English) 
(p. 174). 

Canning College founded at Lucknow (p. 74). 

Government Colleges established at Lahore 
and Delhi (pp. 77-78). 

The SiksJiadarpana O Scimbadasdra (Bengali) 
published by Bhudev Mukhopadhyay 
(p. 243). 

The Indian Whipping Act passed (p. 350). 

Birth of Kshirod-prasad Vidyabinod, Bengali 
playwright, (p. 176). 

Birth of S. M. Paranjpe, Marathi writer 
(p. 189). 

Birth of Mrs. Kamim Ray, Bengali poetess 
(p. 173). 

Birth of Hari Narayan Apte, Marathi writer 

(p. 187). 

Bankim s Durgesanandinl published (p. 165) 

Calcutta College of Engineering amalgamated 
with Presidency College (p. 52). 

Hook-swinging prohibited (March 15) (p. 283). 

The National Paper published by Nabogopal 
Mitra (p. 241). 

The Pioneer published (p. 242). 

London Indian Society formed (p. 520). 

Krishna-Sastri Chiplunkar completes the Ma¬ 
rathi tr. of the Arabian Nights (p. 187). 

Birth of Akshay-kumar Baral, Bengali poet 
(p. 173). 

Birth of Balmukund Gupta, Hindi Journalist 
(p. 183). 

Birth of Ayodhya Singh Upadhyay ‘Hari 
Audh’, Hindi writer (p, 183). 

Keshab-chandra Sen organizes the Brahma 
Samaj of India (p. 103). 

Dar-al-TJlum founded at Deoband (p. 142), 

Government starts girls’ schools (Madras) 
(p. 74). 


659 


THE BRITISH PAKAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


1867 


1868 


1869 


1870 


Formation of the East India Association with 
which The London Indian Society was 
amalgamated (p. 520). 

Publication of the Utkala Dipika (p. 180). 
Lakshman Moreshwar Halbe writes the Ratna- 
prabhd Marathi novel (p. 187). 

Birth of Keshavasuta Krishnaji Keshav Damle, 
Marathi poet (p. 189). 

Prarthana Samaj inaugurated in Bombay 
(p. 106). 

Beginning of the Hindu Mela (p, 472). 

Poona Sarvajanik Sabha founded (pp. 517, 
521). 

National Indian Association founded in Eng¬ 
land by Mary Carpenter (p. 521). 

W. C. Bonnerjee delivers a speech on “repre¬ 
sentative and responsible Government of 
India” in England (July 25) (p. 499). 
Ravji-Sastn Godbole translates the Robhrson 
Crusoe into Marathi (p. 187). 

Birth of Manishankar Ratnaji Bhatt, Gujarati 
author (p. 194). 

The Amrita Bazar Patrika published by Sisir 
Kumar Ghosh (February 20) (p. 244). 

The Madras Mail, the first evening paper in 
India, published (p. 242). 

Naro Sadashiv Risbud composes Maniughdshd 
(Marathi) (p, 187). 

M. M. Kunte writes the pseudo-epic poem, the 
Raja Shivaji (p. 189). 

Birth of Lakshnru-nath Bezbarua, Assamese 
writer (p. 179). 

Birth of Ramanbhai Mahipatram Ntlkanth, 
Gujarati writer (p. 195). 

Surendra-nath Banerji disqualified for the 
I.C.S. (p. 458). 

Sir Syed Ahmad Khan visits England (p. 148). 
Branches of East India Association opened at 
Bombay, Calcutta, and Madras (p. 520). 
Dwaraka-nath Ganguli starts the Journal 
Abala-bandhava (p. 65). 

Birth of Balvantrai Kalya^rai fhakor, Guja¬ 
rati writer (p. 194). 

Death of Mufti Sadr-ud-din, Persian poet 
(p. 213). 

Death of Ghalib, Persian and Urdu poet 

(p. 212). 

Dadabhai Naoroji points out that the average 
annual income of an Indian was 40 Shillings 
(p. 422). 

R. G. Bhandarkar and M. G. Ranade join the 
Prarthana Samaj (p. 106). 

660 


CHRONOLOGY 


1871 


1872 


1878 


Punjab (formerly Lahore) University College 
inaugurated (p. 78). 

Law School founded at Lahore (p. 78). 

Lahore Medical School raised to the status of 
a College (p. 78). 

Rajkumar College at Bajkot opened (p. 78). 

Naro Sadashiv Risbud composes Vishwdsrdo, 
(Marathi .novel) (p. 187), 

Sir Syed Ahmad starts the Tahzibal-Akhldq 
(p. 144). 

Birth of Mahablr Prasad Dvivedx, editor of the 
Hindi Journal Sarasvati (p. 184). 

Death of Kalf-prasanna Sirhha, Bengali trans¬ 
lator of the Mahabhamta (p. 177). 

Parliamentary Committee appointed to inquire 
into the financial administration of India 
under the Chairmanship of Henry Fawcett 
(pp. 392, 519). 

Lord Mayo’s resolution on the backwardness 
of Muslim Education (p. 79). 

Hindu-Muslim riots in U.P. (p. 328). 

A branch of the East India Association formed 
in Bombay (p. 516). 

Publication of the Orissa Patriot and the Ut- 
kalahitaishini (p. 180). 

Rama-chandra Bhikaji Gunjikar writes Mo- 
changad, Marathi historical novel (p. 187). 

Bankim-chandra publishes the Bangadarsana 
(p. 176). 

Ananda-mohan Bose founds the Indian Society 
in London (p. 521). 

First public stage opened in Calcutta (p. 175), 

Mayo College opened at Ajmer (p. 78). 

Rajkumar College opened at Nowgong (p. 78). 

Muir College (U.P.) founded (p. 76). 

Native Marriage Act (popularly known as Civil 
Marriage Act) passed (p. 104). 

• Birth of N. C. Kelkar, Marathi writer (p. 189). 

Birth of Madhavanuj, Marathi poet (p. 189). 

Birth of Vinayaka Karandikar, Marathi poet 
(p. 189). 

Death of Michael Madhu-sudan Datta (p. 1721. 

Death of Dinabandhu Mitra, Bengali play- 
weight (p. 175). 

In Brighton, Ananda-mohan Bose advocates 
gradual establishment of representative 
Government in India (p. 499). 

Krishna-Sastn Chiplunkar and his son trans¬ 
late the Raselas into Marathi (p. 187). 

Publication of the Utkala-Darpana (monthly) 
and Uikala-Putra (fortnightly) (p. 180). 

Arts College established at Jaipur (p. 78). 

661 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


Moroba Kanhoba Vijaykar writes GMshiram 
Kotwal , Marathi historical novel (p. 187). 

Death of Ranchodbhai GirdharbhSi, Gujarati 
writer (p. 190). 

Death of Vithoba Anna Daftardar, Marathi 
poet (p. 188). 

Death of Maulvi Karamat Ali, Persian writer 
(p. 213). 

1874 Birth of Sursinhji Gohel, alias KalSpi, Guja¬ 

rati writer (p. 194). 

Death of Dr. Kirtikar B. D. Palande, Marathi 
poet (p. 188). 

Death of Aru and Toru Dutt (p. 216). 

Death of Babar Ali Anis, Urdu poet (p. 214). 

Death of Aliya Lihga Raja, Sanskrit and Kan¬ 
nada writer (p. 201). 

Death of Ramalinga Swamigal, Tamil poet 
(p. 196). 

Death of Parashuram Balwant alias Parashu- 
ram Pant Tatya Godbole, Marathi writer 
(p. 186). 

Hindu-Muslim riot in Bombay (p. 326). 

Publication of Nibandhamala of Vish$u£astri 
Chiplunkar (p. 186). 

1875 Dayananda founds the Arya Samaj at Bombay, 

(April 10) (pp. 107, 109). 

Madame Blavatsky founds the Theosophical 
Society in U.S.A. (p. 131). 

Syed Ahmad Khan establishes a school at 
Aligarh (p. 76). 

Prince of Wales (later Edward VII) visits 
India (p. 428). 

The Statesman published by Rebert Knight 
(p. 242). 

Robert Knight purchases the Friend of India 
(p. 242). 

‘Indian League’ started in Calcutta (September 
23) (p. 500). 

Death of Salamat ‘All Dabir, Urdu poet 
(p. 214). 

Birth of D. K. Ghate, Marathi poet (p. 189). 

1876 A new regulation is passed lowering the age 

limit of competitors for the I. C. S. examina¬ 
tion (p. 501). 

The Civil and Military Gazette published 
(p. 242). 

Fuller, an English lawyer, kills his groom and 
is let off on payment of a fine of Rs. 30/ 
(p. 358). 

Aru and Toru Dutt’s A Sheaf Gleaned in 
French Fields published (p. 216). 

Birth of Sridhar P§{hak (p. 183). 

662 



CHRONOLOGY 


1877 


1878 


1879 


1880 


Surendra-nath Banerji tours India propagating 
the message of unity (p. 502). 

‘National Mohammedan Association’ founded 
by Amir ‘AH (p. 311). 

Lord Lytton lays the foundation stone of the 
Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College at 
Aligarh (January 8) (p. 308). 

House of Commons passes a resolution urging 
the abolition of the import duty on British 
cotton goods in India (p. 426). 

The Indian Association holds a public meeting 
protesting against the new regulation lower¬ 
ing the age of the I.C.S. candidates (March 
24) (p. 501). 

A Durbar is held at Delhi (t>. 525). 

Ten principles of the Arya Samaj promulgated 

(p. 110). 

Madhvas of South India form an association 
(d. 135). 

Dwiiendra-nath Tagore publishes the Journal 
Bhdratl (p. 177). 

Hindu-Muslim riot at Janjira (p. 332). 

The Vernacular Press Act passed (March 14) 
(p. 503). 

The Arms Act and the License Act passed 
(p. 503). 

Sadharan Brahma Samaj founded by Sivan&th 
Sastri and Ananda-mohan Bose (May 15) 
(p. 105). 

The Hindu (weekly) published (September 
20) by G. Subramaniya Aiyar and Viraragha- 
vacharia (p. 248). 

Death of Surendra-nath Majumdar, Bengali 
poet (p. 173). 

Duties on imported cotton goods from England 
abolished (p. 426). 

Lal-mohan Ghosh addresses the members of 
the Parliament in Willis’s Rooms, House of 
Commons (July 23) (p. 504). 

Formation of the rules of the Statutory Civil 
Service (July 24) (p. 505). 

Surendra-nath Banerji takes over the manage¬ 
ment and editorship of the Bengalee (Ja¬ 
nuary 1) (p. 246). 

Death of Chintamani Pethkar, Marathi poet 
(p. 188). 

Birth of Prem Chand, Hindi novelist (p. 183). 

Calcutta College of Engineering shifted to 
Sibpur (p. 52). 

Mirza Ghulam Ahmad publishes the Bardhlni - 
Ahmadiya (p. 146). 

663 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


1881 


1882 


1888 


1884 


SvamI Yivekananda meets £n Rsunakrish^a 
Paramahamsa (p, 123). 

Lahore Central Training College for Teachers 
opened (p. 78). 

Publication of the Bangabdsi (p. 246). 

The Tribune published by Samar Dayal Singh 
Majeetia (p. 243). 

The K&saft and the Mahratta published (Janu¬ 
ary 4 and 2) (pp. 186, 250). 

Birth of ChSma Raja Wodeyar ip. 202). 

Lord Bipon repeals the Press Act;of 1857 and 
1878 (p. 250). 

Inland Emigration Bill passed (p. 597). 

Punjab University (Lahore) incorporated (Oc¬ 
tober 14) (p. 53). 

Appointment of Hunter Commission on edu¬ 
cation (p. 53). 

A.O. Hume retires from Government service 
(p. 529). 

Kerala Varma translates the Sdkuntaiam into 
Malayalam (p, 206). 

Birth of Brij Narain Chakbast, Urdu poet 
(p. 215). 

Death of Dadoba Pan$urang Tarkhadkar, Ma» 
rathi grammarian (p. 185). 

Death of Vishnu Krishoa-sastribuwa Chiplun- 
kar, Marathi writer (pp. 189, 476). 

Death of SvamI Day&nanda (p. 110). 

First National Conference held at Calcutta 
(December 28, 29, 30) (p. 512). 

A. O. Hume addresses an open letter to the 
graduates of the Calcutta University (March 
!) (p. 539). 

Government passes a resolution declaring its 
policy on Muslim Education (p. 80). 

W.S. Blunt tours India (p. 346). 

IXhert Bill controversy (p. 506). 

Publication of the Sanjibani (Bengali) (p. 246). 

The Hindu converted into a tri-weekly (p. 248). 

Death of Pyan-cband Mitra, Bengali author 
(p. 173). 

Death of Keshab-chandra Sen (January) 
(p. 469). 

Death of Bhdratendu Haris-chandra (p. 182). 

Government passes a resolution on Muslim 
Education (p. 80). 

The Lihgayat Education Association formed 
(p. 136). 

The ‘MaMjan Sabha* of Madras founded (May 
16) (p. 517). ' * 

B. M. Malabari publishes his Notes on Infant 
Marriage and Enforced Widowhood (p. 283). 

664 


CHRONOLOGY 


1885 


1886 


1SS? 


1888 


The Government of India approves the recom¬ 
mendations of the Hunter Commission 

(p. 55). 

Inauguration of the Bombay Presidency As¬ 
sociation (January 31) (p. 516). 

Second session of the National Conference held 
at Calcutta (December 25, 26. 27) (p. 513). 

Indian National Congress holds its first session 
at Bombay (December 28) (pp. 514, 536). 

The Government of Transvaal passes an Act 
imposing disabilities on Indians (p. 619). 

Death of ‘All Abbas of Chirayyakot, Arabic 
scholar (p. 211). 

Gunabhiram Barua publishes the Assam Ban- 
dhu (p. 178). 

Lord Randolph Churchill advocates a Royal 
Commission of Enquiry into Indian Affairs 
(p. 388). 

Hindu-Muslim riot at Lahore and Karaal 
Cp. 327). 

Death of Sri Ramakpshna . Paramahamsa 
(August 16) (p. 120). 

Aitchison College founded at Lahore (p. 78). 

The Indian Association sends Dwarka-nath 
Ganguly to inquire into the conditions of the 
garden-labourers of Assam (p. 597). 

Death of Akshay-kumar Datta (p, 176). 

Death of Narmada-shankar Lalshankar, Guja¬ 
rati writer (p. 191). 

Death of Bholanath Sarabhai, Gujarati writer 
(p. 192). 

Death of Abdul Hayy, Arabic scholar (p. 210h 

Hindu-Muslim riots at Delhi (p. 327). 

Tilak becomes the sole editor of the Kesarl 
(p. 250). 

Allahabad University incorporated (p. 76). 

T)eva Samaj' founded by Siva-narayaip. Agni- 
hotri (p. 139). 

Govardhanram publishes the first volume of 
his (Gujarati) novel Sarasvatuchandr 
(p. 192). 

K. Vlresalingam’s Rdjasekhara-chantramu tr. 
into English (pp. 198-99). 

Publication of the Odia (weekly) (p. 181). 

Death of Rangalal Bandyopadhyaya (p. 172). 

Death of Laia &rimv&sa~das, Hindi playwright 
(p. 183). 

Death of Faiz'ul Hasan, Arabic scholar (p. 211). 

Dufferin defines the British policy towards 
Indian aspirations at the St. Andrews Day 
Dinner (November 30) (p. 556). 

665 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


Congress establishes a paid agency in England 
(p. 563). 

Beck forms the ‘United Indian Patriotic As¬ 
sociation ’ (p. 312). 

Agarkar publishes the Sudharak (p. 186). 

D. A. V. School in Lahore raised to the status 
of a College (p, 78). 

Death of Navalram Lakshmiram, Gujarati 
writer (p. 192). 

1889 The British Committee of the Indian National 

Congress founded (July) (p. 563). 

Charles Bradlaugh introduces a Bill for setting 
up democratic government in India (p. 312). 
Chandu Menon writes Indulekhd, a Malaya lam 
novel (p. 205). 

Paudita Ramabai starts the Sarada Sadan 

(p. 266). 

The Hindu becomes a daily (p. 248). 

The Jondki published in Assam (p. 178). 

Death of Mufti Syed Muhammad ‘Abbas, Ara¬ 
bic and Persian poet (p. 211). 

Hindu-Muslim riots at Hoshiarpur, Ludhiana, 
Ambala, and Dera Ghazi Khan (p. 327). 

1890 Ranade inaugurates the ‘Industrial Association 

of Western India* (p. 486). 

C. V. Raman Pillai writes the Malayalam novel 
Mdrttandavarma (p. 205). 

Death of Robert Knight (p. 242). 

1891 Death of Isvar-chandra Yidyasagar (p. 173). 

Death of Rajendra-lal Mitra (p. 176). 

Death of Madam Blavatsky (8 May) (p. 134). 
Age of Consent Act passed (p. 283). 

Tilak becomes sole proprietor of the Kesari 
and the Mahxatta (p. 250). 

Mirza Ghulam Ahmad proclaims himself to be 
the Mahdi (p. 146). 

Publication of the Utkala~prahh& (p. 181). 
Death of V. J. Kirtane, Marathi playwright 

(p. 188). 

Death of Mahipatram Rupram, Gujarati writer 
(p. 192). 

Hindu-Muslim riot in Palakod (Madras) 
(p. 327). 

1892 Indian Councils Act passed (p. 548). 

Split in the Ary a Samaj (p. ill). 

Islamia College, Lahore, opened (p. 78). 

Death of Gopal Hari Deshmukh alios Lokhita- 

, wadi, Marathi writer, (p. 189). 

1898 Vivekananda attends the Parliament of Reli¬ 

gions at Chicago (p. 127). 

Beck forms the ‘Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental 
Defence Association of Upper India* (p. 312). 
666 



CHRONOLOGY 


189 ^ 

1895 

1896 

1897 

1898 

1899 


Tilak organizes the Ganapati festival (p. 578). 

Anti-Cow killing riot in Bihar (p. 333). 

Hindu-Muslim riots in U.P., Bombay, Punjab 
(p. 327). 

Arts College established at Jodhpur (p. 78). 

Death of Bankim-chandra Chatterji (p. 173). 

Death of Bhudev Mukhopadhyay (p, 173). 

Death of Rajakrishna Ray, Bengali playwright 
(p. 175). 

Death of Chama Raja Wodeyar (p. 202). 

Death of Bihari-lal Chakravarti, Bengali poet 
ip. 173). 

Death of Muhammad Ibrahim Zauq, Urdu poet 
(p. 214). 

Tilak organizes the Sivaji festival (March 15) 
(p. 579). 

Death of Principal Agarkar, Marathi writer 
ip. 189). 

The ‘Advaita Sabha’ of Kumbhakonam started 
(p. 136). 

Death of Gunabhiram Barua (p. 178). 

Famine in Bombay (p. 577). 

Death of Hem-chandra Barua, Assamese writer 
ip. 178). 

Plague epidemic in Bombay (p. 591). 

Rand and Ayerst murdered in Poona (June 
22) (pp. 581, 590). 

Tilak sentenced to 18 months’ rigorous impri¬ 
sonment (July 22) (p. 582). 

Vivekananda returns to India (p. 128). 

Publication of the Utkala Sdhitya (p. 181). 

Khalsa College, Amritsar, founded (p. 78). 

Hindu-Muslim riot at Calcutta (p. 334). 

S. M. Paranjpe publishes the Kdl (p. 186). 

Nadwat at’Ulama founded. at Lucknow by 
Shibli Numani (p. 142). 

Death of Sir Syed Ahmad (p. 320). 

Death of Manilal Nabhubhai Dvivedi (p. 193). 

Rajkumar College, Nowgong, amalgamated 
with Daly College, Indore (p. 78). 

Vivekananda establishes a Math at Belur 
ip. 129). 

Vivekananda re-visits America (p. 130). 

Lord Curzon appointed Viceroy (p. 400). 

The two Dravid brothers, who informed 
against the Chapekar brothers, murdered by 
Vasudev Chapekar (February 8) (p. 592). 

Death of Principal Beck (p. 314). 

Death of D. K. Ghate, Marathi poet (p. 189). 

Death of Raj-narayan Basu (p. 176). 

667 


THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-11 


19Q0 


1901 


1902 


1908 

1904 


1905 


Vivekananda returns to India (p. 130). 

V. D. Savarkar starts the ‘Mitra Mela, at Nasik 
(p. 592). 

The Indian Review published by G. A. Natesan 
(p. 250). 

Death of Sursinhji Gohel, alias Kaldpi, Guja¬ 
rati writer (p. 194). 

Death of the Sanskrit poetess. Lakshmi 
(p. 166). 

Death of Amir Ahmad Minal, Urdu poet 
(p. 214). 

Death of AppayachSrya, Tamil philosopher 
(p. 164). 

Death of Mahadev Govind Ranade (p. 486). 

Publication of Phakir-mohan's Chhaytndna 
Apa-Gwifha (Oriya novel) (p. 179). 

Death of Vivekananda (July 4) (p. 130). 

Indiain Universities Commission (p. 57). 

Sri-Vaishi^avas of Mysore forms an association 
(p. 135). 

Death of Hem-chandra Bandyopadhyay, Ben¬ 
gali poet (p. 172). 

Indian Universities Act passed (March 21) 
(p. 58). 

Curzon announces two principles regarding 
public appointments in India (p. 40). 

‘Servant of India Society' founded (p. 496). 

Nanfilal writes the Vasantotsav (Gujarati) 
(p. 195). 

Death of Nandshankar Tuljashankar, Gujarati 
writer (p. 192). 

Death of Mirza Kh&n D§gh, Urdu poet (p. 214). 

Death of Keshavasuta—Krishna ji Keshav 
Damle, Marathi poet (p. 189). 


668 


INDEX 


Abaldbandhava, 65. 

‘Abbas, Mufti Syed Muhammad. 211, 
213. 

Abbot, Col., 77. 

Abbott, G. F. f 349. 

Abd-el-Latif, 301. 

Abd-el-Rahman, 301. 

Abhinava Bh&rata, 593. 

Abhyankar, Raghunath-gastri, 188. 
Abul Fazl, 20, 212. 

Abyssinian War, 488. 

Academic Association, (or Institution), 

Act (1872), 283. 

„ (1885), 619. 

„ (1895), 617, 623. 

„ No. 8 (1896), 623. 

„ I (1882), 597, 598, 600, 603, 605, 
• 608, 609. 

„ V (1837), 614. 

„ XIII (1859), 596, 609. 

„ XIII (1864), 615. 

„ XV (1842), 614. 

„ XV (1856), Hindu Widow’s Re- 
Marriage), 27$, 282. 

„ XXXII (1837), 614. 

Adam, 17, 19, 44, 63, 75, 230, 232, 235. 
„ Report on Vernacular Education, 
17, 27f, 61, 285, 286. 

„ William, 99, 447. 

Advaita Sabha, (Kumbakonam), 136. 
Adyar, 134, 526. 

Afghanistan, 303, 322, 373, 428, 519. 
Afghan War, Second, 253. 

Africa, 83, 371, 613. 

Agarkar, Gopai Ganesh, 186, 189, 250, 
476. 

Age of Consent Bill, 244, 283. 
Agnihotri, Sivanarayan ( Satyadeva ), 
139. 

Agra, 27, 74, 75, 77, 81, 182, 225, 243, 
358, 405, 502, 510. 

„ College, 74. 

Agra Messenger, 226. 

Analya Bai, 288. 

Ahl-i-Hadis, (People of the Apostolic 
tradition), 145. 

Ahl-i-Qur’an, (People of the Qur’an), 
145. 

Ajhladi,’599, 600. 

Ahmadabad, 58, 109, 190, 513. 

Ahmadis, (Qadianis), 145. 

See a Iso Ahmad. Mirza Ghulam. 
Ahmad Ali al-Zabldi, Shaikh Muham¬ 
mad bin, 210. 

Ahmad, Fair bin Hafiz Ghulam, 209. 
Ahmad, Khadim, 210. 

Ahmed, Maulvi, 301. 

Ahmad, Maulavi Rashid, 213. 

Ahmad, Mirza Ghulam, 145, 146. 
Ahmad, Mohammad Ghaus Sharf ul 
Mulk bin Nizamuddin, 209. 


Ahmad, Dr. Nazir, 144, 145, 147f, 215. 
Ahmad, Saiyid, 141, 142. 

Ahmadiya, (Movement), 134. 
Ahmadnagar, 72, 164. 

Ahmad, Sir Syed, See Khan. 

Aitchison, Sir Charles, 77. 

Aitchison College, (Lahore), 78. 

Aiyar, G. Subramaniya, 248. 

Ajmer, 53, 64, 78, 243. 

Akbar, (Emperor), 140, 288. 
Akhbar-o-Soudagar, 226. 

AI-Afghani, Jamal-ud-din, 303, 304. 
Al-Biruni, 89, 171. 

Al-Zamakhshari, 210. 

Alambazar. 129. 

Alankara Sastras, 19. 

Albert Hall, 500, 513. 

Albuquerque, 268. 

Alexander, 76. 

Alf-i-S5ni, Mujaddid, 140f. 

‘Ali ‘Abbas, Maulavi, (of Chirayyakoli). 
211 . 

‘Ali Abu’ Abd’ullah Husain bin Dildar, 
209. 

Ali, Justice Ameer, 303. 

Ali, Amir, 299, 301, 302. 

‘Ali, Dildir, 209f. 

‘Ali, Amjad, 211. 

‘Ali, Haji Imd&d, 213, 

Ali, Maulavi Charagh, 146. 

‘Ali, Maulavi Karamat, 213. 

Ali, Mir Ghulam, 143. 

‘Ali, Muhammad, 211. 320. 

Allahabad, 74, 119, 238, 315, 316, 348, 
502, 513, 514, 544, 546. 

Allahabadi, Akbar, 145. 

Aligarh, 76, 144, 148. 311, 312, 320, 502. 
Aligarh College, 298, 324. 

Aligarh College Magazine, 313. 

Aligarh Movement, 215, 295, 305, 308, 
314, 317, 325, 327, 328. 

See also Khan Sir Syed Ahmad. 
Alivardi Khan, 2, 5, 23. 

Amarakosha, 19. 

Am ha la, 368, 327. 

Ambedkar, Dr,, 323. 

America, 37, 74, 127, 129, ISO, 131, 138, 
153, 266. 

American War of Independence, 434. 
Amherst, Lord, 34, 43, 44, 234, 271, 286. 
Amman Mir, 147. 

Ampthin, Lord, 372. 

Amraoti, 582. 

Amrita Bazaar Patrika, 7, 244, 245, 248, 
252, 253, 357, 388, 484, 503. 
Amritsar, 502, 510. 

Anandamath, 478. 

Anderson, 197, 279. 

Andrews, 613. 

Anglo-Oriental College, (Aligarh), 80. 
Anjuman (Dindigal), 317. 


669 






THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-II 


Anjuman-i-Islamia, The, (Madras), 
317. 

Anls, Babar ‘All, 214. 

Annapurna, 285. 

Antahpura, 65. 

Anti-Cow- Killing Society, 579. 

Anstey, 376. 

Anusilam Samiti, 593, 594. 

Anwari, 212. 

Appayacharya, 164. 

Appar, 196. 

Apparao, Gurajada, 200. 

Apte, Hari Narayan, 187, 188, 189. 
Aqiqa, 149f„ 

Arbuthnot, 608. 

Arden, 200. 

Argaon, 28. 

Aristotle, 20. 

Arms Acts, 313, 429, 503, 513. 

Arnold, Edward, 215. 

Arnold, W.D., 61, 62, 77. 

Arts Colleges, 52. 

Arabic College, (Calcutta, Delhi), 45, 
145. 

Arts College, (Jaipur), 78. 

Arts College, (Jodhpur), 78. 

Arunodaya Samvdd Pair a, 178. 

Arya Bandhav Samaj, 593. 

Aryadarsana, 243. 

Arya Mahila Samaj, 266. 

Arya Prakds, 110. 

Arya -Samaj, 66, 78, 107, 109, 110, 111, 
112, 113, 114, 137, 139, 154, 183, 264, 
266, 268, 376, 475. 

Arya Vidyalaya, 110. 

“Arzu” Sirajuddin ‘Ali Khan, 214. 
Asan, Kumar an, 207. 

Asiatic Enquiry Commission, (1920), 
620, 

Asiatic Mirror, 223. 

Asiatic Society, (The), 48, 405. 

AsolcHf 466« 

Assam, 166, 178, 595, 596, 507, 601, 602, 
604, 605, 608, 609, 610, 611. 

Astell, William, 45. 

Assye, (Battle of, 1803), 28. 

Atish, Haidar ‘Ali, 214. 

Atmlya Sabha, 98, 224. 

Auckland, 48, 63, 342. 

Auddy, Gaurmohan, 34. 

Audi Alteram Partem, 544. 

Aurangazeb, 142f, 313, 326, 330, 407, 
479. 

Australasia, 83. 

Australia, 420, 624. 

Ava 530. 

Avadh, 74, 140, 211, 246, 298. 

Ayerst, Lieut, 581, 590. 

Ayilyam TirumAl, 164. 

Azad, Ghulam Ali, (of Bilgram), 208. 
Arad, Maulavi Mohammad Husain, 
147f, 215. 

AzamgarH, District, 327. 

‘Aziz, Shah ‘Abd’ul, 209. 


Baba, Pahari, 139. 

Babaji, Santadas, 139. 

Bacon, Lord, 34, 35, 39, 68, 92. 
BadaunI, 212. 

Bagdi, 285. 

Bahadur, Maharaja Kali-Krishna, 274. 
Bahadur, Nawab Syed Mahomed, 315. 
Bahadur Shah II, 140. 

Bahar Danish, 20. 

“Bahar”, Munshi Tek Chand, 213. 

Baji, 590. 

Baji Rao, The Peshwa, 268. 

Baker, Sir E.N., 413, 414. 

Bakhtyar, Khalji, 479. 

Balabodha, (Script), 218. 

Baiakot, (battle), 141. 

Bal, Nanda-Kishor, 180. 

Balwant Parshuram, (alias Parashuram 
Pant Tatya Godbole), 186. 
Bamabodhini, 65. 

Banajee, F.C., 292. 

Banaras, 74, 75, 97, 108, 119, 130, 137, 
163, 182, 276, 318, 326, 348, 502. 
Bandemataram , 478, 575. 
Bandyopadhyay, Hem-Chandra, 172, 
173. 

Bandyopadhyay, Indra-nath, 177. 
Bandyopadhyay, Jatindra-nath, 593. 
Bandyopadhyay, RaAgatal, 172. 

Banerji, Babu Tara-pada, 511. 

Banerjee, Chandi-char an, 177. 

Banerji, Gauri Char an, 233. 

Banerjee, Mr. Justice. Gurudas, 57, 
593. 

Banerji, Hemchandra, 479, 480. 

Banerji, Rev. K., 286. 

Banerji, Rev. K.M., 289. 

Banerji, Sasipada, 65, 278. 

Banerji, Surendra-nath, 58, 103, 243, 
246, 249, 309, 316, 430, 453, 454, 481. 
482, 483, 484, 485, 486, 499, 500, 501, 
502, 503, 504, 510, 511, 512, 513, 514, 
525, 526, 527, 532, 533, 534, 535, 539, 
548, 563, 571. 

Banga Bhasa Prakasika Sabha, 444, 
446. 

Bahgab&si, 246. 

Bangadariana, 243. 

Bahg&dhipa-par&jaya, 481. 

Bain, 365. 

Bankipore, 513. 

Bannerjee, Kali Charan, 545. 

Baptist Mission College, 33. 

Barahnagar Patrika Samdchar, 346. 
Baral, Akshay-kumar, 173. 

Baranagar, 125, 126, 129, 509. 

Baranagore Ma$h, 126. 

BaranI, 212. 

Baraset. 290. 

Barelvi, Syed Ahmad, 148. 

Bareilly, 141, 326. 

Bareilly College, 74. 

Barnes, Archdeacon, 190. 

Baroda, 267, 593. 

Barr, Sir Darvid, 345. 

Barua, Gunabhirfim, 178. 


670 




INDEX 


Barua, Hem-chandra. 178. 1 

Barua, Sasadhar, C04. / 

Basava Purana, 201. 

Bassein, 72. 

Basu, Amrita-lal, 176. 

Basu, Ananda-mohan, 482. 513. 

Basu, Chandra-nath. 177. 

Basu, Kajnaiayan, 91. 176. 177. 

Basu, Ramram, 167. 

Bayley, W.B., 230, 231. 

Beadon, Sir Cecil. 283. 

„ Resolution, (1865), 283. 

Beck, Theodore 311. 312. 313. 314, 320. 
324. 

Bedil, 212. 

Behrampore, 68. 598. 

Bell, Dr. Andrew, 74. 

(Madras System). 74. 

Bellary, 73. 

Bengalee, 241, 246, 441, 598. 

Bengal, 1, 2, 4, 5. 6. 8, 9, 10. 11. 12, 16. 

17. 18, 20, 21, 22, 23. 28, 31, 32, 33. 

36, 41, 42, 48, 49, 55. 60, 61, 64, 67, 

69. 70, 71, 73, 75, 76, 89, 91, 115, 135, 
139, 151, 154, 162, 164, 165, 170, 177, 
178, 224f, 231, 240, 241, 244, 245, 246, 
256, 258, 261, 262, 263, 265, 269, 271, 
273, 274, 275, 278, 279, 282, 284, 285, 
292, 298, 301, 302. 303, 304, 315, 338, 
339, 341, 347, 363, 374, 375, 418 , 427, 
433, 436, 441, 456, 468, 477 , 495, 499, 
500, 503, 504, 510, 511, 515, 527 , 534, 
536, 537, 540. 566, 567, 573. 593, 609, 
612. 

Bengal Chronicle, 443. 

Bengal Gazette, 223, 224. 

Bengal Hurka’ru, 239, 436, 443, 447. 
Bengal Herald, see Roy, Raja Rdm- 
inohan, 170, 225. 

Bengal Spectator, 38, 40, 441. 
Bengali-Assamese, (Script), 218, 219. 
220 . 

Bentham, 43, 45. 

Bentinck, 44, 46, 47, 227, 234, 273, 274, 
341, 405. 

Resolution, (1835),-44, 47 , 48, 73. 

Belur and Belur Ma$h, 129, 130, 494. 
Besant, Annie, See Theosophical 
Society , 133, 134, 492, 525, 526, 560. 
Bethune, Hon’ble J.E. Drinkwater, 66. 

70, 291, 448. 

Bethune College, 70. 

Bethune School, 292. 

Be 2 barua, Lakshmi-nath, 179. 

Bhagaipur, 513. 

Bhagalpur, 340. 

Bhdgavatd Purana, 19. 

Bhagavatkavi, 198. 

Bhandarkar, R.G., 106, 266. 

Bhanja, Upendra, 181. 

Bh&ratamahild 65. 

Bharata-mihir, 243. 

Bhdrati, 65, 176. 

Bharat-chandra, 172. 

Bharati, Premananda, 136. 

Bharati, Subramania, 198. 


Bharati, Suddhananda. 198. 

Bhatti-Kavya, 19. 

Shaft, Manishankar Ratnaji. (Kant). 
194. 

Purvalap, 194. 

Guru Govindsinh, 194. 

Roman Swarajya, 194. 

Ek Devinu Vrittant, 194 

Vasant Vijay. 194. 

Chakravak-Mithun. 194. 

Bhavabhuti^ 206. 

Bhattatiri. Arur, 164. 

BhavanI, Rani, 288. 

Bhave, Vishnu Amritu. 188. 

Bhawanipore, 31. 

Bhiwindi, 322 

Bhola Kachan, 608. 

Bholagiri. 139. 

Bhopal. 145, 211. 

Bhowanagree, 560. 

Bhowanipore College. 68. 

Bihar, 1, 5, 17. 18, 23. 61, 273, 315, 333. 

Riots, (Anti-Kine-Killing). 333. 

Bijnor, 305. 

Bilgrami. Ghulam ‘Ali Azad, 211. 

Bilgrami, Sayyid Husain, 571. 

Billingsgate, 25. 

Binyon, Laurence, 217. 

Birajananda, Swarm, 108. 

BismiUah, 149f. 

Black Acts, (1849). 341, 363. 

Blanchard, S.L., 239. 

Blavatsky, H.P., see Theosophical 
Society. 131. 132, 133, 134. 

Blunt. W.S.. (Wilfrid), 248, 299, 300, 
301, 302, 303, 304, 346. 347, 351, 352, 
353. 354, 359. 364. 378. 396, 408, 411, 
507, 513. 

Boer War, 624. 

Bohtlingk, 466. 

Bolts, 222. 

Bombay, 24. 28, 31, 48. 49*, 52, 55, 60, 
68. 70, 71, 72, 73. 103, 105, 109, 132, 
135, 153, 154, 178, 186, 190, 224, 225, 

226, 228, 231, 239, 242, 245, 246, 254, 

265, 269, 274. 277. 292, 298, 315, 326, 

327, 339, 346, 348, 355, 375. 397, 398, 

408. 449, 453, 456, 460, 477, 512. 513, 

514, 515, 516, 519, 520, 522, 530, 533, 

535, 536, 539. 540, 542, 547, 549, 577. 

592, 614. 

Bombay Association, 459, 460, 462. 

Bombay Courier, see Times of India. 
The, 224, 225, 242. 

Bombay Gazette, 224, 456. 

Bombay Native Education Society, 70. 

Bombay Herald, 224. 

Bombay Presidency Association, 516. 

Bombay Samdchar, 225, 239. 

Bombay Standard, see Times of India, 
The, 242. 

Bombay Telegraph, see Times of India, 
The, 242. 

Bombay Times, see Times of India, The, 
225. 226, 239, 241, 242. 


671 





THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


Bonner jee, W.C., 499, 514, 520, 530, 532, 
533, 537, 545, 563. 

Book and Tract Society, Hie, 186. 

Bose, Ananda-mohan, 105, 473, 499, 513, 
521. 

Sadharan Brahma Samaj, 105, 107. 

Bose, B.K., 571. 

Bose, Dr. Jogendra-chandra, 177, 385. 

Bose, Manmohan, 481. 

Bose, Rajnarayan, 103, 469, 470, 472, 
473. 

Boston, 136. 

Bradlaugh, Charles, 312, 390, 518, 547, 
563. 

Brahma chan, Vishnubuwa, 189, 458. 

Brahmaism, 115. 

Brahmananda, SwamI, 129. 

Brahmanical Magazine, (1821), 15. 

Brahma Samaj, see Roy, Raja Ram 
Mohan, 65, 90, 92, 94, 97, 99, 100, 
101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 109, 112, 
114, 123, 130, 134, 139, 154, 155, 192, 
201, 256, 264, 277, 283, 468, 474, 486, 
545, 597. 

programme of Social reforms, 104. 

Sulabh Sam&ch&r, 104. 

Brahml, (Script), 218. 

Bramley, Dr. M.T., 69. 

Branson, 507. 

Briggs, Lt. General, 37. 

Bright, 574. 

Bright, John, 389, 390, 393, 394, 420, 455, 

. 504, 518, 543, 553. 

Brighton, 521. 

British Guiana, 613, 614. 

British and Foreign School Society of 
England, 285. 

British India Advocate, 447. 

British Indian Association, (Society), 
53, 241, 277, 297, 298, 328, 341, 448, 
449, 450, 451, 452, 453, 454, 455, 459, 
504, 539, 565, 566. 

British Rule, (in Bengal), 1, 4,75,10,11, 
23, 31, 37, 168, 184, 219, 222, 236, 
237, 265, 311, 312, 322, 325, 358, 394, 
572, 587 , 612. 

Reaction of the people, 2-3. 

Economic consequences, 2. 

Political changes, 2. 

Attitude of the Hindus, 3-4. 

Attitude of the Muslims, 5-8. 

Hindu-Muslim cleavage, 6-10. 

Liberal character, 11-12. 

Education in Bengal, 17-20. 

Social Evils, 21-26. 

Social relation between the Euro¬ 
peans and the Indians, 28-28. 

Divide and Rule policy, 320-325. 

Broach, 70, 190, 332. 

Riot, (1857), 332. 

Bronson, 178. 

Brougham, Lord, 614. 

Brown, 40, 607. 

Brown, C.P., 200. 

Browne, Lieut. H.E., 607, 608. 

Brown, William, 200. 


Brown, Major, 77. 

Bruce, Robert, 582. 

Brutus, 320. 

Bryce, Dr., 232. 

Bryan, Jennings, 415. 

Buckley, 346. 

Buckingham, James Silk. 230, 232, 434. 

Buddhiprakds, 191. 

Buist, George, 239. 

Burdwan, 19, 97. 

“Burhan’’, Muhammad, Husain, 212. 

Burma, 52, 53, 64, 160, 428. 

Burmese War, Third, 253. 

Bux, Mowla, 249. 

Byculla, 72. 

Byculla Club, 408. 

Bdngtil Gejefi, 274. 

Banga-duta, see Bengal Herald. 

Baba Bharati, see Bharati Prem- 
(Luanda, 

Cachar, 166, 387, 606. 

Caesar, 580. 

Calcutta, 18, 22, 26, 28, 31, 32, 33, 34, 
38, 42, 43, 45, 48, 52, 59, 60, 66, 68, 
70, 71, 80, 98, 99, 100, 109, 116, 119, 
123, 124, 129, 130, 151, 153, 154, 155, 
162, 169, 171, 175, 178, 181, 183, 184, 
211, 223, 224, 225, 228, 229, 232, 233, 
235, 242, 244, 262, 269, 271, 273, 274, 
277, 279, 284, 290, 291, 295, 297, 298, 
299, 300, 301, 303, 311, 324, 328, 334, 
338, 339, 341, 342, 363, 365, 368, 374, 
378, 386, 392, 434, 449, 460, 500, 501, 
502, 503, 504, 505, 508, 511, 512, 513, 
518, 520, 522, 524, 525, 526, 533, 535, 
537, 539, 541, 547, 555, 565, 589, 583, 
599, 611, 614. 

Calcutta Chronicle, 234. 

Calcutta Female Juvenile Society, 285. 

Calcutta General Advertiser, See Bengal 
Gazette. 

Calcutta Gazette, 223, 

Calcutta Journal 36, 230, 232, 242. 

Calcutta School Book Society, SI, 32. 

Calcutta Review, 286, 374, 375, 554. 

Calcutta School Society, 285, 

Caldwell, Dr A., 197, 200. 

Calicut, 73. 

California, 130. 

Cama, K.R., 135. 

Cameron, Charles Hay, 49, 461. 

Campbell, A.D., 61, 64, 200, 201, 

Campbell, Sir George, 69, 246, 247, 425. 

Canada, 420, 422. 

Candy, Major, 186. 

Canning, Lord, 74, 238, 239, 455, 

Canning College, (Lakshnau), 74. 

Cape Comorin, 128. 

Carbonari, 484, 589. 

Carey, William, 151, 167, 168, 184, 200, 
201, 242, 343. 

Carlyle, 469. 

Camaticus, 321. 

Carpenter, Frank G., 413. 

Carpenter, Mary, 521. 


672 



INDEX 


Cashmere, see Kashmir. 

Cawnpore, 238, 250, 371, 349, 502. 
Central Muhammadan Association, 

Ceyionf 218^421, 552, 553. 

Chailley, Joseph, 60. 340, 349. 355, 376, 
378, 415. 

Chaifcanya, (Cult), 118, 135. 

Chakbast, Brij Narain, 215. 
Chakravarti, Bihari-lal, 173. 

Chakralavi, Maulvi Abdullah, 145. 
Chakravarti, Tarachand. 40, 41. 99. 100, 
441, 442, 448. 

Chamberlain, 620. 

Chamberlain, Neville, 373. 

Champaran, 334. 

Chandemagore, 269. 

Chanel idas, 172. 

Chandra, Bhola-nath, 342. 

Chandra, Deva, 201. 

Chandra, Dr. Suresh, 357. 

Chapekar, (brothers), 581, 590, 591, 592. 
Chapekar, Balkrishna, 591. 

Chapekar, Damodar, 590, 592. 

Chapekar, Vasudev, 592. 

Chaplin, Hugh, 72. 

Chaplin, William, 70. 

Chapman, 245. 

Chapra, 334, 361. 

Charaka-puja, (Hook-swinging), 22, 
282, 283. 

Charaka Samhitd, 165. 

Charlu, P.A., 571. 

Charter Act, (1833, 1840, 1953), 15, 42, 
49, 152, 153, 280, 284, 383. 399. 421. 
448, 451, 455, 518. 

Charvaka, 90. 

Chatterji, Bankim Chandra, 5, 115, 116, 
136, 162, 170, 173, 174, 176, 202, 208, 
217, 243, 260. 263, 345, 478. 479, 487, 
496, 567. 

Krishnacharitra, 136. 

Rijmohan’s Wife, 174. 

Bangadarsana, 176. 

Chatterji, Dr. N.L., 535, 536. 

Chatterji, Sarat-chandra, 479. 

Chatterji, Dr. S.K 160. 
Chaftopadhyay, Nagendra-nath, 177. 
Chatushpdthis, 17. 

Chaudhuri, Sir Ashu-tosh, 588. 
Chellapijla, 198. 

Chenna Basava Purana, 201. 

Chesney, General, 556. 

Chettiar, Tyagaraja, 197. 

Chicago, 126, 489. 

Chicago Daily Tribune, 127. 

Chilian wala, 483. 

China, 131. 

Chinnayasuri, 199. 

Chinsura, 31, 269, 285. 

Chiplunkar, Krishna-sastri, 187, 189. 
Chiplunkar, Vishnu Krishna-£astri- 
bhuwa, 189, 476. 

Chiplunkar, Vishnusastri, 186, 250. 
Chitale, M.B., 188. 


Chitnis, M.R., 185. 

Chittagong, 503. 

Chirol, Valentine, 579. 

Chhandombudhi, 201. 

Chowdhury, J., 363. 

Christian College, (Madras), 74. 
Churchill, Lord Randolph, 388, 553. 
Civil Marriage Act, (Native Marriage 
Act), 104, 105. 

Citizen, 226. 

Clive, (Lord), 3, 14, 23. 

Cobden, 420, 445, 543, 574. 

Cochin, 163, 164, 166, 202, 204. 

Coke, Lt. John, 321. 

Coldbath, Fields, 394. 

Colebrooke, 268. 

Digest of Hindu Law, 268, 269. 
College of Engineering, (Calcutta), 52. 
College of Engineering, (Guindy), 52. 
College of Engineering, (Poona), 52, 72. 
College of Engineering, (Roorkee), 52, 
76. 

Collet, Miss S.D., 107, 232. 

Columbus, 127. 

Colvin, Sir Auckland, 544, 545, 546, 
556, 559. 

Colvin, School, (Lakhnau), 78. 
Conceicao, Dr., 604. 

Congress Catechism, A, 544. 

Congress, See Indian National Congress. 
Congress of Socialists, The, (at Amster¬ 
dam), (1904), 564, 

Conjeevaram, See Kahchi. 

Connemara, Lord, 384. 

Conspiracy, (1757), 3. 

Constantinople, 304. 

Convention of London, 620. 
Cooch-Behar, 105, 116. 

Cooke, Miss, See Mrs. Wilson, 285, 286. 
Coorg, 387. 

Corbett, 361, 362. 

Cornwallis, Lord, 23. 

Cotton, Sir Henry, 344, 345, 350, 353, 
354, 355, 357, 358, 359, 469, 502, 513, 
519, 553, 611. 

Council Act of 1892, 384.. 

Council of Education, 49, 66, 68, 79, 231. 
Cowan, 359, 360, 361. 

“Cowan Case", 359. 

Cror^-ook, Lc 

Cranganore, 16T 
Crimean (Wars;, ±48. 

Croesus, 129. 

Croft, Sir Alfred, 55. 

Cross, Lord, 253, 254, 322, 324, 325, 384, 
385, 402, 533, 541, 554, 555, 556. 558; 
559, 561. 

Cuddalore, 72, 73. 

Cummin p’s Calcutta Academy, 44. 
Cunningham, Alexander, 466. 
Cunningham, Justice, 608. 

Curzon, Lord, 56, 57, 59, 60, 251. 253, 
362, 365, 366, 367, 369, 370, 371, 372, 
384, 385, 386, 394, 399, 400, 401, 402, 
403, 404, 405, 406, 408, 560, 561, 562, 
610, 611. 


B.P.I.R.—48 


673 






THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE—II 


Cuttack, 513: 

Cutch, 276. 

Dabir, Salamat ‘All, 214. 

.Dacca, 68. 

Daftajrdar, Vithoba Anna, 188. 

Bagh, Nawab Mirza Khan, 214. 
p&hyabh&i, Da^patram, 190, t 91. 
da’ia, 147 f. 

Dakshina Prize Committee, The, 186. 
Dalhousie, Lady, 292. 

Dalhousie, Lord, 49, 52, 66, 70, 76, 280, 
292, 386, 394. 

Daly, Sir Henry, 78. 

Daly College, (Indore), 78. 
Dakshinesvar, 117, 118, 119, 123, 124. 
Dar-al-‘Ulum, 142. 

Darbhanga, 513. 

Darjilling, 508. 

Darogas, 291. 

Diarpan, 186. 

Dars-i-Nizami, 208. 

Darul-TJlum, 212. 

Das, Bhola-nath, 178. 

Das, C.H., 593. 

Das, Malik Bhagavan, 540. 

Dat&karna, 18. 

Datta, Akshay-Kumar, 102, 176, 442. 
Datta, Aswini-Kumar, 567. 

Datta, Madhusudan, 154, 172, 173, 174, 
175, 177, 178, 179. 

Captive Ladie, 174. 

Sarmishtha, 175. 

Krishnakumarl, 175. 

Datta, Rameshchandra, 175, 233. 

Datta, Umesh-chandra, 65. 
Dattakamxmam^, 19. 

Daulatram, Pandit, 182. 

Ddyabh&ga, 19. 

Dayananda, (See Saraswati, Dayanand). 
Dayan and Anglo-Vedic School, 78, 111. 
Dayaram, 190. 

Deccan Sabha, 521. 

De Boigne, 27. 

De, Harinath, 386. 

Deccan Education Society, 66. 

Delhi, 28, 61, 74, 75, 77, 78, 141, 143, 181, 
209, 214, 225, 268, 303, 312, 327, 371, 
512, 513. 

Delhi Akhbar, 225. 

Delhi College, 74, 76. 

Delhi Durbar, (1877), (1903), 369, 519, 
525 

Delhi Gazette, 226. 

Deoband, 142. 

Deoghar, 513. 

Deologni, 600. 

Dera Ghazi Khan, 327. 

Derby, Lord, 618, 619. 

Derozio, Henry Louis Vivian, 38, 39, 40, 
90, 216, 434, 435. 

Derozians, 40. 

Hesperus, 40. 

Inquirer, 40. 

The Quill, 40. 

Dtshmukh, Gopal Hari, 457, 476. 


Despatches, 43, 44, 48, 72, 74. 

Dev, Baja Raahakanta, 32, 44, 100, 165, 
272, 274, 285. 

Dev, Chandra Sekhar, 99. 

Deva, Baja Padmanabha Narayana, (of 
Parlakimedi), 180. 

Deva Samaj, (See Agnihotri, $iva- 
narayan), 139. 

Devadasis, 267 f. 

Deval, Govind Ballal, 188, 189. 
Devanagari, see Nagari. 

Dharamsi, A.M., 538. 

Dharma Sabha, 100, 277. 

Dharwar Dramatic Company, 199. 
Dholsaji, pahyabhai, 195. 

Dhubri, 598, 599, 600. 

Dhulia, 325. 

Dibrugarh, 598, 600, 603, 604. 

Dickens, Theodore, 438. 

Dickinson, John, 455. 

Digby, (John), 6, 97, 98, 346, 518. 

Digby, William, 563. 

Digdarsana, 169. 186, 224. 

Dikshithar, Muthuswami, 203. 

Dinapur, 371. 

Diron, (tea estate), 607. 

Disraeli, 253. 

Djemal ed Din, 303. 

Qidwell, Prof., 51. 

Dooab, 27. 

Doveton, 68. 

Dravid, (brothers), 592. 

Drummond, 434. 

Dubois, Abbe, 62, 150, 267f8. 268. 

Letters on the State of Christianity 
in India, 150. 

Duff, Dr., 68. 443. 

Duff, Rev. Alexander, 33, 40, 49, 155. 

‘India & Indian Missions’, 155. 
Dufferin, Lord, 252, 253, 254, 322, 323, 
324, 325, 384, 385, 386, 530, 531, 532, 
534, 535, 541, 543, 545, 546, 547, 554, 
555, 556, 557, 558, 559, 561, 562, 570. 
Dukhin, Babu, 41. 

Dum-Dum, (tea estate), 604. 

Duncan, 276. 

Duncan, Jonathan, 42. 

Durban, 623. 

Durbin. 239. 

Durgesn-nandini, 479. 

Durham, Lord, 420. 

Dutt, Aru, 216. 

Butt, Govind a-Chandra, 452. 

Dutt, M.N., (Michael Madhu-Sudan), 
136, 216. 

Dutt, Rtomesh Chunder, 216, 217, 42*, 
425, 427, 571. 

Dutt, Torn, 216, 217. 

DvivedI, Mahablr Prasad, 184. 

DvivedI, Manilal Nabhubhai, 193, 195. 
Sudarsan Gadyavali, 193. 
Atma-Nimajjana, 193. 

Kanta, 193. ~ 

Gulabsinh, 193. 

BalavilAsa, 193. 

Siddhantsara, 193. 


674 



INDEX 


Dygoreon, (tea garden), 604, 

East, Sir Hyde, 32, 33. 

East India Association, 422, 423, 520. 
East India Company, 3, 40, 42, 43, 49, 
65, 97, 140, 143, 152, 153, 166, 167, 
222, 225, 232, 234, 242, 280, 341, 385, 
396, 399, 409, 421. 432, 455, 550. 

East Indian, 435. 

Eastern Star, 228. 

Eden, Sir Ashley, 507. 

Education Commission, (1882), 66. 
Edward VII, 428, 479. 

Egypt, 210, 299. 

Egyptian Expedition, 391. 

Egyptian War, 299, 300, 304. 

Eknath, 185. 

Ellenborough, Lord, 302, 322, 381, 383, 
386, 393, 450. 

Elgin, Lord, 304, 325, 383, 385, 398, 400, 

560. 

Elphinstone College, 70f, 72, 190, 292. 
Elphinstone, Lord Mountstuart, 37, 70, 
71, 73, 228, 236, 321, 382, 406, 556. 
Emancipation Act, The, 280, 281. 
Emerson, 469. 

Emigration Act, 604. 

Emigration Report, (1883), 605. 
Englishman, (Newspaper), 12, 39, 226, 
(John Bull), 242, 251, 397, 500, 553. 
Etawah, 243. 

Ettrick, 361. 

Euclid, 20. 

Eyre, 361, 605. 

FaizI, 212. 

Fandi, Anant, 184. 

Farangi Mahal, 142, 210. 
Farhang-i-Jahangiri, 213. 
Farhang-’i-Rahxdi, 213. 

Farid, Khwaja, 143. 

Fawcett, 392, 393, 394, 426, 518, 519, 520, 
553. 

Fazl-i-Imam, 210f. 

Fergusson, 466. 

Ferid-ed-din, 356. 

Fielding, 192. 

Fiji, 613. 

Firishta, 212, 268. 

Fisher. H.A.L., 217. 

Forsyth, 360, 361. 

Forbes, 31. 

Forbes, A. Kinlock, 190, 191. 

Fort William College, 20, 465. 

Fort William, 371. 

Fowler, Sir Henry, 414. 

France, 228 
Francis, 604. 

Fraser, Lovat, 60. 

French Revolution, 434. 

Friend of India, The, See Statesman, 
The, 226, 239, 242. 

Fuller, Sir Bampfylde, 364, 365, 605, 608, 

610. 

Fuller Case, 358, 361. 


Fulta, 3. 

Furdunji, Naoroji, 461 
Furreduddin, Maulvi, 544. 

Fysabad, 510. 

Ferguson, (College), 72. 

Fort William College, (Calcutta), 166, 
182. 

Gandhi, Mahatma, 95, 428, 453, 474, 566, 
575, 613. 

Ganesa, 165. 

Gahgadbara, 164. 

GItagovinda, (imitations), 164. 
Sar^itaraghava, 164. 

Gahgash|apadl, 164. 

Gangopadhyay, Tarak-nath, 175. 
Ganguii. Dwaraka-n&th, 65, 597, 598. 
Garibaldi, 177, 243. 

Garratt, 348, 350, 351, 353, 358. 

Gaya, (District), 334. 

Gelette, 200. 

General Committee of Public Instruc¬ 
tion, 43, 44, 48. 

Gentoos, 9. 

George IV, 405. 

Ghate, D.K., 189. 

Ghalib, (Mirza Asadullah Khan), 141, 
212, 214, 215. 

Ghayasuddm, Muhammad, 213. 
Ghazipur, 306 
Ghazni, 322. 

Ghosal, Swama-Kumari, 65. 

Ghose, Aurobindo (Arabinda), 217, 430, 

572, 573, 575 585, 586, 502, 593. 
Ghose, Harchanora, 233. 

Ghose, Justice Chandra Madh&b, 806. 
Ghose, Kasl-prasad, (Kashipr&sad), 
216, 436. 

Ghose, Manmolian, (Mono-Mohan), 547, 

573. 

Ghosh, Girls (Girish) Chandra, 176, 441. 
Ghosh, Barindra-Kumar, 593. 

Ghosh, KUi-prasanna, 177. 

Ghosh, Kedar Nath, 604. 

Ghosh, liUmoh&n, 504, 505, 507, 571. 
Ghosh, Bamgopsl, 442, 452, 455. 

Ghosh, Ram-lochan, 444, 445, 448. 
Ghosh, Raah-behari, 571. 

Ghosh, Slik^Kumar, 244, 245, 

Gibbons, @07. 

Gilbert, Murray, 376. 

Girami, 213. 

Gir&gia College, (Gondml and Wadhwan 
in Kathiawar), 79. 

Girdharbhii, Baijieho^bh&i, 190. 
Gladstone, W. K, 383, 384, 388, 407, 504, 
549. 

Gladstone, Life of, 388. 

Goa, 162, m t m . 

Goalpara, 598. 

Goalundo, 600. 

God bole. P&rasur&m Pant, 188. 
Godbole, Rkvji-Sistri, 187. 

Goethe, 194. 

Gogoi Pator, 608. 


675 







THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-11 


Gokhale, G. K., 59, 316, 402, 403, 407, 
415, 416, 430, 495, 496, 522, 532, 563, 
571, 582, 588, 592. 

Golaghat 604. 

Gold Law, No. 15 (1898), 622. 

Gopal Chandra, 607. 

Gordon, Lieutenant, 613. 

Gosse, Edmund, 216. 

GosvamI, Bijoy-Kjishna, 139. 
Government College, (Kumbakonam), 
197. 

Government Engineering College, (Sib- 
pur), 69. 

Government and Oriental Colleges. 
(Lahore), 78. 

Govindacharya Svami, A., 135. 
Graham, Mrs., 339. 

Grand Old Man, See Naoroji. 

Grant, Charles, 23, 42, 46, 48, 62. 
Grant, Sir J.P., 259, 282. 

Grant Medical College, 71, 72. 

Grantha—Tamil- Malayalam, (Script), 

218, 220. 

Greece, 1, 83, 278. 

Greco-Turkish (Wars), 148. 
Greenshield, 604. 

Grote, Mrs., 45. 

Gujarat, 108, 110, 129,193, .215, 276, 483. 
Gujarati, (Script), 220. 

G&yatri-mantra, 101. 

Gundert, Dr., 204. 

Gunjikar, Rama-Chandra Bhikaji, 187. 
Gupta, Isvarchandra, 172. 

Gupta, Madhusudan, 69. 

Gupta, Maithili Saran, 183. 

Gujar, Vithal Sit&ram, 188. 

Gurmukhi, (Script), 218, 219, 220. 
Gwalior, 393. 

Gyananneshun, 440, 444. 

Habibullah, Wall ’ullah bin, 210. 
Hackney, 519. 

Had!, Eyed, 143. 

Haider, MuBa, 210. 

Hafiz, 20. 

Haileybury College, 461..' 

Halbe, Lakshman Moreshwar, 187. 
Hall, Altai Hosain Panipatl, 215. 

Hali, Aim Hussain, UM P Hit 
Halkabandi, 751, 76, 77. 

Hall, Dr. C. C., 349. 

Halliday, F. G.» 450, 451. 

Halliday, Sir, F., 282. 

Hamilton, S84, 385, 386. 

Hamilton, Lord George, 251, 304, 325, 
369, 379, 371, ‘398,- 400, 401, 402, 403, 
425, 560, 561, 562, 610, 611. 
Hamilton, Sir Frederick, 340. 

Hanafi, (School), 142, 145, 146. 

Hanifa, Aba, 210. 

Hansaraja, 188. 

Haqq, Muhammad Fazl-i, 209. 
Harmnge, Lord, 49, 276. 

Educational Despatch, (1844), 49. 
Hax£, Daoid, 32, 34, 36, 38. 

Hari, 122. 


Haridwar, 111. 

Haris-chandra, (of Benaras), 182, 183. 
Harrington, J., 32, 285, 

Hasan, Raja Amir, (of Lakhnau), 346, 
Hasan, Maulana Faizul, 213. 

Hasan, Maulavi Faiz’ul, 211. 

Hasan, Nawab Siddiq, 145. 

Hasan, Syed, 212. 

Hastings, Marquess of, 229, 230. 231, 
232, 271, 337, 405. 

Hastings, The Private Journal of the 
Marquess of, 382. 

Hastings, Warren, 2, 42, 43, 167, 223, 
279. 

Hayy, Maulana Abdul, 141, 210. 
Heber, (Bishop), .13, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 
28, 31, 34, 44, 62, 272, 295. 
Heeman, 249. 

Hero Worship, 469. 

Hicky, James Augustus, 223. 

Hijra, 145f. 

Hindi Bangavasx, 184. 

Hindi Kharl Boll, 147. 

Hindoo Patriot, 225, 239, 240, 241, 441, 
500, 501. 

Hindu, 248. 

Hindu Balika Vidyalaya, 66. 

Hindu College, (Calcutta), 7, 31, 32, 34, 
38, 39, 40, 41, 43, 44, 68, 69, 71, 90, 
91, 173, 295, 434, 435, 436, 439, 440, 
441 442 444 

Parthenon, (1830), 40. 

Gyananneshun, (1831-1844), 40. 
Hindu Pioneer, 40, 444. 

Hindu Free School, 36. 
Hindu-hitaishint , 243. 

Hindu Mela, 298, 328, 472, 473. 

Hindu Missionary Society, 265, 

Hindu Pioneer, 40, 444. 

Hindu Theophilanthropic Society, See 
Duff, 40. 

History of Gujarat, 458. 

History of the Sepoy War in India, 395. 
Hobhouse, 48. 

Holwell, 14. 

Holy Alliance, 434, 

Homes, Captain Francis, 228. 

Hooghly, 116. 

Hooghli College, 68. 

Hope Anthony, 216. 

Hosack, 607, 608. 

Hoshiarpur, 327. 

Hospital, Sir Jamsetjee Jeejeefohoy, 
71. 

Hossainpore, 513. 

House of Commons, 414, 420, 426, 504, 
518, 519, 548, 549, 563, 571. 

Hulett, Sir Liege, 623. 

Hume, 39, 40, 123, 314, 387. 

Hume; Allan Octavian, 518, 525-533, 
535, 536, 543, 544, 548, 558, 559, 562, 
573, 574, 575. 

Hume, Joseph, 455. 

Hunas, 8. 

Hunter, Sir W. W., 53, 143, 613. 
Commission, 54, 55, 64, 304. 


676 





INDEX 


‘The Indian Mussalmans’, 143, 306, 

322. 

Hu’rkaru (Hircarrah) , 223, 226. 

Husain, Syed Ghulam, 340. , 

Hussain, Syed Amir, 299, 301. 

Hussain, Maulavi Tasadduq, 214. 
Hussain, Syed Nazir, 145. 

Hussain, Zakir, 362. 

Huseyn., Akbar, 359. 

Huseyn. Delawar, 299. 

Hyde, 47. 

Hyderabad, 211, 345. 

Hyder Ali, 432. 

Hyndman, H. M., 392, 393. 

mhdd, 147f. 

Ilberfc, Mr., 506. 

Ilbert, Sir Courtenay, 508. 

Iibert Bill, 251, 299, 301, 302, 313, 363, 
364, 397, 408, 480, 506, 507, 508, 509, 
511, 512, 515, 516, 524, 526, 552. 
Imam of San’a, 210. 

Imams, Hasan and Husain, 209. 
Imperial Paper, The, 317. 

Impey, Sir Elijah, 223. 

India, 563, 564. 

India Act V, 1843, (slavery), 280. 

India Bill of 1853, 389. 

India Office, 396, 397, 398, 405, 413, 563. 
India Reform Society, 455. 

India Revisited, 390. 

Indian Association, (Calcutta), 310, 500, 
501, 503, 504, 505, 506, 510, 511, 512, 

514, 515, 527, 533, 534, 539, 597, 598, 
602, 608, 609. 

Indian Civil Service, 401, 409, 410, 411, 
412, 414, 442, 451, 481, 501, 502, 503, 
504, 507, 513, 518, 519, 527, 552, 554. 
India Council, The, 548. 

Indian Councils Act, (1861, 1892), 241, 

323, 542, 548, 549, 570, 571. 

Indian Field, 241. 

Indian Gazette, 223, 382, 439, 443. 
Indian Herald, 223. 

Indian Immigration Restriction Act, 
(1897, 1903), 623. 

Indian League, 500. 

Indian Mirror, 241. 

Indian National Congress, 58, 59, 66, 
144, 251. 258, 295, 310, 314, 315, 316, 
317, 319, 322, 324, 388, 389, 398, 400, 
407, 408, 409, 413, 415., 421, 453, 514, 

515, 516. 524-551, 553, 554, 558, 559, 
560, 561, 582, 563, 585, 567, 570, 571, 
572, 573, 574, 575, 577, 578, 590, 609, 
623, 624. 

Indian National Social Conference, 258. 
Indian Review, 250. 

Indian Social Congress, 66. 

Indian Society, (in London), 521. 
Indian Universities Act, 58, 59. 

Indian Universities Commission, 56, 69f. 
Indian Unrest, 579. 

Indu Prakash (Prakasa), 186, 572. 
Industrial Revolution, The, 611, 612. 


Inland Emigration Bill, See Act 1 , 1882, 
597. 

Institute Gazette, The , (Aligarh Col¬ 
lege), 311, 314, 317. 

Iqbal, 149. 

Iqbal, Sir Muhammad, 215. 

Iran, 146. 

Iraq, 211. 

Ireland, Home Rule Bill for, 384. 

Isa Khei, 327. 

Ishaq, Abu Sulaiman Muhammad, 209. 
Islamia College, (Lahore), 78. 

Isma’il, Qazi Muhammad, 209. 

Isma’il, Shah Muhammad, (Shahid), 
141f. 

Italy, 243, 589. 

Iyengar, Pandits M. and R. Raghava, 
197. 

Iyengar, Kasturiranga, 248. 

Iyer, B. R. Rajam, 197, 217. 

Iyer, Dr. V. Swaminatha (Mahamaho- 
padhyaya), 196, 197. 

Jacquemont, 383. 

Jdgir, 75. 

Janan Begum, Sultan, (The Begum of 
Bhopal), 148. 

Jahangir, (Emperor), 140, 268. 

Jaimini, 113. 

Jaimini Bh&rata, 201. 

Jaintir, 387. 

Jalpaiguri, 599. 

Jamaica, 613. 

Jambhekar, Bal Gangadhar, 185, 189. 
Jambhekar, Gangadhar Shasiri, 265. 
Jam-e-Jamshed, 239. 

Jam-i-Jahan Numa, 225. 

Jammu, 165. 

Janjira Riots, (1877), 333. 

Japan, 488. 

Jean Marie Farina, 374. 

Jekyll, 47. 

Jenkins* Richard, 61. 

Jentue-rajahs, 3. 

Jessore, (District), 357. 

Jervis, Captain George, 184, 185. 

Jervis, Col., 71. 

Jesuit and S.P.G. Colleges, (Trichino- 
poly), 74. 

Jinsivale, Professor, 581. 

Jndnaprak&sa, 186. 

Jnanaprasarak Sabha, The, 186. 
Jnanasundarl, 165. 

Jnanodaya, 186. 

John Bull, 444. 

Jondki, 178, 179. 

Jones, William, 468. 

Jones, Sir William, 215, 338. 

Jerbafc, 608. 

Jubbulpore, 513. 

Judicial System of India, 6. 

Jullimdur, 66. 

Jumma Masjid, 405. 

Jharija, (Jadeja), 276. 


677 






THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-!! 


Kabul, 211, 322. 

Kabul, (Expedition), 391. 

Kadattanad, 166. 

K&lapa, 19. 

Kalapi, (Sursinhji Gohel, Thakor of 
La*hl), 194. 

Kalicharan, 138. 

Kalidasa, 206, 208. 

Kalyan Singh, 3. 

Kamarpukur, 116. 

Kambakhtpur, Ram Buksh, 544. 
Kanchi, 164. 

Kanchi Sabha Raoji, 135. 

Kandahar, 211. 

Kanpur, See Cawnpore. 

Kar&ndikar, Vinayaka, 189. 

Karel, 201. 

Karimgunge, 606. 

Karimuddln, Munshi, 214. 

Karnal, 327. 

Karve, Professor, D. K., 278. 

Kashina th, Sadashiv, (alias Bapu 
Chhatre), 185, 187. 

Kashmir, 163, 165, 219, 268, 313, 374. 
Kasi, See Banaras . 

Kasipur, 125. 

Katniababa, 139. 

Kavasji, Dadabhai, 226. 

Kaviraja, Gangadhara, 165. 

• Kavyavisarad, Kali-prasanna, 177. 
Kaye, Sir John, 394, 395. 

Kelkar, Prof., 250. 

Kelkar, N.C., 189 
Kemp, 358. 

Kerala, 202, 203. 

Kesari , 250, 477, 578, 579, 580. 

Keshavji, Hari, 185. 

Keshavsuta, 189. 

Keshavasuta—Krishnaji Keshav Damle, 
189. 

Khadilkar, Krishnaji Prabhakar, 188, 
189. 

Khairabad, 209. 

Khalsa College, (Amritsar), 78. 

Khan, Afsal, 580, 581, 582. 

Khan, Aga, 304. 

Khan, Dehxa Ismail, 540. 

Khan, Haji Muhammad Ismail, 316. 
Khan, Maulavi Sami'ullah, 144. 

Khan, Mir Osman ‘Ah, 213. 

Khan, Mirza, 212. 

Khan, Nawab Alauddin Ahmad, 303. 
Khan, Nawab Amin Hasan (of Kakori), 
(“Bismil”), 211, 213. 

Khan. Nawab Amir Ali, 298, 311. 

Khan, Nawab Mahmud, 305. 

Khan, Nawab Raza Hasan, 211. 

Khan, Nawab Villayet Ali, 347. 

Khan, Sheik Raza Hussein, 315. 

Khan, Sayyid Ghulam Hussain, 9. 
Khan, Sir Syed Ahmad, 76, 80, 141, 143, 
144, 146, 147f, 148, 154, 215, 298, 303, 
305, 306, 307, 308, 309, 311, 312, 313, 
314, 315, 316, 317, 318, 319, 320, 321, 
322, 540, 546. 

Asaru-s-Sanadia, 215. 


Khantfekar, Raghava Apa, 164. 
Kosavatamsa, 164. 

-Khetakriti, 164. 

Paddhatichandrika, 164. 
Pahchahgarka, 164. 

Krishnavilasa, 164. 

Khaqani, 212. 

Kharpade, 585, 586. 

Khasi, (dialect), 221. 

Khobong Garden, 600. 
Khulasat~ut~Tawarikh, 3. 

Khusrav, Amir, 212. 

Kidderpore, 151. 

Kimberley, Lord, 619. 

Kipling, Rudyard, 373, 376, 387. 
Kirloskar, 189. 

Kirtane, V.J., 188. 

Kishore, Pandit Jugal, 183. 

Kishore, Munshi Newal, 214. 

Kittel, 201. 

Knight, Robert, (“The Bayard of 
India”), 242. 

Koath, 334. 

Koithampuran, Vidwan, 203. 

Kolhatkar, Mahadeo-6astri, 188. 
Kolhatkar, Shripad Krishna, 188. 
Konkani, (Speech), 220. 

Krause, Dr., 620. 

Krishnagar, 68, 511. 

Krishnaraja, Mummadi, 200, 201. 
Krishnamacharya, 201. 

Kruger, President, 621. 

Kuchipudi, (School), 199. 

Kuka, (rebellion), 359. 

Kuli-Kahini, 596. 
Kulina~Kula~Sarvasva, 175. 

Kulins, 22, 259, 261, 262, 

Kumar an, Moorkothu, 207. 
Kumbakonam, 136, 165. 

Kunte, M.M., 189. 

Kurup, Azhakathu Padmanabha, 207. 
Kushanas, 8. 

Kesari, See Nayanar, Kunju Raman. 

Lachman Sing, 599. 

LahidI, Rahtanu, 177. 

Lahore, 78, 111, 139 147, 148, 275, 316, 
327, 348, 502, 510. 

Lahore Central Training College, The, 
78. 

Lahore Chronicle, 226. 

Lahore Medical College, 78. 

Lajpafc Rai, Lala, 109, 430, 574, 585, 586. 
Lakshmi, 166. 

Lakshmlnarasimham, Chilakamarti, 199. 
Lakshmiram, Nava tram, 192. 

Lakhnau, 142, 147, 209, 210, 214, 215, 
315, 316, 502. 

Lala, Jaganmohan, 180. 

Lai, Lalluji, (of Agra), 182. 

Lai, Munshi Kundan (Ashki), 209. 

Lai, Munshi Munwan (Falsafi), 209. 
Lalshankar, Narmadashankar, 191, 192. 
Pingalprakas, 191. 

Alahklrpraves, 191. 

Ras-Praves, 191. 


678 



INDEX 


Nayika-Vishaya-Praves, 191. 
Narmakosa, 191. 

NarmakatihJikosa, 191. 

Dharm-viehar, 191. 

Marl Hakikat, 191. 

La Martiniere, 68, 70. 

Lancashire, 426, 551. 

Lancasterian Method, 70f. 

Landa, (Script), 218, 219. 

Landholders’ Society, 446, 447. 

Lande Schools, 61f. 

Landsdowne, Lord, 384, 385, 402, 559, 
622. 

Larcom, 333. 

Latif, Abdul, 298, 300, 303. 

Lavani, 201. 

Law Colleges, 52. 

Lawrence, Sir John (later Lord), 104, 
321, 342, 348, 349, 388, 405, 423, 503. 
Lebedeff, Herasim, 175. 

Lee,Warner, 560, 

Lele, Ganes-sastri, 188. 

Lethbridge, Sir Roger, 414. 

License Act, 503. 

Lincoln, Abraham, 403. 

Lingayat Education Association, 136. 
Linguistic Survey of India, 160. 
Liverpool, 24. 

Lloyd George, 403. 

Locke, 39, 46. 

Lodi, Sikandar, 213. 

Lokhitwadi, Gopal Hari Deshmukh, 
189 

London, 24, 25, 127, 134, 329, 355, 370, 
391, 521, 614, 616. 

London Indian Society, The, 520. 

Long, 175. 

Long Acre, 24. 

Long, Reverend James, 24, 227, 408. 
Loretto House, 70. 

Los Angeles, 130, 136. 

Lowther Castle, 546. 

Ludhiana, 225, 327, 359, 360. 

Lutchman Sing, 599. 

Luther, 92. 

Lyall, Sir Alfred, 356. 

Lyall, J.E., 69. 

Lytton, Bulwer, 

Lytton, Lord, 234, 244, 247, 250, 358, 
370, 386, 399, 400, 402, 426, 427, 503, 
515, 519, 524, 528, 531. 

Minute, (1877), 247, 370. 

Lucknow, See Lakhnau. 

Loodhiana, See Ludhiana. 

Maben, 201. 

MacDonnell, 371. 

Macdonnell, Sir Anthony, 561. 
Macaulay, Lord, 23, 33, 36, 37, 45, 46, 47, 
48, 227, 236, 383, 387, 394, 406, 507. 
Minute on Education, 46, 47 , 81. 
Mackenzie, Col., 200. 

Macnaghlen, 232. 

Madgaonkar, G.N., 189. 

Madagascar, 613. 

Madrasa-i-Jawadiya, (Banaras), 147. 


Madhavanuj, 189. 

Madhaviah, 198, 217. 

Madras**, 8, 17, 42, 68, 69, 144, 208, 298. 
Madras, 28, 31, 49, 52, 55, 60, 61, 66, 72, 
73, 74, 98, 103, 107, 109, 129, 134, 
152, 178, 196, 201, 202, 223, 225, 228, 
229, 231, 246, 247, 248, 250, 269, 274, 
278, 284, 298, 315, 316, 318, 327, 329, 
338, 339, 344, 371, 372, 378, 433, 449, 
453, 460, 462, 512, 513, 514, 515, 517, 
519, 520, 525, 526, 530, 536, 540, 541, 
542, 549, 551, 560, 614. 

Madras Courier, 223. 

Madras Mail, 242. 

Madras Native Association, 248, 452, 
462. 

Madras Spectator, 226. 

Madras United Services Gazette, 226. 
Madrisa-i-Qadlma, 142. 

Madura, 267. 

Ma Gun, 366. 

Mahajan Sabha, 517. 

Magha-Kavy&, 19. 

Mahajan, Bnan, 186, 189. 

Mahakanya Vidyalaya, 66. 

Mahmud, Syed, 521. 

Mahanubhavas, 185. 

Morley, John, See Motley, Lord. 
Maharaja’s College, (Trivandrum), 206. 
Maharaja of Darbhanga, 546. 

Maharaja of Mysore, 559. 

Maharani Swarnamoyee of Bengal, 504, 
Mahldhara, 113. 

Mahita, 65. 

Mahomed, Nawab Syed, 317. 
Mahomedan Observer, The, 317, 324. 
Mahratta, 250, 591. 

MaithiU, (Script), 218, 219, 220. 
Majeetia, Sardar Dayal Singh, 243. 
Majnun, 62. 

“Majruh”, Mir Mahdi, 213. 

Majuba Hill, 617. 

Majumdar, Sris-chandra, 175. 
Majumdar, Surendra-nath, 173. 
Makhzin, 147. 

Maktabs, 17. 

Malabar, 162, 202, 204. 

Malabari, Behramji Merwanji, 217, 
283 

Malcolm, Sir John, 43, 71, 274. 

Maldah, (District), 151. 

Malaviya, Madan Mohan, 571. 

Malleson, 395, 541. 

Mallik, Madhab-chandra, 36. 

Mallik, Rasik-Krishna, 438, 440, 442. 
Manchester, 389, 427, 563. 

Mandalik, V.N., 189. 

Mandlik, 348. 

Manikkavachakar, 196. 

Manipravdla, (Style), 205, 206. 

Manipur, i66. 

Manipur, (Outbreak), (1891), 251. 
Mannadiyar, Chathukkutty, 206. 

Manu, 19. 

M.A.O. College, 148. 

Marriot, Saville, 424. 


679 






THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-11 


Marsh 152. 

Marshman, J.C., 169, 224, 242, 272, 343. 
Martin, Montgomery, 225. 

Marx, Karl, 455. 

Mathur, Babu, 120. 

Mathura, 76, 183, 184. 

Mathuri, 19. 

Maulvi, A.M., 300. 

Mauritius, (He de France), 613, 614, 615, 
616. 

Mazar-ul-Haq, Maulvi, 315. 

Mazzini, 177, 243, 482, 483, 484, 593. 
Mazumdar, A.C., 462, 509. 

Mayavaram, 166. 

May, Mr., 285. 

Mayo, Lord, 78, 79, 143 361, 

Mayo College, (Ajmere), 78. 

McLeod, 605. 

Mecleod, Sir Donald, 78. 

Meares, Gerald, 357, 358. 

Medical College, (Bombay), 52. 

Medical College, (Calcutta), 52, 69. 
Medical College, (Madras), 52, 74. 
Medical School, (Lahore), 52. 

Meerut, 316, 502, 513, 514. 

Megasthenes, 278. 

Mehta, Sir Pherozeshah, 58, 326, 327, 
397, 430, 515, 516, 533, 539, 547, 571, 
573. 

Melaftur Tyagareja, 199. 

Menon, Chandu, 205. 

Menon, C.P. Achutha, 207. 

Menon, Kundoor Narayana, 208. 
Metcalfe, 61, 228, 234, 235, 236, 237, 273, 
274, 556. 

Press Law, (1835), 234. 

Midlothian, 411. 

Military Gazette, (of Lahore), 242. 

Mill, 424, 433. 

Mill, James, 43, 44, 45, 465. 

Mill, John Stuart, 123, 227, 235, 337, 338. 
Milton, 68. . 

Mlmamsa, 35. 

Minal, Amir Ahmad, 214. 

Minto, Lord, 229, 325, 340. 373, 411. 
Miran, 23. 

Mirat, 309, 316. 

Mlrai-ul-Akhb&r, 225, 226, 234. 

Mir J&far, 2, 3, 14. 

Mir Qasim, 3. 

Mirror, 534. 

Misra, Kampala, 180. 

Misra, Pandit Sadal, 182. 

MiWcshard, 19. 

Mithila, 163. 

Mitra, 113, 

Mitra, Basanti, 66. 

Mitra, DXnbandhu, 175, 480. 

Mitra, Digamber, 260. 

Mitra, Kishori-chand, 241, 452. 

Mitra, Krishna-kumar, 597. 

Mitra, Kumudini, 66. 

Mitra, Metya, 592. 

Mitra, Naba-gopal, 241, 472, 473. 

Mitra, P., 593. 


Mitra, Peary-chand, 39, 328, 450, 451, 
452. 

Mitra, Pyarl-chand, 167, 173. 

Mitra, Rajendra-lal, 176, 466, 540. 
Mizan, (Prosody), 20. 

Modak, Achutaraya, 164. 

Moderate Party, 407, 429, 583. 

Modi, (Script), 218. 

Moegling, 201. 

Mahammedan Literary Society, 298, 317. 
Mohamedan Nation, 317. 

Mohsin, (endowment), 68. 

Mohsin, Haji Muhammad, 298. 
Mohsin-ul-Mulk, Nawab, 318. 

Moirra, Lord, 62. 

Molesworth, 185, 186. 

Moli&re, 192. 

Monghyr, 24. 

Montgomery, (I.C.S.), 579. 

Montagu, 561. 

Montgomery, Sir Robert, 77, 152. ^ 
Moradabad, 144, 321. 

Morley, Lord, 373, 387, 388, 411, 561. 
Morning Post, 251. 

Morris, 200, 358. 

Morrison, Mr., 312, 314. 

Morrison, Sir Theodore, 357. 

Mudaliyar, Prof. Chelvakesavaraya, 
197. 

Mudaliyar, Ranganatha, (Professor) 
197. 

Mudaliyar, Sambanda, 198. 

Mudaliyar, Subramania, 196. 

Mudaliyar, Tantfavaraya, 196. 

Mukherji, Ashu-tosh, 571. 
Muhammadan, Anglo—Oriental College, 
144, 308, 311 s 314. 

Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental Defence 
Association of Upper India, 312, 313, 
314, 317. 

Muhammadan Central Association, The, 
(Punjab), 317. 

Muhammadan Educational Congress, 
144f, 308, 317. 

Muhamud of Ghazni, Sultan, 215, 477. 
Muhammad Ghuri, 477. 

Muhammad ibn Qasim, 477. 

Muhuri, 288. 

Muir Central College, 76. 

MujtaJiids, 147f. 

Mukherjee, Baidyanath, 33. 
Mukhopadhyay, Bhudev, 116, 177, 243, 
465. 

Mukherji, Haris-chandra, 225, 239, 241. 
Mukheiji, Jay-krishna, 260, 540. 
MukherjVs Magazine, 241. 
Mukhopadhyay, Dakshina-ranjan, 40, 
440, 452. 

Mukhopadhyay, Rajib-lochan, 167. 
Mukhopadhyaya, Sambhu-chandra, 241. 
Mukundaram, 172. 

Mula Sankara, See Dayanand Saraswati. 
Mulji, Karsondas, 266. 

Muller, Max, 127, 215, 466. 

Multan, 503. 

Mumin, Muhammad Mu’min Khan, 214. 


680 






INDEX 


Munroe, Sir Thomas, 43, 61, 62, 73, 75, 
228, 236, 238, 382, 406, 556. 

Munshi, 194. 

Murshidabad, 3, 4, 19, 20, 97, 130. 
Murshidabad School, 7. 

Murshid Quli Khan, 5. 

Mushin’ul-Mulk, 144. 

Muslim Herald, The, 317. 

Mutiny, 74, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213, 240, 
242, 259, 281, 283, 305, 309, 313, 319, 
321, 322, 332, 350, 352, 353, 420, 455, 
592. 

Muttaqi, Mir, 143. 

MuzafTarpur, 513. 

Mymensingh, 243. 

Mysore, 135, 163,165, 200, 201, 267, 387. 

fiabobs, The, 377. 

Nadia, 19, 20. 

Nadiya, 163. 

Nadwat al-‘Ulama, 212, 213. 

Naga, (dialect) 221. 

Nagari, (Script), 218, 219, 220, 221, 318. 
Nagpur, 61, 164, 513. 

Nair, Sankaran, 586, 590. 

Naishada-JKavya, (love of Nala and 
Damayantl), 19. 

“Naivar”, Nawab Ziya’uddln, 213. 
Nambudini, (of Mahishamangalam), 
165. 

Namjoshi, 250. 

Nampoodiris, Venmani, (the Senior and 
the Junior), 205, 206. 

Nanak, 485. 

Nana lad, 194, 195. 

Nana Saheb, 164. 

Nanauta, Maulana Muhammad Qasim, s 
213. 

Nanda-Nandana, 115. 

Nanjappa, Muddagiri, 201. 

Nanjunda, Devatapurada, 201. 

Naogaon, 598. 

Naoroj, Dadabhai, 134, 226, 326, 327, 329, 
330, 3&2, 393, 398, 399, 421, 422, 423, 
424, 425, 459, 461, 515, 520, 527, 533, 
539, 541, 548, 563, 564, 571. 

Napier, Lord, 361. 

Naples, 434. 

Napoleon, 228, 580. 

Napoleonic War, 613. 

Narasayya, Phakki Venkata, 198. 
Narayana, Kempu, 201. 

Narasiriihacharya, S.G., 202. 
Narendranath, see Vivekdnanda, 
Swami. 

Narsingh, 361, 362. 

Narsinhrao, 193, 194. 

KusummaLa, 193. 

Hyidayavlna, 194. 

Nupurjhahkar, 194. 

SmaransamhitS, 194. 

Manomukur. 194. 

Abhinayakaia, It 4. 

Vivartlikala, 194. 

Smarap Mukur, 194. 
Premanandana-natako, 194. 

Nasik, 72, 592. 


Nasikh, Imam Baksh, 214. 

Natal, 617, 622, 623. 

Natesan, G.A., 250. 

Nath, Pandit Ayudhya, 546. 

National Mohammedan Association, 
298f, 301, 311, 317, 328. 

National Conference, 310, 512, 513, 514, 
525, 526, 527, 528, 532, 533, 534, 535. 
National Indian Association, The, 521. 
National Paper , 328, 472, 473. 

National Society, 298. 

Nationalities and Subject Races, Con¬ 
gress on, 376. 

Nationality Promotion Society, 470, 
471, 472. 

Natore, (Rajashahi district), 61. 

Natu, 590, 591. 

Navababu-vilasa, 91. 

Navalar, Arumuga, 196. 

Nawab of Avadh, (Oudh), 342. 

Nawab of Bengal, 2, 13. 

Nawab of Janjira, 333. 

Nawab of Murshidabad, 2. 

Nawab Sadat Ali, 31. 

Nawab Shamsudaula, (of Dacca), 31. 
Nawab Wazir, 3. 

Nayanar, Kunju Raman, 207. 

Nazimiya College, 147. 

Nazir, 288, 291. 

Naziri,~212. 

Nazir, Muhammad, (of Agra), 214. 
Nedungadi, Appu, 205. 

Negapatam, 150. 

Neill, General, 350. 

Nepal, 218, 219. 

Nepali, Kessur Sing, 599. 

New India. 586. 

Newari, (Script), 218, 219, 220. 

New York, 130, 134, 136. 

Vedanta Society, 130. 

New York Daily Tribune, 455. 

Newton, 46. 

Nibandhamalu, 186, 189. 

Nicholson, John, 348, 349. 

Nightingale, Florence, 553. 
Nila-darpana, 480. 

Nilkanth, Ramapbhai Mahipatram, 195. 
Bhadraihbhadra, 195. 

Raino Parvat, 195. 

Hasyamandir, 195. 

Kavitae Sahitya, 195. 

Nineteenth Century, 392. 

Naranappa, Nandajige, 202. 

Niranjanl, Ramprasad, 182. 

Nizami, Darsi, 142f. 

Niyaz, Munshi Sadasukhlal, 182. 

Niyoga, 258. 

Noakhali, 362, 363. 

Noble, C.F., 3. 

Noble, Margaret, see Sister Nivedita. 
Noman, M., 316. 

Norris, Mr. Justice, 510. 

Northbrook, Lord, 79, 247, 361, 426. 
Norton, Eardley, 563. 

Notes on the evidence on Indian 
Affairs, 450. 

Nu’mani-Shibli, 142, 145. 213, 215. 


681 





THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-II 


Qdiia, 181. 

Official Secrets Acts, 407. 

O'Gara, 368. 

Olcott, Col. H.S., see Theoso'phical 
Society, 131, 132. 

Old Bailey, 25. 

Olivier, Lord, 613. 

Ordinance, XXII, (1847), 615. 
Ordinance, XXXI, (1867), 615. 

Oriental Seminary, 34. 

Orissa, 1, 180, 220, 273, 282. 

Oriya, (Script), 218, 220. 

O’Sullivan, 368. 

Oudh Punch, 147f. 

Oudh, see Avadh, 540. 

Oriental College, (Delhi), 74. 

Pachayyappa’s College, (Madras), 74. 
Padmanji, Baba, 187, 189. 

Pai, Nagesh Visa-nath, 217, 

Pakistan, 10, 160, 318. 

Pal, B.C., (Bipin Chandra). 115, 303, 
304, 305, 430, 452, 468, 473, 475, 479, 
480, 481, 482, 484, 486, 491, 492, 544, * 
545, 585, 586, 593. 

Pal, Rrishto-das, 241, 500, 

Pal, Ramsaran, 139. 

Palakod, 327. 

Palamkottah, 72, 136. 

Palande, Dr. Klrtikar, B.D., 188. 

Palasi, see Plassey. 

Pallavas, 220. 

Pall Mall Gazette, 247. 

Pandit, Sakharam, P., 187. 

Pandita, Charuklrtl, 201. 

Pandita, ^antaraja, 201. 

Paine, Tom, 39. 

Age of Reason, 39. 

Pandenamath, 20, 

Panditia, Lalk, 165. 

Pandurang, Dr. Atmaram, 106. 
Pandurahg, Balwant, (alias Kirloskar, 
Anna Saheb), 188. 

Pamni, 19. 

Panipat, The Third Battle, 330. 
Pararaahaxhsa Sabha, 265. 

Paramaharhsa, givanarayan, 137. 
Paranjpe, S.M., 186, 188, 189. 

Paris, 127, 134. 

Congress of the History of Religions, 
130. 

Parliament of Religions, (World Con¬ 
gregation), 126, 127, 489. 

Parthenon, 444. 

Parvate, Raghunatha 6astri, 164. 
Padabhushana, 164. 

Sank ar apad abhush an a, 164. 

Pathak, Sridhar, 183. 

Pather-Dahi, 479. 

Pathsala, Kayastha, 545. 

Patna, 97, 347, 348, 589. 

Patna College, 68. 

Patwari, 288. 

Paul, Herbet, 414. 

Payagambar, 21. 


Pearson, 613. 

Fennel, 362, 363, 365. 

Peridean, 1. 

Athens, 1. 

School of Hellas, 1. 

Perkins, Colonel, 360. 

Perron, 27. 

Perry, Sir Edward, 71, 72. 
Perso-Arabic, (Script), 220. 

Peshwsr, 503. 

Petkkar, Chintamani, 188. 

Phadke, Wasudeo Balwant, 495, 589. 
Phukan, Anandaram Dhekial, 178. 
Phule, Jotiba, 189, 265. 

Filial, Desigavinayakam, 198. 

Piiiai, Dewan Bahadur, A. Govinda, 
" 208. 


Pillai, Kanakasabhai, 197. 

Piiiai, K C. Kesava, 207. 

Pijlai, Krishna, 196. 

Piiiai, K.K. Krishna, 207. 

Pillai, Min akshi sund ar am, 196, 197. 
Piiiai, Na lias warm, 197. 

Pijlai, P.K. Narayana, 207. 

ai, Namakkal Ramalingam, 198. 
ai, C.V. Baman, 205. 
ai, Saravana, 198. 

Pijlai, Sundaram, (Professor), 197, 198. 
Pijlai, Vedanayakam, 197. 

Pindaris, 28. 

Pioneer, (of Allahabad), 242, 251. 

Pirs, 21. 

Plassey, battle of, 1, 2, 3. 

Plato, 20. 

Plevna, 249, 

Policy of Education, 31-67. 

English Education, 31-42. 

British Policy towards Education, 
42-48. 


Progress of English Education, 55-60. > 
Primary Education, 60-65. 

Female Education, 65-67. 

Poona, 186, 265, 268, 278, 449, 453, 521, 
525, 576, 580, 581, 590, §92. 

Poona College of Science, 72. 

Poona Sanskrit College, (Deccan Col¬ 
lege), TO, 72. 

Forteus, 606. 

Potti, C.S. Subramanian, 208. 

Poverty and Un-British Rule in India, 
423. 


Prabhakar, 186, 189, 445, 458. 
Prabuddha Bhdrata, 129. 

Pradhan, Bajaba, 188. 

Prajd-handhu, 252. 

Prarthana Samaj, see Sen, Keshab- 
chandra, 66, 103, 106, 107, 109, 134, 
256, 265. 

Pratap, Rana, 495. 

Pratapasimfia, (Raja of Satara), 165. 
Pratt, Mr. Hodgson, 291. 

Prayag, (see Allahabad). 

Prem Chdnd, 183. 

Presidency College, (Calcutta), 52, 74. 
Presidency College, (Madras), 74. 

Press Law, (1835), see Metcalfe , 234. 


682 








INDEX 


Press Ordinance, (1823), 232, 233, 234, 
235, 437. 

Press Regulation, 4, 13. 

Pretoria, 617. 

Pretoria Convention, 617, 618. 

Prinsep, 46, 48, 62, 466. 

Progress of Education. 67. 

Bengal, 67-70. 

Bombay, 70-72. 

Madms, 72-74. 

Uttar Pradesh, (United Provinces), 
74-77. 

Punjab, 77-78. 

Chiefs 5 Colleges, 78-79, 

Muslim Education, 79-81. 

Ptolemy, 20, 

Pulavar, Umaru, 196. 

Punch, 376. 

Punjab, 49, 61, 06, 77, 110, 140, 145, 183, 
298, 325, 327, 503, 510, 540. 

Punjab, University College, 78. 
Punyastambha, 164. 

Puri, 153. 

Purneah, 19. 

Qadian, 146f. 

Qadir, Shah Abdu’l, 147. 

Qatil, 212. 

Quarterly Journal, 552. 

Queen’s Proclamation, see Royal Pro¬ 
clamation. 

Rabindranath, see Tagore . 

Radha Soami Satsang, (The), 138. 
Radhanagar, 97. 

Rafiq-i-Hind, The, 317. 

Hafi’uddin, Shah, 209. 

Raghunandana, 19. 

Rannumai Mazdayasnan Sabha, 134. 
Raikes, Charles, 322. 

Raily, 363. 

Raipur College, 78. 

Rajbansi, 276. 

Raja, Aliya Linga, 201. 
Narapati-Charita, 201. 
Prabhavatl-parinaya, 201. 
VIrabhadra-sataka, 201, 

Mahalihga Pataka, 201. 

Rajaballabh, Raja, 277. 

Rajabarie, 605. 

Raja of Burdwan, 20. 

Raja-Guru, ^yama-sundara, 180, 

Raja Nabakrishna, 3. 

Rajarajavarma, 136. 

Raja Shiva Prasad, 546. 

Rajahmundry, 73. 

Rajashahi, 20. 

Rajendra Kama, 201. 

Rajkumar, 276. 

Rajkumar College, (Nowgong), 78. 
Rajkumar College, (Rajkot), 78. 

Raj wade, Krishna-gastri, 188. 

Raj wade, V.K., 189. 

Raleigh, Sir Thomas, 57. 

Ramabai, Pandita, 266. 


Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, (Thakur), 
116£, 123, 124, 125, 126, 128, 137, 138, 
176. 

Ramakrishna Maps, 116, 129, 130. 
Ramakrishna Mission, see Viveka- 
nanda, 129, 130, 135. 

Ramakrishna Order, see Vivekananda, 
126, 130. 

Ramakrishna-Vivekananda Doctrine, 
131, 

Ramakrishnayya, P., 200. 

Ramanuja, 135. 

Ramdas, 184. 

Rampur, 214. 

Rana Pratlp, see Pratdp, Rand. 

Ranade, Justice, 538. 

Ranade, Mahadev Govind, 106, 256, 257, 
258, 265, 266, 268, 476, 486, 492, 515, 
521, 522, 578. 

Ranchhodbhai, 191, 192. 

Rand, 581, 582, 590, 591. 

Rangacharlu, 202. 

Rahgacharya, Paravastu Venkata, 165. 
Rangalal, 479, 

Rangoon, 366, 368, 373. 

Rangpur, 98. 

Rana Pratap, 330. 

Rost Goftar, (Truth-teller), 134, 135, 
226, 239, 326. 

Rao, Sir Madhava, 556. 

Rao, Madhu-sudan, 179, 180. 

Kasmani, 117, 121. 

Rasul, A., 315. 

Rawalpindi, 77. 

Ray, Dasarathi, 172. 

Ray, Dwijendra-lal, 173, 176. 

Ray, Hara-ehandra, 224. 

Ray, Mrs. Kamini, 173. 

Kay, Radha-nath, 179, 180, 181. 

Ray, Ram-^ankar, 180. 

Reay, Lord, 384, 561. 

Recollections s (by Morley), 411. 

Reeve, 201. 

Regulation, The, (1772, enslavement), 
278, 279. 

Regulation VI, (1802, Infanticide), 276. 
Regulation III, (of 1818), 411. 

Regulation XVII, (Sati, 1829), 273, 275. 
Reid, 40. 

Reid, Captain Blair, 77. 

Religious Sects, 139. 

Kafolr-panthls, 139. 

Dadu-panthls, 139. 

Radhaballabhis, 139. 

Dandis, 139. 

Dasanamis, 139. 

Yogis, 139. 

Aghoris, 139. 

Avadhutas, 139. 

Vamacharls, 139. 

Sauras, 139. 

Ganapatyas, 139. 

Kartabhaja, 139. 

Renaissance and Nationalist Movement, 
318. 

Representative Men, 469. 


683 




THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-11 


Review of Education, (1886), 55. 

Rewa, 164. 

Rice, 201. 

Richardson, Capt. D.L., 40, 41. 

Riots, (Bombay, 1837), 332. 

Riots, (Calcutta, 1897), 334. 

Ripen, Lord, 53, 64, 80, 250, 299, 369, 
388, 411, 507, 508, 509, 535, 553, 562, 
5S7, 598, 600. 

Risbud, Naro Sadashiv, 187. 

Rise and Growth of the Congress, 527. 
Robert, Sir Frederick, 373. 

Robinson, Sir Hercules, 619. 

Rogay, All, 346. 

Bohillas, 385. 

Rohtak, 183. 

Roman, (Script), 220, 221. 

Rome, 268, 278. 

Ronaldshay, Earl of, (Lord), 60, 365. 
Round Table Conference, (1930-31), 
234. 

Routledge, 344. 

Royal Commission, The, (1897), 613. 
Royal Proclamation, (of 1858), 399, 41)0, 
401, 402, 407, 455, 

Rtoy, Raja Baidya-nath, 286. 

Roy, Raja Rammohan, 4, 5, 6, 11, 12, 13, 
15, 16, 20, 22, 25, 32, 33, 34, 35, 44, 
65, 92f, 93, 94, 95, 97f, 98, 99, 100, 
101, 102, 103, 110, 113, 130, 154, 167, 
170, 177, 216, 224, 225, 226, 232, 233, 
234, 235, 271, 272, 273, 274, 284, 306, 
340, 343, 393, 418, 434, 436, 437, 438, 
439, 440, 443, 447, 518, 521. 

Appeal to the King in Council, 4, 11, 
12 232 . 

Appeal to the Christian Public, 12, 99. 
Tumat--ul“Muwahhidin s (A Gift to 
Monotheists), 97. 

The Precept of Jesus, 99, 

The Guide to Peace and Happiness, 
99. 

Sambada Kaumudi. 

Bengal Herald . 

Rules La Monte, Robert, 392. 

Rupram, Mahipatram, 192. 

Burki, 139. 

Russell, 68 , 856 . 

Russia, 84. 131. 

Ryan, E., 48. 

Saadi, 20, 62. 

Sabdamanidarpana, 201. 

Sadasukhlal, Munshi, 183. 

Sadhana, 117, 118, 122. 

Sadharan Brahma Samaj, 596. 
Sadharam Dharma, 138. 

Stidk&ra'Z !» 243, 249. 

Sadruddln, Mufti, 213. 

Saharanpur, 76. 

Sahabad, (District), 334. 

Stal%ackar t 243. 

Sahibram, Pandit, 165. 

J§aiva Sabhas, 136. 

&aiva Siddhanta, 136. 


Sakkari, B&lacharya, (Santi Kavi), 202. 
Sam&ch&ra-darpana, see Marshman, 
J. C„ 169, 171, 224, 439, 454. 
&akuntala, 19. 

Salisbury, Lord, 247, 324, 383, 384, 425, 
554. 

SamacMra-Chandrikd, 100, 225, 245. 
Sam&ch&r Sudhavarshan, 239. 
Samaja-darparm, 249. 

Sammja, 252. 

Sambddakaumudi, see Roy , Rdjd R&m- 
Mohan, 38, 100, 170, 2S5f, 272. 
Sambandar, 196. 

Samiulia, Maulvi, 299, 300. 

Sampson, George, 217. 

San Antone Valley, 130. 

Sanderson, 201. 

San Francisco, 130. 

Sangatya, 202. 

Sandhurst, 325. 

Sanfivam, 597, 598. 

^ahkaracharya, 139. 

Vedanta Philosophy, 139. 

Sanskrit College, (Banaras), 42, 74. 
Sanskrit College, (Calcutta), 43, 68, 69, 
277. 

San tali, (Dialect), 221. 

Sarabhki, Bhojanath, 192. 

Sarada, (Script), 218, 219, 

Saradamapi, 118, 119. 

Sarada Sedan, 266. 

Suren, (District), 334. 

Sara&wati, Dayanand, 95, 107, 108, 110. 
see Dayananda, 111, 112, 113, 114, 
137, 183. 

Founded Arya Samaj, 107. 

Satyartha P’rak’al, 110. 

Veda-Bhashya Bhumika, 110. 
Satyarth»Prakash, 114. 

Sarkar, Akshay-Chandra, 177, 243. 
Sarkar, Biharl-l&l, 177. 

Sarkar, Sir Jadu-nath, 1, 23. 

J§arroa, Radhamohan, 165, 

£arm&, Rain, 217. 

6arma, Vaidyanath, 184. 

Sarshar, Pandit R&tann’ath, 215. 
Sarvajanik Sabha, (of Poona), 516, 517, 
521, 522, 552. 

&astri, Ayya, 202. 

6astri, B&pu, 1S5. 

gastri, Basavappa, (Abhinava Kali- 
disa), 202. 

Sastri. Hara~prasad, 177. 

&astrl, Mot&ganhalji ^amkara, 202. 
Sastrl, Pandit lliva-n&th, 101, 105, 177, 
473, 474, 597, §98. 

SastrX, Parvatiswara, 183. 

SSstri, Ramasvami, 164. 

Kirtivildsa, 164. 

Bhaftikavya. 164. 
Kaivalyavaliip&ripaya, 164. 
PmbodDbadbandrodaya, 164. 
Ksheiratattvadlpika, 164. 

Sastrl, Prof. $eshagiri, 197. 

&astrl, N. Subba, 202. 

6astrl, Subrahmanya, 98. 


• , \ ' 

684 







INDEX 


&astr!> Suryanarayana, 197, 198. 

Sastrl, Syarna, 203. 

6astrl, Venkatarama, 199. 

Sastri, Venkatesa, 202. 

Sastri, Vishnu, 278. 

Sati, (burning of a widow), 22, 100, 152, 

224, 258, 263, 268f, 269, 270, 271, 272, 
273, 274, 275, 277, 283, 387. 

Satyagraha, 428,, 

Satyartha Prakasa, 475. 

Satya-Shodak Samaj* 266. 

Saugor, 513. 

Savarkar, Vinayak Damodar, 592. 
Sayana, 113. 

Sayani, R.M., (R&himaluUah), 295, 315, 
3.16, 318, 538, 571. 

School Book Society, (1824), 287. 

Scott, (Colonel), 3. 

Scott, Sir Walter, 215. 

Seeley, 4, 321. 

Senapati, Phakir-mohan, 179, 180. 

Sen, Girish-chandra, 65. 

Sen, Keshab-chandra, 93, 102, 103, 104, 
105, 106, 109, 176, 177, 241, 246, 256, 
375, 393, 468, 469, 473, 474, 482, 486, 
545. 

Sangat Sabha, 102, 

Brahma Pratinidhi Sabha, (Repre¬ 
sentative Assembly), 103. 

Brahma Samaj of India, 103. 

Sen, Krishna-prasanna, 115, 119. 

Sen, Nabln-chandra, 116, 172, 173, 245. 
Sen, Narendra-nath, 241, 538. 

Sen, Ram-kamal, 446. 

Serampore, 33, 151, 162, 168, 184, 224, 

225, 242, 269. 

Serampore College, 68. 

Serfogi, (Raja of Tanjore), 195. 
Seriadji, Bexanj, 332. 

Servants of India Society, 496, 497. 
Sbahabuddin, Kazi, 329. 

Shah Alarm 13. 

Shah, Wajid ‘All, 211. 

Shahjahan, Emperor, 209, 405. 
Shakespeare, 31, 68, 175, 192, 198. 
Shams-ul-'ulma, 315. 

Shankershet, Jagannath, 265, 459. 
Sharer, ‘Abdul Halim, 215. 

Shashi, 599, 600, 

Sh&tpadi, 202. 

Sheikh Khodadin, 607, 608. 

Sheikh Sukari, 607. 

Shelley, 194. 

Sherpore, 360. 

Shia Arabic College, 147. 

Shibsagar, 598, 606, 607. 

Shifa’i, 212. 

Shift a, Nawab Mustafa Khan, 212. 
Shitab Rai, 3. 

Shore, John, (Lord Teignmouth), 42, 
44, 223, 339. 

Sialkotij, 366, 367, 369. 

Siddhantavijaya, 165. 

Sikander, 2S8, 405. 

Sikandar Jahan Begum, Nawab, 211: 
Siksh&darpana, 243. 


Sirakins, 362. 

Sikandamamah, 20. 

Silappadikaram, 196. 
Simha-KalX-prasanna, 177. 

Simla, 322, 587, 

Simla Conference, 60, 

Sind, 210. 

Sindhi, (Script), 220. 

Singh, Gopal, 77. 

Singh, Guru Govind, 313. 

Singh, Jogendra, 217, 

Singh, Maharaja Dalip, 275, 

Singh, Ranavira, 165. 

Singh, Ranjifc, 140, 275, 482. 

Sinhalese, (Script), 218. 

Sahjtbani, 246. 

Siraj-ud-dauiah, 2, 3, 23, 277. 

Sirhindi, Sheikh Ahmad, 140. 

Siromani, Tarhu-charan, 169, 

Sister Nivedita, 491. 

SItaramacharya, 198. 

Sitaramayya, Pattabhi, 525, 526. 
Sivachandra, 164. 

Siva Dayal, (Tulsi Ram), 138. 

£iva, Pranathartihara, 198. 

Sivaji, 199, 313, 330, 477, 495, 577, 579, 
580, 581, 584, 589, 590. 
givarama, 165. 

^ivasahkara, 165. 

Srinivasa-das, Lain, 183. 
^rlperumbudur, 165. 

Sriramamurti, Gurajatfa, 200. 

Sriramulu, Dasu, 198. 

Smith, 346. 

Smith, Lionel, (Major-General), K. C. 
B., 37. 

Smith, Samuel, 390, 391. 

Socrates, 584. 

Sonnaprakdsa, 243, 248, 250. 

Sorabji, Cornelia, 217. 

South Africa. 420, 617, 623, 624, 

Speer, T.G.P., 339, 344, 352, 377, 
Spencer, Herbert, 123. 

St, Joseph’s College, (Negapafcam), 74 
St. Paul’s, 68. 

St Peter's College, (Tan j ore), 74., 

St. Stephen’s College, (Delhi), 78. 

St. Xavier’s, (College), 72. 

Stanhope, Leicester, 228, 279. 

Statesman, The, 242. 

Stephen, Fitzjames, 360. 

Stevens, 606. 

Stewart, Douglas, 40. 

Strachey, Sir Arthur, I.C.S., 314. 
Strachey, Sir Henry, 341. 

Strachey, Sir John, 252, 321, 508. 
Strassbourg, 374. 

Stri-bodh, 292. 

Strickland, Sir Walter, 372. 

Students’ Literary and Scientific 
Society, The, 186, 292. 

Subhadra, 166. 

Subramanya, Venkata Rama Sastrl, 

201 . 

Subrahmanyakavi, 198. 

{§uddhi, (Movement), 111, 268. 


685 




;THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSANCE-11 


Sudhdbar, 35, 183. 

Suez Canal, 15. 

Sufi, 97, 118, 140, 142, 209, 213, 214. 
Sujar-ul-Mutakherin, 9. 

Sukumaran, K., 207. 
Sulabha-Samach&ra, 246. 

Sultan Al-Madaris, (Lucknow), 147. 
Sultan-ul-Akhbar, 239. 

Sundararaja, 164. 

Sundarar, 196. 

Sundaravalli, 165. 

Sunder Raman, Professor, 137, 531. 
Suprabhdt, 65. 

Surat, 191. 

Surat Samachdr, 191. 

Surat Sabd Yoga, 138. 

Surendranath, see Banerji. 

Surur, Rajab Ali, 147. 

Svaml-Narayana, 190, 191. 
Svarna-kumari, 175, 176. 
Swadeshamitram, 248. 

Swadeshi Movement, 478, 510, 567, 594. 
Swamigah Ramalihga, 196. 
Syed-ul-Akhbar, 225. 

Sylhet, 606. \ 

Tagore, Chandra Kumar, 233. 

Tagore, Devendra-nath, 93, 101, 102, 
103, 105, 107, 155, 177, 241, 450, 472, 
540. 

Tagore, Dwarakanath, 12, 13, 16, 101, 
225, 233, 341, 342, 354, 393, 418, 441, 
442, 443, 444, 446, 447, 448, 452, 454, 
455, 518. 

TattvabodhinI, 101. 

Tagore, Dwijendra-nath, 65, 173f, 176. 
Tagore, Jhanendra-mohan, 520. 

Tagore, Sir Jatindra-mohan, 334, 534. 
Tagore, Jyotirindra-nath, 175. 

Tagore, Prasanna-kumar, 13, 175, 233, 
418, 440, 442, 443, 452. 

Tagore, Rabindra-nath, 28, 162, 170, 173, 
175, 176, 393, 472, 487, 593. 

Tagore, Rama-nath, 260, 446. 

Tahzib al-Akhlaq, see Khan, Sir Syed 
Ahmad, 144f. 

Tahzib-i-Niswdn, 148. 

Taimiya, Ibn, 142f. 

Taj Mahal, 405. 

Talukdars, 63, 74, 78.' 

Talyarkhan, Jehangir Ardeshir, 192. 
Tamayya, Rangadasa Srinivasa, 201. 
Tampuran, Kochchunni, 165. 

Tampuran, Kuhhikkutlan, 165. 

Tankara, 108. 

Tanjore, 72, 163, 199. 

Tarakvachaspati, Tar ana th, 165. 
Tarka-chutfamani, Pandit Sasadhar, 
115. 

Tarkalankar, Jayagopal, 169. 
Tarakaratna, Panehanan, 166. 
Tarkaratna, Ramnarayan, 175. 
Tarkhadkar, Bhaskar Pandurang, 456, 
476. 

Tarkhadkar, Dadoba Pandurang, 
(Panini of Marathi), 185. 


Tattvabodhini Patrika, 155, 176. 
Tattva-bodhinl Sabha, 277. 

Taw Sein Ko, 366. 

Tehsildari, (Schools), 75, 77. 

Tejpur, 513, 598, 599. 

Telang, Kashinath Trimbak, 515, 516, 
527, 533, 538. 

Telugu-Kannada, (Script), 218, 220. 
Temple, Richard, 77, 515. 

Temps, 564. 

Thakoor, Hurree Mohan, 28. 

Thakor, Balvantrai Kalyanrai, 194. 
Thakur, 592, 

Thampi, Irayimman, 203. 

Omana Ttihkalkitavo, 203. 
Dakshayagam, 203. 

KIchakavadhyam, 203. 
Uttara-svayamvaram, 203. 
Thampinan, Appan, 207. 

Tampuran, Keralavarma Valiya Koil, 
164. 

Thampuran, Kochunni, 206. 

Thampuran, Kunju Kuttan, 206. 

Thana, 70, 72, 332. 

Thayumanavar, 195, 196. 

Theosophical Society, see Blavatsky, 
131-134, 476, 491, 492, 526. 
Theosophical Convention, (1884), 525. 
Thirunal, Ayilliyam, 204. 

Thirunal, Swathi, 202, 203. 

Thirunal, Uthram, 203. 

Thiruvilayadal Puranam, 196. 

Thomas, H.H., 322. 

Thomason, 63, 74, 76. 

Thompson, 353, 448. 

Thompson, George, 389, 393, 394, 408. 
Thornton, Henry, 42, 235, 237. 
Thyagaraja, 203. 

Tibet, 97, 133. 

Tibetan War, 253. 

Tilak, B. G., (Bal Gangadhar-Loka- 
manya), 186, 189, 245, 250, 260, 266, 
283, 284, 430, 476, 477, 487, 522, 571, 
576, 577, 578, 579, 580, 581, 582, 583, 
584, 585, 586, 589, 592. 

Kesari, 186. 

Tilak, Rev. N.V., 189. 

Times, The, 222. * 

Times of India, The, 225, 242, 350. 
Times, London, 398, 455, 538, 539, 551, 
552 553. 

Tipu Sultan, 14, 268, 432. 

Tirunal, Visakham, 204. 

Tlrthaswami, Hariharananda, 98. 

Tols, 8, 17. 

Tota-purl, 117, 118. 

Town Hall, Calcutta, 434, 438, 442, 455, 
504, 505, 614. 

Trailahga SvamI, 139. 

Tranquefear, 150. 

Transvaal, 617, 618, 619, 620, 622, 623, 
624. 

Transvaal British Association, 620. 
Travaneore, 163, 164, 202, 267. 
Travancore Planter’s Case, 371. 


686 



INDEX 


Trevelyan, Sir Charles, 37, 45, 46, 48, 
62, 238, 383, 336, 567. 

Tribune, (Lahore), 243. 

Trichinopoly, 72. 

Trilokekar, Sokar Bapuji, 188. 
Trinidad, 613. 

TripathI, Govardhanram Madhava- 
ram, 192, 193, 195. 

Sarasvatlchandr, 192, 193, 194. 
Saksharjlvan, U93. ^ 

Navaljivan, 193. 

LSlavatljlvankala, 193. 

Tripithi, Govardhanram Madhavaram, 
1927 193, 195. 

Triven!, 165. 

“Tufta”, Munshi Hargopal, 213. 
Tukaraxn, 184. 

Tuljashankaf, Nandshankar, 192. 
Turton, 447. 

Tuiieorin, 299. 

Twining, 151. 

Tyabji, Abbas S., 317. 

Tyabji, Badruddin, 315.. 331, 515, 516, 
533 542. 

Tyabji, Mr. Justice, 317. 

Tyabji, Sir Syed, 314, 315. 

Tyson, 613. 

Tytler, 68. 

Tattvabodhini Patrikd, 102, 176. 

Tezpur, see Tejpur. 

Udaipur, 175. 

Udbodhana, 129. 

Udayram, Ranchhodbhai, 192, 195. 
UUoor, 207. 

Umbalia, see Ambala. 

Uncle Tom’s Cabin, 596. 

United Indian Patriotic Association, 
(Aligarh), 312, 316, 317, 546. 
University of Lahore, 53. 

Universities Act, (1904), 60, 560. 
University of Allahabad, 53. 
Universities Commission. 57. 

Upadhyay, Ayodhya Singh, (‘Hari 
Audh’), 183. 

Upanishads, 99, 100, 102, 112, 164. 

Urfi, 2(h 212. 

U tka.la-Darpa.na, 180. 

Utkala-dipika, 180, 

Utkaia-Hituishini . 180. 

Utkcda-prabha. The, 181. 

Utkala-Putra, 180. 

Utkala-Sdhitya, The, 181. 

University Board, (Madras), 73. 
University, (Bombay), 51, 52, 187, 190. 
194. 

University, (Calcutta), 49, 51, 52. 53, 57, 
59, 69, 76, 78, 123, 298, 529, 530. 
University, (Madras), 51, 52, 73f, 204, 
205. 

University College, (Lahore), 53. 
University, (Allahabad), 76, 298. 
University, (Punjab), 53, 78. 


Vaidya, C.V., 188. 

Vaidya, Gajananrao, 265. 

Vaidyanath, 119. 

Vaglela, Visvanath Simha, 164. 

Vairdg% 3 285. 

Valiakoithampuran, Kerala Varma. 

204, 205, 206, 207, 208. 

Vallathol, 207. 

Vahchchesvara, 164. 

Vaqar’ul-Muik, 144. 

Varanasi, see Bannras. 

Varier, Unnai, 203. 

Varma, A.R. Raja Raja, 206, 207 , 208. 
Varma, Pandalam Kerala, 207. 

Varma, Rama, 164. 

Varma, Virakerala, 164. 

Varman, Rajaraja, 165. 

Vasudeva, 165. 

Vasurayalu, 198. 

Vartamandlpika, 186. 

Varuna, 113. 

Vedanta College, 98. 

Veeresalingam, 278. 

Vengamena, Tarigonda, 199. 
Venkatacharya, B., 202. 

Venkataraju, Poduri, 199. 
Venkatarayakavi, SIrnadu, 199. 
Vernacular Press Act, 244, 247, (IX of 
1878), 248, 250, 429, 503, 504, 554, 
592. 

Vicharalahari, 186. 

Victoria Paper, The , 317. 

Vidhinataka, 199. 

Victoria, Queen, 306, 381, 393, 420, 455, 
518. 

Vidyalahkar, Mrityunjay, 167, 168, 465. 
Vidyabagish, Pandit Ram-chandra, 101. 
Vidyabinod, Kshirod-prasad, 176. 
Vidyabhusan, Dwaraka-nath 243f. 
Vidyabhushan, Jogendra-natn, 177, 243. 
Vidy’alankar, Ha{I, 288. 

Vidyalankar, Pandit Gaurmohan, 287. 
Vidyaratna, Pandit Ram-kumar, 596, 
597. 

Vidyasagar, Pandit Isvar-chandra, 66, 
170, 173, 176, 177, 260, 263, 277, 278, 
292. 

Vijayakar, Maroba Kanhoba, 187. 
Viraraghavacharya, 248. 

Viresalihgam, Rao Bahadur K., 198, 
199, 200. 

Visakham Tirunal, 164. 

Vishnupriya, 285. 

Visvesvara, 165. 

Vithoba, 332. 

Vivekananda, SvamI, 95, 117, 119, 120, 
121, 123-131, 176, 474, 476, 488, 489, 
490, 491, 492, 493, 494, 495, 586, 
Ramakrishna Order, 126, 130. 
Ramakrishna Mission, 129, 130. 
Ramakrishna Mission, House of 
Service, 130. 

Paper on Hinduism, 127. 

My Master, 129. 

Rijayoga, 129. 

Karmayoga, 129. 


687 



THE BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN RENAISSABCE—41 


Baaktiyoga, 128- 

Vividh&rtha Sangraha, see Mitra , 
Rdjendra-UI, 176. 

Vis&gapatam, 165. 

Vizier of Oudh, 14. 

Volksraad, 618. 

Voltaire, 39. 

Vrindaban, 118. 

Vyadh, 285. 

VyaptUFanchaka, 19. 

Vyasa, 113. 

Veda S&m&j, (see Brahma Sam dj ). 
Varanasi, see Banaras. 

Wacha, D.E., 540. 

Wahabi, (Movement), 5, 134, 142f, 145, 
297, 305, 306, 319, 327, 328, 431, 476. 
Walker, 276. 

Wallace, William, 582. 

Wali’ullah, Shah, 2(19. 

Ward, William, 25, 61, 62, 151, 242, 285. 
Warden, 71. 

Waring, Major Scott, 42. 

Wedderbum, William, 396, 518, 535, 547, 
553, 562, 563. 

Weekly Journal* 226. 

Weekly Madras Gazette, 223. 

Wellesley, 229. 

Hegiib.t3bi.iS for the Press, (1799), 229. 

Wellesley, Lord, 151, 270. 

Wellington, Duke of, 322. 

Whipping Act, (1864), 350. 

White, 521. 

Widow Remarriage Association, 278. 
Widows’ Home, 278. 

Wiegle, 201. 

Wilberfocce, 152. 

Wllberforoe, William, 42. 

Williamson, Capi, 339- 
Williams, Monier, 215. 


Wilson College, 70, 71, 72. 

Wilson, Mrs., see Miss Cooke, 69, 72, 
286. 

Winslow, 197. 

Witwfttersrand, 622. 

Wodeyar, Chama Baja, 202. 

Wood, Sir Charles, 49, 50, 389, 455, 
Educational Despatch, (1854), 49, 50, 
51, 52, 55, .63, '64, 66, 68, 292. 
Woodburn, Sir John, 382, 3©. 

Woodrow, Henry, 69, 74. 

Wordsworth, 194. 

Wilson, H.H;, 273, 286, 386, 466. 

Y&kshagana, 199, 201. 

Yati, Advaitendra, 164, 

Yavana-Jati, 7. 

Yayati, 175. 

Yemen, 210. 

Yogi, Rama Brahmananda, 201. 
Yokohama, 129. 

Young Italy, 481, 483, 593. 

Young Turk Movement, 306. 

Yule, George, 546. 

Yusuf, Muhammad, 302. 

Yusuf and Zulekha, 20. % 

Yuvaraja, Goda Varma, 185. 

Easasadana Bh&pa, 165, 

Ramacharita, 165. 

Zabid, 210. 

Zafar, Bahadur Shah, 141. 

Zain-ul-‘Abidin, 268. 

Zaka’ullah, Maulavi, 147f, 215. 

Zanq, Muhammad Ibrahim, 214, 215. 
Zeigenbalg, 150. 

Zeigler, 201. 

ZemincLaiy Association, 448. 

Zia-ud-dm, Shamsui-Ulma Maulavi 
145. 

Zubda , (Permutation), 20, 

Zuhalr, Ka*b bin, 209. 


688 




























































\ 














< 



' 

















* l 

































































THE HISTORY AND CULTURE 

OF THE 

INDIAN PEOPLE 


This is the first history of India, written 


exclusively by her own people, bringing to bear on 
the problems a detached and truly critical 
appreciation. A team of over sixty scholars of 
repute presents herein a comprehensive and up-to- 
date account of the political, socio-economic and 
cultural history of the Indian people. 


VOLUME I 
THE VEDIC AGE 
(up to 600 B.C.) 



VOLUME II 

THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 
(600 B.C. to 320 A.D.) 


VOLUME III 
THE CLASSICAL AGE 
(320-750 A.D.) 


VOLUME IV 

THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 
(750-1000 A.D.) 

VOLUME V 

THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 
(1000-1300 A.D.) 

VOLUME VI 

THE DELHI SULTANATE 
(1300-1526 A.D.) 


VOLUME VII 

THE MUGHAL EMPIRE 
(1526-1707 A.D.) 

VOLUME VIII 

THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 
(1707-1818 A.D.) 



VOLUME IX 

BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN 


RENAISSANCE (1818-1905 A.D.) PART I 


VOLUME X 

BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN 
RENAISSANCE (1818-1905 A.D.) PART II 


VOLUME XI 

STRUGGLE FOR FREEDOM (1905-1947) 






VOLUME I: THE VEDIC AGE 

"This history unlike its predecessors is first and foremost a history of India and of 
her people rather than a history of those who have from time to time invaded her.... The 
standard, in a word, is very high...." 

The Times Literary Supplement, London 

"....Distinguished historians contribute and they are not only learned but also very 
readabfe .... It contains much new information...." 

The Manchester Guardian, Manchester 

VOLUME II: THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

"....It is safe to say that these volumes will transform the study of Indian history in 
our times; their authors are not only writing history, they themselves are making history, 
a whole new history of knowledge and education...." 

i The Illustrated Weekly of India, Bombay 

VOLUME III: THE CLASSICAL AGE 

"....It maintains the leading trait of the series viz. to devote more attention to the 
social and cultural aspects of the story than to the purely political side, and the narrative of 
dynastic struggles and wars.... The political history is generally complete and up-to-date 
and a great amount of authentic information on social and economic history has been 
culled and presented systematically for the first time...." 

K. A. Nilakanta Sastri in Journal of Indian History 

VOLUME IV : THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

"....This is a magnificent piece of exact and unbiased scholarship.... Its pages are 
alive with the spirit of the modern Indian Renaissance; freedom has animated Indian 
learning and this is one of its finest achievements....this new Indian history is not 
concerned merely, or even mainly, with war and politics. Two thirds of the book deal with 
cultural and social matters...." The Statesman, Calcutta 

VOLUME V : THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

"....Like all the preceding volumes its treatment.... is detailed and comprehensive 
and is based upon the highest standards of scholarship. The contributors .... have made the 
best use of all the available source material and the important previous works on the 
subject....From every point of view it will be accepted as the standard and authoritative 
work on the history of India in the age of transition from ancient to medieval times...." 

| , The Hindustan Times, New Delhi 

VOLUME VI: THE DELHI SULTANATE 

"....Voluminous publication....piecing together all relevant material....easily stands 
out as one of the most outstanding and comprehensive treatises so far brought out on this 
period of Indian history....surpasses them all....being written....from an entirely new angle 
of vision....is indeed a significant contribution....this comprehensive and detailed work is 
really a very valuable addition to the existing literature on the subject...." 

The Pioneer, Lucknow 

VOLUME VII: THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

"....A comprehensive and balanced history of a momentous period; an exacting task 
ably fulfilled....A notable volume in a .notable series, the work is a finely integrated and 
well brought-out history of a remarkable time...." Nagpur Times, Nagpur 

VOLUME VIII: THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

"....The editors have done a commendable job in bringing out this volume in which 
the political history of the period has been dealt with in a scholarly maimer...." 

The National Herald, New Delhi 

VOLUME IX : BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND 
INDIAN RENAISSANCE, PART I 

"....The volume is an exhaustive study of the British rule,...Its impact on the 
cultural, social and educational life in the country....This is an important publication for 
students of Indian history...." The Hitavada, Nagpur 

VOLUME X : BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND 
INDIAN RENAISSANCE, PART II 

"....This volume, like its predecessors, is a mine of information and brings to light 
numerous significant facts and developments in the last century....It maintains the high 
standards set by the earlier volumes...." * Sunday Standard, Bombay 

VOLUME XI: STRUGGLE FOR FREEDOM 

"....The present volume covers the momentous period 1905-1947. It gives a detailed 
account not only of political developments, but also of such other essential topics as 
administration, education, art and literature...." 

"Unique in the annals of modern Indian scholarship...." 

Sunday Standard, Bombay 

ISBN 81-7276-407-1 



