लौकिकन्यायाञ्जलिः॥ 
प्रथमो भागः ॥ 
A HANDFUL OF POPULAR MAXIMS. 
IAS 
Indological Truths 
Indological Truths 
Indological Truths 
* 
II 
WTT 
A HANDFUL OF POPULAR MAXIMS 
CURRENT IN SANSKRIT LITERATURE. 
COLLECTED BY 
Colonel G. A. Jacob, 
INDIAN STAFF CORPS. 
Atilhor of " Concordance to the Principal Upanishads," " Manual of Hindu Pantheism " &ct &c. 
SECOND EDITION-REVISED AND ENLARGED- 
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED 
BY TUKARAM JAVAJI, 
PROPRIETOR OF JlvAji DiDlji's "NiRNAYA-siaARA" PRESS. 
1907. 
Price G Annas. 
Indological Truths 
Quly I. HARVARD UNIVERSITY SANSKRIT DEPT. LIBRARY 
[All rights reserved by the Publisher.] 
Registered under Act XXV of 1867. 
Indological Truths 
EXTRACT FROM PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION. 
IN Dr. Biihler's well-known Kashmir Report of 1877, we read the following: "A curious and very useful though modern treatise is the Laukikanydyasangralia of Raghunath, a Raj- put This worthy has collected the nydyas or 
' inferences from 
familiar instances,' which occur in the S'dstras, especially those from the Veddntas'dstra e. g. DandQ.ptipik&'n'ydya, Dehatt- dipanydya &c. The collection is not complete, but contains a good deal more than that Professor Balas'astri has given in his article in the Pandit* P. Vamanacharya Jhalkikar is at pre- sent engaged on a still more extensive work on this subject, which will comprise about 900 such nydyas." Page 76. 
The information given in the concluding sentence raised our hopes to a high pitch, for the need of such a work was great, and Balas'astri had explained only nine of those nyayas. But alas ! 
' there's many a slip between the cup and lip,' and though we have waited for this "more extensive work" for 22 long years, there are still no signs of its appearing. 
I have therefore determined to lay before the public the 'handful' of popular maxims which I have collected during many years of a of reading, in the hope that they may become the nucleus very much larger collection. In Taranath Tarkavachas- pati's Vdcaspatyam we have a list of 151 nyayas, popular and technical ; but references to works where they are to be found are few and far between, and this considerably lessens their value. Thirty of these were reproduced in V. S. Apte's dictionary, in 1890, but with the same defect. Again, in 1875, Pandit Satya- vrata Samas'rami published a small pamphlet of 36 popular maxims together with a larger number of purely technical ones, and professed to give a reference for each of them. But a man who refers you to the " Bhagavata on the Vedantabhashya, " or to " A Purana," commentary to "A commentary on the Kavya- 
* October and December 1867. 
2005776 
Indological Truths 
II PREFACE. 
prakas'a," and vouchsafes no further information whatever, is a worthless guide ; and such mere semblance of guidance deserves nothing but reprobation. One can tolerate ambiguity of this kind in the ancient writings ; but in modern times, when printed books of reference abound, such vagueness is inexcusable. 
My list comprises only 
' popular' maxims, and therefore such purely technical ones as Adhydropanydya, Jcaimutikanydya, gunopasamhdranyd-ya, and others of a similar nature, which abound in the philosophical and grammatical works, will not be found here. Moreover, I have rigorously excluded even popular maxims which I have been unable to find in actual use in the literature, deeming an unverified maxim with a mere diction- ary-existence as of very little value. 
I may add that about 22 illustrative sayings, which are practi- cally nydyas, might be gathered from the fourth Book of the Sdnkhyastitras ; such as, for example, the well-known "grfffr- 5hrjfta?t" and others more or less useful. Some of them were published in the Pandit for December 1876, under the title of "Stories illustrative of the Sankhya doctrine;" but the Aphorisms" whole will be published found #***** 
translated in Triibner's in Oriental the volume Series. of "Sankhya 
In concluding this preface I must apologize to the reader for not giving him a bigger 'handful' of maxims, and one of better quality. But what there is has been put together in defiance of the wainings of the skilful oculist in whose hands I have been for the last five years, and therefore at some risk to failing sight May some younger scholar be provoked to the good work of giving us something fuller and better. 
Redhill, July r i 1000. 1m Surreal. r* ~) r J 
n '-" **. A u. T 
Indological Truths 
PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION, 
Seven years have elapsed since the publication of this book- let, and, as ray researches have been continued during the whole of the interval, I have naturally collected much ad- ditional material. Part of this was published as a " Second Handful" in 1902, and that was succeeded by a "Third" in 1904^ During my reading I frequently came upon older references to many of the nyayas first published, and these have now been utilized; whilst other changes, some of them of a radical nature, have been made, and a few new nyayas added. The discovery of MSS. of Raghunathavarman's works, as recorded in the pre- face to the " Second Handful", was of the utmost importance to me j but the student will find in my three small volumes some nyayas which even he did not explain, amongst which are the ^^rf^cTI^TT and trfdprerora here incorporated for the first time. I make no distinction now between what may be really called a 'popular' maxim, and one of a technical nature. Both need to be explained and illustrated, so both are freely admitted. I have thoroughly revised, and considerably enlarged, the "Se- cond Handful " also, and hope soon to see it reprinted. It will contain, amongst much new matter, the story connected with the ^>$*nqm<wn*I which so long eluded me, and for which, as well as for several other valuable items of information, I am in- debted to Mr. Govind Das, an Honorary magistrate of Benares. Another lover of Sanskrit has come to my help in the person of Mr. M. K. Telang, Head Shirastedar of the Bombay High Court, who has kindly supplied what was to me, at any rate, a novel interpretation of the 3stesreiT??*n*r * am anx i us to revise as soon as possible the whole of the nyayas which I have en- deavoured to elucidate, before increasing infirmities compel the abandonment of the studies which have been my delight for 
forty-six years. 
Indological Truths 
IV PREFACE. 
I wish I could impart to some of my fellow countrymen resid- ent in India, something of the enthusiasm which its grand literature awakened within me in the early part of my career, and which has never waned during this long intervening period. Such a hobby not only provides delightful mental exercise, but, better still, it draws one into sympathetic touch with the people amongst whom one's lot is cast. 
Redhill, Surrey, \ 
October, 1907. J G. A. JACOB. 
Indological Truths 
List of Wofks quoted in the 
following pages. 
Advaitabrahmasiddhi, of Sadananda Yati; Bib. Ind., 1890. Alankdrasarvasva of Rajanaka Ruyyaka ; Nirnaya-sagar 
Press, Bombay, 1893. Apastamba-GrihyasiUra, with the Com. of Sudars'anarya ; 
edited by Dr. Winternitz, Vienna, 1887. Atmatattvaviveka, of Udayana, edited by Pandit Jivananda 
Vidyasagara; Calcutta, 1873. Bhdmatt of Vacaspatimis'ra ; Bib. Ind., 1880. 
Bhartrihari's S'atakatraya, with Com.; Nirnaya-sagar Press, 
Bombay, S'aka 1813. Bhdshdpariccheda, -with Com.; edited by L. N. Vasaka, 
Calcutta, 1871. Bhedadhikkdra of Nrisimhas'rama Muni ; Benares Sanskrit 
Series, 1904. Brahmastttrabhdsya of S'ankaracarya, with Anandagiri's Com. ; Anandas'rama Press, 2 vols, 1890-1. Translation by Dr. G. Thibaut in Sacred Books of East Series; 2 vols, 1890-6. A. fine edition of the Bhasya, with the Bhdmati, and two other Commentaries, was issued from the Nirnaya-sagar Press, in one volume, in 1904 Brahmastitratdtparyavivarana, published in The Pandit 
for 1882. 
Brih^dranyakopaniscidbhdsyavdrtika of Sures'varacarya, with Anandagiri's tika, and full Index to verses; Ananda- s'rama Press, 2 vols, 1892-4. This is sometimes quoted as the large Vartika. Citsukhi of Citsukhamuni, with his own vritti; published in 
the Pandit for 1882-3. 
Dhvanydlolca of Anandavardhana, with Abhinavagupta's tika; 
Niruaya-sagar Press, 1891. 
Indological Truths 
VI LIST OF BOOKS. 
Ganaratnainahodadhi of Vardhamana; edited by Prof. Egge- 
ling, 1879-81. Index much needed. Hathayogapradipikd of Svatmaram, with Brahmananda's 
tika; Nirnaya-sagar Press, S'aka 1811. History of Indian Literature, by Prof. Dr. Weber; Triibner's 
Oriental Series, 1878. 
History of Sanskrit Literature, by Prof. A. A. Macdonell, 
London, 1900. 
Jairaini's MimdmsdsiUra, with S'abara's Bhasya; 2 vols. Bib. 
Ind., 1873-89. Jivanmuktiviveka of Vidyaranya; Anandas'rama Series, S'aka 
1811. 
Kamas&tra of Vatsyayana; Nirnaya-sagar Press, 1891. Katltdsaritsdgara of Somadevabhatta; Nirnaya-sagar Press, 1887. Translation by Prof. C. H. Tawney,*2 vols., Bib. Ind., 1880-4. 
Kdvyddarn'a of Dandin ; Bib. Ind., 1863. Kdvydlankdra of Rudrata, with Namisadhu's tika ; Nirnaya- 
eagar Press, 1886. Kdvyapradipa of Govinda, with Vaidyanatha's tika ; Nirnaya- 
sagar Press, 1891. Kdvyaprakas'a of Mammata and Allata; edited by Mahes'a- 
candra Nyaj^aratna, Calcutta, 1866. 
KItandanakhandakhddya of S'riharsa, with S'ankaramis'ra's tika; Medical Hall Press, Benares, 1888. A new edition of this work, with the Com. entitled Vidydsdyari, is now appearing in the Chaukhamba Sanskrit Series, Benares, edited by Prof. Ganganatha Jha who is also issuing a translation in the new Magazine Indian Thought. 
Khandanoddhdra, a criticism of the above, by Vacaspati (not the celebrated philosopher, but a modern writer of about three centuries ago-so the learned Pandit Govind Das of Bena- res tells me ); Medical Hall Press, Benares. Incomplete. Kuswndnjali of Udayana, with his own vritti, and two tikas ; 
Indological Truths 
LIST OF BOOKS. VII 
2 vols, Bib. Ind., 1890-95. The karikas of the same, with Haridasa's tika, edited and translated by Prof. Cowell; Calcutta, 1864. Kumlaydnanda of Appaidiksita, with Vaidyanatha's tika, edi- ted by Pandit J. Vidyasagara; Calcutta, S'aka 1796. A very faulty edition. But an excellent one of the same two works, was published at the Niriiaya-sagar Press, in 1903. 
LaukiJcanydyasangraha of Raghunathavarman ; India office MS. 700. An inaccurate edition was published at the Medical Hall Press, Benares, in 1902. Magha's S'is'up&lavadha with Mallinatha's comment, edited by 
Taranath Tarkavacaspati ; Calcutta, S'aka 1769. Malidbhdrata, 4 vols, Calcutta 1834-39. Also an oblong edition with Nilkaiitha Govind's tika ; Ganpat Krishnaji's Press, Bombay, S'aka 1799. Mahdbhdsya of Patanjali, edited by Dr. Kielhorn ; 3 vols, Bom- bay Sanskrit Series, 1880-85. A new edition is now in course of publication ; and let us hope that the learned edi- tor will add a complete index. Manusmriti with 7 Commentaries ; edited by Rao Sahib V. N. 
Mandlik, Bombay, 1886. Manual of Hindu Pantheism, by Colonel Jacob; Triibner's Oriental Series, 3rd edition, 1891. This edition was reprinted by the publishers, about two years ago, with- out the author's knowledge, and therefore without the revision necessary to bring it up to date. Molesworth's Mardthi-English Dictionary, 2nd. edition, 
Bombay, 1857. Mricchakatikandlaka, edited by N. B. Godbole; Bombay, 1896. Translation by Dr. Ryder; Harvard Oriental Series, 1905. Mudrdrdk?a8andtaka with Dhundhiraja's tika, edited by K. 
T. Telang; Bombay Sanskrit Series, 1884. Naiskarmyasiddhi of Sures'vara, with the comment of Jnanot- tama; edited by Colonel Jacob, 2nd. edition, Bombay, 1906. 
b 
Indological Truths 
VIII LIST OF BOOKS. 
Nitisdra of Kamandaki, with tika; Bib. Ind., 1884. 
NydyabindutMed of Dharmottara, edited by Prof. P. Peterson ; 
Bib. Ind, 1889. 
NydyaJcandali of S'ridhara, with the text of Pras'astapada's Vais'esikabhdsya; Vizianagram Sanskrit Series, 1895. It is a lamentable thing that this fine series has come to a premature end. A translation of both works is now appearing in the Pandit. NydyaJcanikd, a Commentary by Vacaspatimis'ra on Manda- namis'ra's Vidhiviveka, with which it is now being pub- lished in the Pandit. 
Nydyamakaranda of Anandabodha, with comment by Cit- sukha Muni; Chaukhamba Sanskrit Series, Benares. 
Incomplete. Nydyamanjari of Jayanta Bhatta; Vizianagram Sanskrit 
Series, 1895. Nydyasiddhdntadipa of S'esadharacarya, with comment of 
S'esananta ; in course of publication in Pandit. NydyavdrtiJca of Uddyotakara; Bib. Ind., 1907. The first 
fasciculus was issued in 1887 ; the title page, this year ! 
Nydyavdrtikatdtparyatikd of Vacaspatimis'ra; Vizianagram Sanskrit Series, i895. Often quoted as Tdtparyatikd. When are we going to have an edition of Udayana's Paris'uddhi ? 
Padamanjari, a Commentary on Kds'ikdvritti; published in 
the Pandit, 2 vola 
Pancadas'i of Vidyaranya, with Ramkrishna's comment; 
edited by Pandit J. Vidyasagara, Calcutta, 1882. 
Pancapddikd of Padmapada; Vizianagram Sanskrit Series, 1891. Said to be the oldest comment on S'ankara's bhasya (sutras 1-4 only). A translation of the first 14 pages of this work, by Mr. Arthur Venis, was published in the Pandit, but then, alas! it ceased ! 
Indological Truths 
LIST OF BOOKS. IX 
Pancatantra, edited by Professors Biihler and Kielhorn ; Bom- 
bay Sanskrit Series, 1885. 
Paris'istaparvan of Hemacandra, edited by Prof. H. Jacobi ; 
Bib. Ind., 1891. 
Practical Sanskrit Dictionary by V. S. Apte ; Poona, 1890. 
Prasannardghava Natalca of Jayadeva; Nimaya-sagar Press, 
1893. 
Rdjatarangini* of Kalhana, edited by Pandit Durgaprasad ; 
Bombay Sanskrit Series, 1892-96. 
Rdmdyana of Valmiki; Nirnaya-sagar Press, 2 vols, 1888. 
Rasagangddhara of Jagannath Pandit, with Nages'a Bhatta's 
tika; Nirnaya-sagar Press, 1888. Rational Refutation of Hindu Philosophical Systems, by N. S'astri Goreh, translated from the Hindi by Dr. Fitzed- ward Hall; Calcutta, 1862. 
Saddars'anacintanikd of Mahadeo Moreshwar Kunte, in San- 
skrit, Harathi and English; Poona, 1877-82. Incomplete. 
Saddars'anasamuccaya of Haribhadrasuri, with the comment of Manibhadra; Chaukhamba Sanskrit Series, Benares, 1905. About half of the chapter on Jainism is found, word for word, in the Syddvddamanjari ! Which was the plagiarist, this man or Malliseiia ? 
S'ankaravijaya of Anandagiri; Bib. Ind., 1868. Sdnkhyastitravritti of Aniruddha, with Extracts from Vedantin Mahadeva's Commentary, edited and translated by Dr. R. Garbe; Bib. Ind., 1888 and 1892. 
Sdnkhyatattvakaumudi of Vacaspatimis'ra, edited by Pandit 
Taranath Tarkavacaspati ; Calcutta, 1871. 
Sankshepas'driralea of Sarvajnatma Muni ; The Pandit, vok, IV-X. New Series. Saptapad&rthi of S'ivaditya, with comment by Madhava Sara- 
svati; Vizianagram Sanskrit Series, 1893. 
Indological Truths
﻿X LIST OF BOOKS. 
Sarvadars'anasangraha of Madhava ; Bib. Ind., 1858. An edi- tion by Jivananda Vidyasagara, Calcutta, 1871. Trans- lation by Professors Cowell and Gough, in Triibner's Ori- ental Series, 1882. This, too, was reprinted by the publi- shers, without the much-needed revision. An edition of the Text, with an additional chapter on S'ankara's system, and the text of Madhusudana Sarasvati's Prastlidnabheda, was published at the Anandas'rama Press in 1906. 
S'dstradipilcd of Parthasarathi Mis'ra ; Medical Hall Press, 
Benares, 1891. 
Satyavrata Samas'rami's Nydydvali; Calcutta, 1875. 
Siddhdntales'a of Appaidiksita ; Vizianagram Sanskrit Series, 1890. A translation by Mr. Arthur Venis is being pub- lished in the Pandit. So far, it extends to page 47 only of the text. I hope ray learned friend will carry this on to completion; for his renderings and critical notes are al- ways of the highest value. 
Syddvddamanjari, a Commentary by Mallisena on Hemacand- ra's verses entitled Vitardgastuti ; Chaukhamba Sanskrit Series, Benares, 1900. This work is wrongly described by Rajendralal Mitra, in his Notices of Sanskrit Mss. voL iv, page 87, as "A Commentary in verse," and ascribed to Gaganadiuamani See the remarks, above, on Saddars'- anasamuccaya. 
Taittiriyopanisadbhasyavdrtika of Sures'varacarya, with Anandajnana's tika; Anandas'rama Press, S'aka 1811. 
Tantravdrtika of Kumarila ; Benares Sanskrit Series, 1903. Prof. Ganganatha Jha is bringing out a translation of this important work in the Bibliotheca Indica Series. He has already, through the same channel, published a com- plete translation of the first volume of Rumania's work, the S'lokavartika. 
Tdrkikaralcsd of Varadaraja, with the Commentary ( in part ) 
of Mallinatha; Medical Hall Press, Benares, 1903. 
Indological Truths 
LIST OF BOOKS. XI 
Tattvamuktdlcaldpa, of Venkatnatha, with his own comment ; Medical Hall Press, Benares, 1900. In the Sarvadars'ana- sangraha it is quoted as Tattvamuktdvali. Uddnam, a Buddhist work, published by Pali Text Society, 
1885. 
UpamitiblmvaprapancoL Kathd of Siddharsi, edited by Profess- ors Peterson and Jacobi; Bib. Ind., 1899-1907. Incomplete. Upadcs'asdhasri of S'ankaracarya, with Rainatirtha's tika; 
edited by Krishna S'astri Navare, Bombay, 1886. Vacaspatyam, a Sanskrit Lexicon, of 5442 pages, by Pandit Taranatha Tarkavacaspati, Calcutta. It is very full up to the end of q ( page 4550 ), whilst the rest of the alphabet is squeezed into 900 pages! It is said that the Bengal Govt., which largely subsidized the undertaking, ordered it to be curtailed. If that is so, it did a very unwise thing ! We ought to store up the knowledge of these old Pandits who are fast dying out ! 
Veddntakalpataru of Amalananda, a commentary on the 
Bhamati; Vizianagram Sanskrit Series, 1895-7. VedantaJcalpataruparimala of Appaidiksita; Vizianagram Sanskrit Series, 1895-8. Sometimes quoted as Parimala. 
Veddntasdraot Sadananda, with the commentaries of Nrisimha- sarasvati and Ramatirtha; edited by Colonel Jacob, and published at Nirnaya-sagar Press, 1894. For the transla- tion of the same, see Manuil of Hindu Pantheism. Veddntasiddhdntamulddvali of Prakas'ananda, edited and 
translated by Prof. Arthur Venis; Benares, 1890. Vidvanmandana of Vitthala Upadhaya, edited by Ratnago- pala ; Victoria Press, Benares, 1904. In Hall's Index this is described as " Strictures on the expositions of several expositors of the Vedanta doctrine." It ascribes to the same author a work entitled BhaJctihetunirnaya. 
Vivaranaprameyasangraha of Vidyaranya; Vizianagram Sanskrit Series, 1893. A translation by Dr. Thibaut is now appearing in the new Review, Indian Thought, 
c 
Indological Truths 
XII LIST OF BOOKa 
Yas'astilaka of Somadeva, with S'ris'rutasagara's tika; Nir- 
naya-sagar Press, 2 vols. 1901-3. Yogastitra with Vyasa's bhashya and \7acaspatimis'ra's tika, edited by Rajaram S'astri Bodas; Bombay Sanskrit Series, 1892. 
Yogavdrtika of Vijnana Bhiksu; Medical Hall Press, Benares, 
1884. 
Yogavdsistha with the Commentary of Anandabodhendra Saraswati; Ganpat Krishnaji's Press, Bombay. This ought to be printed in modern style. The huge oblong tomes are most difficult to handle.ERRATA, 
Page 36, line 7 from bottom. For " virtully" say "virtually". 
Indological Truths 
A HANDFUL OF POPULAR MAXIMS. 
The maxirn of the she-goat and the sword. It is founded on some story of a goat's being suddenly killed by accidental con- tact with a sword, and is used to illustrate any surprising event happening altogether by chance. It therefore belongs to the same class as spTsEcTT^sta, ^R^lZfSRrsfar and others of a similar kind. An excellent illustration of its use is found on page 229 of sufac^fcT S'riharsha's ^% Khandanakhandakhddya:' 
SRT235T ^fa i ti^\^ q^ W?T23JTfcrero gg^ren^riofiq^i^q- srmft liafcr" it In a footnote the maxim is thus explained: 
:'' II Vardhamana puts it differ- ently in his comment on Qanaratnamakodadhi iii. 196 : 
^TTiiNm" II For another variety, see Padaman- jari on Kds'ilcd 5. 3. 106. 
The nyaya, with the same illustration, is found also in the Khandanoddhdra, page 52; and the illustration, without the nyaya, in Siddhdntales'a, page 95. Then on page 96, it is again referred to in the expression 
It is interesting to note that the Marathi-speaking folk of Western India have adopted the maxim, but with a changed meaning. Molesworth defines it as " The maxim of the sword upon the neck of the goat. Expressive of meekness and abso- 
Indological Truths 
The maxim of a lamp in a central position. Applied to something ra's <T*n bhashya |R 3lTc*?T which on sT^R5f the fulfils Mundaka sTlIx$oi a double Upanishad R?m purpose. " 
It occurs in S'anka- 
3. 1. 5. ("?i?qf 35wrecT- i ) on which he says: 
" 
II It is akin to ^^ifiq^nq and Jivananda's edition of the MundaJcdbkdshya reads . The reading given above is from the Anand- as'rama edition. 
The maxim, of the blind man and the quail. Like ^^n- ^TTofiq' and many others, it is used to express a wholly fortu- itous occurrence. Vardhamana, on Ganaratnamahodadhi iii. 195, explains it thus: " sir^si ^spr ^ sr^^ri^ I 3T?^=^^T 
T^ | ^TTT^^^^T^ " 
II This authority brings the quail under the blind man's foot ; but the commentator S'ris'rutasagara, tilaka * and who in the who expounded the work colophon is described as " 
Yas'as- 
" brings the bird into the man's hands. And, surely, such a prodigy of learning must be right 
! The verse in which 
the expression arysTcpgra^jfaT occurs is Yas'astilalca ii 153. 
^rf^T'^l^^^t'n^' 
' 
II "It is altogether by chance that a soul wandering about in this ocean of repeated births is born as a man; and that he should be born into a family of repute in the world, and enjoy the society of the good, is likewise as accidental as in the case of the blind man and the 
* This important work, described by Dr. Peterson at considerable length in his Second Report, was published in the KdvyamAM, a valuable periodical issued by the Proprietor of the Nirnayastigar Press, 
Indological Truths 
quail." S'ris'rutasagara's explanation of the last term is as follows : " 3F^3E^<3>tefr fEFrf J I 
The maxim of the Hind men and the elephant. A number of blind men desired to form an idea of the shape of an elephant. One touched his trunk and thought he must be like a snake ; another took hold of a leg and supposed that he was like a post, and so on. Taranatha tells us that it is used to illus- trate the divergence of views held by the ignorant in regard to 
Is'vara. 
The story is found in the Buddhist work Uddnam ( vi. 4, pages 66-69) published by the Pali Text Society in 1885. 
It is referred to in Sures'vara's large Vdrtika 4. 4. 566 ( page 1813) as follows: 
Also in his NaisJcarmyasiddhi ii. 93 : 
I' I have met with the nyaya again on pages 107 and 160 of Syddvddamanjarl. It occurs also in the Jainadar- s'ana of Saddars'anasamuccaya ( page 46 ); but the passage in which it is found was taken verbatim from Mallisena's work, without any acknowledgment. 
II 
The maxim of the blind man and the cow's tail. The story is that an evil-disposed fellow found a blind man who, having lost his way, was wandering about helplessly. Expressing great sym- pathy for him, and promising to help him, the man led him to a young and frisky cow, and putting her tail into his hand told 
Indological Truths 
him to hold on, and that she would certainly lead him to the village to which he wished to go. The result was, of course, most disastrous. 
S'ankara, in his bhashya on VeddntasiUra 1. 1. 7, applies the maxim to the case of a teacher who wrongly instructs his pupil in regard to emancipation and so leads him to destruc- tion ! These are his words : " * 
U The nyaya is found, too, in Panca- ixidikavivarana, page 170 
The maxim of a continuous series of blind men. It would seem to be in this sense that S'ankaracharya uses it in his Brahmasutrabhdshya 2. 2. 30, 37. The passages stand thus : 
II In n ^s rendering of the former passage, Dr. Thibaut has overlooked the maxim, but the latter he translates as fol- lows : "For in past time as well as in the present, mutual interdependence of the two took place, so that the beginningless series is like an endless chain of blind men leading other blind men." I should add that, in the former case, S'ankara is argu- ing against the Buddhist theory of a beginningless series of mental impressions, and, in the notion of a similar chain of human latter, against the Sankhya actions and divine interposi- tions. Dr. Thibaut's explanation of the maxim is quite in accord with that of Dr. Garbe in his rendering of the Sdnkhya- sutra iii. [ comparable 81 "f^n?'<*wni" to a row ] "Else there would be a tradition of blind men [ leading each other ]." is given A very in apt that quotation useful work from A one Rational of Coleridge's Refutation Lay of Sermons Hindu Philosophical Systems ( now quite out of print ), from which I 
Indological Truths 
extract the following: "The old man talked much and vehe- mently concerning an infinite series of causes and effects, which he explained to be a string of blind men, the last of whom caught hold of the skirt of the one before him, he of the next, and so on till they were all out of sight; and that they all walked infallibly straight, without making one false step, though all were alike blind. Methought I borrowed courage from surprise, and asked him, 'Who, then, is at the head to guide them ?' He looked at me with ineffable contempt, not unmixed with an angry suspicion and then replied, "No one; the string of blind men goes on for ever without any beginning, for although one blind man cannot move without stumbling, yet infinite blindness supplies the want of sight." 
In the opening part of the Padamanjari ( Pandit x. 248 ) we find the expression SFWTT^TTTsrH^ used with reference to testimony received through a series of blind men, and therefore of doubtful value. It is part of an interesting discussion regarding different forms of a word, why some are considered correct and others not. " 3^ 
I rfcT: TJ^fT 
n 
That the nyaya is in very general use will be apparent from the following additional references. TantravdrtiJca, pages 11, 72, 75, 232, 799, 877. Pancapddikd, page 98. Blidmati, pages 254, 464. Nydyamanjari pages 234, 249, 251, 425, 492. 
The maxim of the pointing out of the star Arundhati. The idea here is that of gradual instruction, on the principle of the renifara3T5?tnq' for which see the Second Handful. Its 
Indological Truths 
usage is explained by S'ankara in Brahmastitrabhdshya 1. 1. 8, as follows: " 
Similarly, too, in 1. 1. 12, we read: "H" II The maxim is sometimes styled ^j^Hr^rft^TO) an(l ^ appears under this name in Nrisimhasarasvati's commentary on section 20 of the Veddntasdra that section which gives the views of Charvakas and others as to the dtman. 
H . 
If one can find honey on the Arkx-tree [ close at Land ] then why go to the mountain for it ? That is, if an object can be accomplished by simple means, don't adopt a more complicated method. This is well illustrated by S'ankara in his Veddnta- ^tttrabhdshya 3. 4. 3, as follows: " % 
Its source, however, is S'abara on Jaimini 1. 2. 4. Here, the ptirvapakshin, after taking exception to certain Vedic injunc- tions as useless says: " rr?Trr <rfT 
The same couplet is quoted by Aniruddha in his comment on Sdnkhyastitra i. 1; also by Vachaspati Mis'ra in his Sdnkhya- tattvakaumudi 1., and again in his Nydyavdrtikatdtparyatikd, page 220. Instead of g^, however, we have in the former instance^ and in the latter aj%. Raghunath reads g^P and explains it by ajppToi. One more example of the application of this nyaya may be found in Rumania's Tantravdrtika 1.2.17: 
Indological Truths 
The maxim of the semi-senile woman. It is very difficult to fix on the exact force of this saying. Authorities differ so much as to make it almost an instance of quot homines tot sentential. As expounded by Vardhamana ( iii. 195 ) it seems to imply in- definiteness, half-and-half-ness, the being neither one thing nor the other. He says 
: " *w\^ vr ^^jfr 35*1^^?^ ^I%5T- cWFST 3R3T cr^j sm^r ?f^l%^n%t sraT3R<' || This seems to accord with the meaning assigned to it by Marathas, as shown by Molesworth in his Marathi dictionary where he defines it as " Action of indeterminate character; speech vague and indefinite; a proceeding void of decided leaning or bearing." 
The maxim is cited by S'ankara in BrahmasiUrallidshya 1. 1. 19, and again in 1. 2. 8. In the former, after quoting Taittirtya-upanishad ii. 1-4 in regard to srarsreq1 
, snor^q &c. he says: "s[fcT 
I! The com- mentators Anandagiri and Ramananda (erroneously styled Govindananda* ) ignore the maxim entirely, and so does Dr. Thibaut in his translation. In the second instance, S'ankara 
says: which is rendered by Dr. Thibaut, "Very well, then, it appears that the truth about scriptural matters is to be ascertained from scripture, and that scripture is not sometimes to be appealed to and on other occasions tobe disregarded." Anandagiri's comment is: " qi^", "You cannot take one part of a fowl for cooking and leave the other part to lay eggs;" that is, you must take a 
* See Dr. Fitzedward Hall's Index, page 90. 
Indological Truths 
8 
thing in its entiretj', or else leave it altogether. Ramananda, on the other hand, says : " are g^*?ra 3R3II f^w. 5fTJT*Kf M*4|4|: ^r ^tt r 5^:," which seems to be based on Patanjali's words "T ^^Rfar^R^T WHT" I 3T" *nrc*TT: <bW4<ksvf ^fa", as found in Mahdlhdshya 4. 1. 78.* Again we find the maxim in the Bauddha section of Sarva- dars'anasangraha (page 14 of Bib. Ind., and 17 of Jivananda's edn.), which reads thus: "T 'efT^^i^^^F^cm I f % ^^^T jV', and which is identical with Anandagiri's exposition. Prof. Gough, who translated this chapter, rendered the maxim by " semi-effete" " Nor is a semi-effete existence admissible." 
Another excellent illustration of the usage of this nyaya is given in the following passage of the Brahmasutratdtparya- yiwra.ua a 4. 26. (The Pandit vol. vi page 220):" 
^t^Trn^f? IR^ 1 
angr sn 
Other references are the following : SaptapaddrthS, page 26. Vivaranaprameyasangraha, page 21. Nydyamanjari, pages 248, 249. Advaitabrahmasiddhi, page 340. 
/ aril too weak to construct a house, but I am well able to destroy one. This is found in Dhundhiraja's commentary on Mudrdrdkshasa iii. 11. Chanakya says "^ 
I and then follows the verse "fJ?TT*TT: 
* Vol. ii. page 231 of the edition by Dr. F. Kielhorn, who himself most kindly gave me the reference. 
Indological Truths 
fvrara qTOTTr^ &c.," on which Dhnndhiraja remarks: " 
'-Hfa^fofrT" ll I am indebted for this passage to the late learned Librarian at the India Office, C. H. Tawney Esqr., who has also pointed out to me Pancatantra i. 363 as illustrating the nyaya. 
The verse reads thus : 
The maxim of the grove of As'oka trees. Apte says "Ravana kept SitS, in the grove of As'oka trees, but it is not easy to account for his preference of that particular grove to any other one; so when a man finds several ways of doing a thing, any one of them may be considered as good as another, and the pre- ference of any particular one cannot be accounted for." For the As'oka-grove see Pdmdyana 1. 1. 73. The only example of this nyaya that I have met with is in S'esananta's tika on S'as'adhara's Nydyasiddhdntadipa, page 11. This work was commenced in the Pandit for April 1903, but is still incomplete, 
The maxim of the stone and clod of earth. Apte, following the Vdcaspatyam, explains it thus: "A clod may be consi- dered to be hard when compared with cotton, but is soft as compared with a stone. So a person may be considered to be very important as compared with his inferiors, but sinks into insignificance when compared with his betters." Taranatha adds that when it is intended to indicate that there la very little difference between two things or persons compared, the kindred 
2 
Indological Truths 
10 
maxim trrerotE^reni is used. With these Apte compares the Marathi proverb "^fra^pfjfcvrat" "Brick is softer than stone." The sense, however, is not quite the same; for, accor- ding to Molesworfch, the Marathi saying is used "in ironical softening of a difficulty or hardship but barely surmountable or sufferable, by comparing it with a matter utterly impracticable or intolerable." 
Is it not much more likely however that the maxim is based on Brihaddranyaka Upanishad 1. 3. 7, 
which S'ankara expounds thus: "TOT 
" ? This is referred to in Brdhma- sutrabhdshya 3. 3. 6. as the "sT^q^JTgR^^rV an(^ ^ seems to remind one of the Scripture saying "Whosover shall fall upon that stone shall be broken; but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder." 
A iveapon is silenced by a weapon. Perhaps analogous to the saying "Diamond cuts diamond," or, " Set a thief to catch a thief." It occurs in Jnanottama's commentary on Sures'vara's Naiskarmyasiddki i. 81, where he says: " 
Compare with this Nitisdra viii. 67 : 
r" n 
The simile of a Lamp without oil [ that is, from which the oil has burnt out]. Raghunathavarma explains it thus: 
I 
Indological Truths 
11 
I have met with the following example of the nyaya in Yogavdsistha 2. 1. 44, a chapter entitled 
For the nyaya ^[R?r^T^t^ f^r^^^ see the Third Hand- ful of Popular Maxims; and for fvrf!ra>5TSflTT% see Veddnta. sdra, pp. 55, 57 &c., and Manual of Hindu Pantheism, pages 109, 110. 
The maxim of the snake and its coils. The expression occurs in Bralimasutra 3. 2. 27, and is explained in the bhashya. They read thus: "^^resR^l 
^rflr3?Ttfrr I " 
II Dr. Thibaut's translation is as follows : "But on account of twofold designation, ( the rela- tion of the highest Self to the individual soul has to be viewed) like that of the snake to its coils ......We therefore look on the relation of the highest Self and the soul as analogous to that of the snake and its coils. Viewed as a whole the snake is one, non-difterent, while an element of difference appears if we view it with regard to its coils, hood, erect posture and so on." It is akin therefore to the expressions "a forest and its trees," "a lake and its waters," so often used by the Vedantists as illustra- tions of identity. The explanation given by Taranatha in the Vdchaspatyam does not coincide with the above. He says : 
:" II 
Indological Truths 
12 
The maxim of striking the sky with ones fist. A vain attempt at an impossibility. It occurs in the Jaimini chapter of Sarvadars'anasangraha ( page 133 of Bib. Ind. edition, and p. 151 of Jivananda's) as follows_: " a**TT<q^T ^ 
fTRT II Pr f- Cowell has rendered it thus : "Therefore, as we can prove that authoritativeuess is both produced and recognized by means of something external, the Mimanisa tenet 'authoritativeness is self-proved' is like a gourd over-ripe and rotten. This long harangue of our opponent, however, is but a vain attempt to strike the sky with his fist." 
Much older instances of the employment of the nyaya are the following -.Tantravdrtika, page 170, "sre-trrjsfqr^Tq ?WT- I 13 ^3 *?tfl%<T * fsngsffar gfefvn" II [ Wi^h this com- pare the words of a great modern preacher-Dr. Maclaren- "Logic without Revelation is like a spinning-machine without cotton, busy drawing out nothing"]. PancapddiM page 43, line 19, "^if^ TI?T ?T 
Then, in Nydyakandali, page 56, line 6, we find the cognate expression U^ 
and again in Nydyakanilcd, page 219. 
The appearance or disappearance of a quality (or char- acteristic ) produces a corresponding change in the subject of it. This nyaya is the second line of Naiskarmyasiddhi ii. 35, the first being u3Tmwnf^R?^T^R^^fTRT|%:" 
II Although it 
is included in Raghunatha's list, it ought not, strictly speaking, to find a place amongst popular maxims; but I insert it in order to make a necessary correction in the printed text of the Sarvadarsanasanyraha where it is quoted. On page 161 
Indological Truths
﻿13 
of the Bibliotheca Indica edition, and on page 182 of that prepared byJivanandaVidyasagara, we read "cKT3riqqja^3i j:>W? fo3*TT% 1% sffflGlfofa n*hf" and this bad reading of course affects the translation as it appears on page 244 of the volume prepared for Triibner's Oriental Series by Professors Cowell and Gough. The explication given in Vdchaspatyam is as follows: "qsj 
The maxim of a camel's eating thorns. This is not in Raghu- natha's list, but in the Vdcaspatyam it is explained thus : 
II I regard this, however, as quite beside the mark. In Brahmasdtrablidshya 2. 2. 1. S'ankara, after combating at length the Sankhya theory, that objects are in themselves ?p?f:*smiT?*RJ, says: "^^TUf^^f^Sfq ^ vn^Tfe^ M U^if^T%- $r^Tic(555^:," which Dr. Thibaut renders " And, further, although the sense-object, such as sound and so on, is one, yet we observe that owing to the difference of the mental impres- sions (produced by it) differences exist in the effects it produces, one person being affected by it pleasantly, another painfully, and so on." On which Anandagiri says: "^is^T^tfa I ^TT^TT &C." Vacaspatimis'ra, explains the same passage in the Bhdmati, (pp. 380-1), pointing out that things are not in themselves essen- tially pleasant or unpleasant, and that what causes pleasure to one may be painful to another, and that even the same thing which at one time is agreeable may at another time be the re- verse. Otherwise thorns would be as acceptable to men as they are to a camel. Here are his words; "q 
Indological Truths 
14 
A camel, then, eats thorns because it likes them; a man does not eat them because he does not like them. May not the maxim, man's food is therefore, be another man's the poison? 
equivalent " of our "What's one Mr. M. B. Telang has kindly pointed out Vikramdnkadevacarita i. 29. as illustrating a camel's love of thorns. 
Whilst seeking for one thing he loses another. The saying appears twice, in this form, in the Sarvadars'anasangraha. The first instance is in the Arhata Section ( p. 27 of Bib. Ind. and 33 of Jivananda's edn. ), translated by Professor Cowell: 
:" i "If in your wish to escape this difficulty, you assert that 'the perception does not follow the object in being insentient,' then there would be no perception that the object is insentient, and so it is a case of the proverb, 'While he looks for one thing which he has lost, anotlwr drops" The second example, and 134), is as follows: from " 
the Akshapada section (pp. 118- 
" Nor may you retort on us that we have fulfilled the pro- verb of 'seeking one thing and dropping another in the search' since we have abolished happiness as being ever tainted with some incidental pain &c." 
* The printed text wrongly reads ^"^ for 
Indological Truths 
15 
In the Khandanakliandakhddya ( page 447 ) and in Malli- natha on Tdrkikaralesd, pp. 7 and 25, we meet with the nyaya in another form, namely "q^ *ri?v^fl<nsqj 5jx?i^f" which means " Whilst trying to reunite one [ piece of a broken vessel] another falls off." 
The maxim of two fruits attached to one stalk. Used Ly writers on Alankara to illustrate a particular kind of Parono- masia, namely the coalescence of two meanings under one word. It was first pointed out to me by Mr. F. W. Thomas, Assistant Librarian to the India Office, he having met with it in the commentary on Kdvyddars'a ii. 310. I have since found it in use in the Alankdrasarvasva,, Kdvyapradipa, Sdhitya- darpana, Masayangddhara, Alankd-rakaustubha, and Sdhitya- Icaumudi, in each case under the figure ^j^. The maxim finds a place in Maratln literature also, and is regarded by Moles- worth as equivalent to our proverb "Killing two birds with one stone." 
The maxim of the buds of the Kadamba tree. They are said to burst forth simultaneously. As, for example, in Hema- candra's Paris'ishtaparvan i. 241 : 
' In the Nyayamanjari, pages 214 and 228, and in the Bhdshdparichchheda (verse 166) this nyaya is given as an illustration of the way in which sound is produced. The last- mentioned reads thus:- 
Indological Truths 
1G 
The commentary, Siddhdntamuktdvali, however, explains^~ and this is the form given to the maxim in the Vdcliaspatyam which explains it as follows: " 
SffrT:" || In Vedantin Mahadeva's comment on SdnkhyasiUra V. 103, we have a third form, namely 
* n 
The maxim of treacle on the elbow. Used of something tantalizingly inaccessible. It is found in Udayana's Alniatattva- viveka, page 26 : 
: I 
II Then in the Akshapfvda chapter of Sarvadars'anasangraha (page 116 of Bib. Indica, and 132 of. Jivananda's edition) we read : 
II which Prof. Cowell trans- lates as follows : "But is not your definition of the summum bonum, liberation, that is, the absolute abolition of pain, after all as much beyond our reach as treacle on the elbow is to tlie tongue ; why then is this continually put forth as if it were established beyond all dispute ?" In a footnote he says, "Com- pare the English proverb 'As soon as the cat can lick her ear.' " In the Vdchaspatyam, however, the nyaya is explained as mean- ing the absence of a thing, not its inaccessibility. It says: 
II The St. Petersburg Lexicon ( s. v. ^tforg^T) renders it "like a ball on the elbow." 
Indological Truths 
17 
II 
The maxim of the crow and the Palmyra fruit. A crow alighted on a Palmyra tree, and at the same moment some of the fruit fell on its head and killed it. The maxim is therefore used to illustrate a startling and purely accidental occurrence. It is well explained in the Kds'iJcdvritti on Pdnini 5. 3. 106 ( as quoted by Dr. Eggeling in a footnote to Ganaratnainaho- dadhi iii. 195): "^JTcum^W*. I 3T5TT$T!iforat < 
We find the saying in Paftchadas'i ix. 12 as follows: 
" 
II And again in Anandavardhana's Dhvanydloka, ii. 16, and in NydyavdrtiJcatdtparyatikd, page 401. There is a capital example of it, too, in the following verses of the Nydyamanjari (page 106): " 
II 
u 
I ^3 tT^T^n^\Tf^r% ^rf^^Trt^" H In llis commentary on S'&ntiparva clxxvii. 11, Nilakantha Govind gives another, and less probable, definition of the maxim. He says: " 
Molesworth explains it thus: " Said when any occurrence synchronizing with, or immediately following, some other seems, however in truth independent of it, to have been occasioned by it; as the fruit of a Palmyra falling at the alighting upon it of a crow, may appear to fall in 
consequence." 
Indological Truths 
18 
n 
The maxim of the examination of a crow's teeth. Used of any useless and manifestly fruitless enquiry. It occurs in the Buddhist treatise Nydyabindutikd, page 1, and again on page 3, line 8. Also in S'ankara's bhashya on Katha- Upanishad i. 25 
n We find it too 
in Abhinavagupta on Dhvanydloka iii. 19 (page 163 of Pandit Durgaprasada's edition) as follows: "afanS*IT *TWg *TT ^1^ 
R3*jfaf5ft*r: 
I 3I^cr7fT$nsn*m^ 3<sn%% *Tra:" ll Ifc appears also in Pancapddikd, pages 53 and 68, and in many works besides. In Nydyamanjari, page 7, line 5, it takes the form of 
The maxim of the crow's eyeball. Crows are popularly sup- posed to have only one eye, which, as occasion requires, moves from the cavity on one side into that on the other. The maxim is used of a word which appears only once in a sentence but which applies to two portions of it; or of persons or things ful- filling a double purpose. I have met with it in the former sense in Sv&tmav&m'BHathayogapradipikd iv. 10, "i%riraKT*R: cp*h$T%ii: ^R^rcrqr," on which the commentator, Brahmananda, says "f%ni%KT% ^Tfam<5^iq?fw*re *tett." Also in Abhi- navagupta's comment on Dhvanydloka iii. 1, "< 
r:") where he remarks "grfifas^: 
|| Of its use in the second sense, we have an interesting example in Kamandaki's NUisdra, a work ascribed to the third century before Christ. Chapter xi. 24 reads thus: 
Indological Truths 
19 
n 
The maxim of catching at straws. The being driven from one argument or position to another equally untenable. Tara- natha says: "s 
:" II The expression <T" occurs in the A.rhata chapter ( p. 25 of Bib. Ind. and p. 31 of Jivananda's edition ) of the Sarvadars'ana* sangraha, and again in the Panini chapter (pp. 142 and 161 ); and in both places Prof. Cowell has rendered it " like a drow- ning man's catching at a straw." We have the same, though not as a compound, in NaishJcarmyasiddhi i. 76, "q^ f%^r- ^itsfr 5RT $5T ^nre*5Trf." It appears also in Nydyamanjari page 183; and again, as follows, on page 551 : "^JTFJmiaicns- sr^ ?rw^ m ^^s^oiqr i ^ sn^m^Tfe sr?f?T^mi^^JT^" u In TantravdrtiJta 1. 3. 18 ( page 213 ) we have the maxim in the following couplet: "pfoT*r T ^T^ g^fe 5nrra%: I 
u 
In expounding Brahmastitrabhdshya 3. 3, 29, Anandagiri quotes Amarakos'a 2. 4 166 (g^r f?t fsfr ^: qfll^RST *F3<Jlij) as follows : "arer ^T^fr f^rnr^iRf^fSfTgRTg^/' Does this throw any new light on the date of Amara 1 In his History of Indian Literature ( page 230 ), Professor Weber tells us that the Amarakos'a cannot be widely separated from those dictionaries which we know to belong to the eleventh, twelfth, and following centuries; whilst Professor Macdonell, in his recently issued History of Sanskrit Literature ( page 433 ) assigns that work to about 500 A. D. 
The maxim of a frog in a well. It ia applied to an inex- perienced person brought up in the narrow circle of home, and 
Indological Truths 
20 
ignorant of public life and mankind. "Home-keeping youth have ever homely wits" ( Tivo Gentlemen of Verona i. 1 ). The following passage from Prasannardghava-Ndtaka i. (page 13) illustrates the use of the term : '^j ^TWfq ^rf^foi^iftnfi- 
%" II So, too, Upamitibhavaprapancd, page 828: 
The maxim of the pots attached to the water-wheel of a well. As the wheel revolves, some of the pots are going up and others are going down; some are full whilst others are empty; and so it is applied to illustrate the changes and chances of this mortal life. This is well put in Mrichchhakatika x. 60 : 
Taranatha's explanation of this maxim is extremely tame, not to say nonsensical ! According to him, it is intended to teach that as a pot is raised by the water-wheel from a deep well, so, by means of instruction, the essence of the S'astras is drawn up, deep though they are by reason of their complexity ! See the cognate v&q^pqm in Second and Third Handful. 
II 
The maxim of the limbs of tlie tortoise. Its meaning and application will be apparent from the following passage taken from the Sankhya section of Sarvadarsanasangraha (page 150 Bib. Ind. and 170"of Jivananda's edition): "qm fir *$- 
Indological Truths 
21 
<7f%: SRTT sn Prof. Cowell renders it thus : " As the limbs of a tortoise, when they retire within its shell, are concealed, and, when they coine forth, are revealed, so the particular effects, as cloth &c., of a cause, as threads &c., when they come forth and are revealed, are said to be produced; and when they retire and are concealed, they are said to be destroyed ; bub there is no such thing as the production of the non-existent, or the destruc- tion of the existent." Very similar language is used by Vachas- pati Mis'ra, too, in his Sdnkhyatattvakaumudi 9 and 15. See also, Kshurikd-lfpanisliad 3. and Gitd ii. 58. 
The nyaya stands thus in Tantravdrtika 3. 4. 1 : "3^3 *n<*T3jffrnT^m: fj<r: * St^Tftrenaroftfc ZWW;" On applying to my friend Mr. Arthur Venis for an elucidation of the nyaya he' replied as follows: "I have always understood it as the method of granting to your adversary what later you mean to refute, for which another common expression is Sfy^tfTH^T^. The word 35^1 is elliptical for ^fa ef?3T that is, having admit- ted your adversary's point, you proceed to the foscIT or discus- sion of it." This view seems to be confirmed by the fact that in S'dstradipikd, pages 615, 666, 707, 710, and 739, it takes the form of "^frf ^3T f^??q^/' and that in S'abara on Jaimini 11. 3. 16. and 12, 2. 11, we read at the close of each 
In his Saddars'anacintaniJcd, Mr. M. M. Kunte gives three different renderings of the expression. On page 650 ( where it is attached to the title of the adhikarana ) its meaning is said to be "a point already discussed," and he claims for it the authority of Madhava; then, on page 1999, it 
Indological Truths 
22 
is rendered " an adjustment not founded on fact:" and, finally, on page 2040, "the examination of a subject after merely grant- ing an opponent's statement." This third rendering coincides with that of Mr. Venis. 
I may add that Prof. Ganganatha Jha tells me that a pandit would explain the term thus; "fj^r ( 
Or, as the Professor himself puts it, " the bhasya has introduced certain points of discussion simply for the saJce of argument, in order to exhaust all possible alternatives with regard to the subject matter of the adhikarana." I have not met with the nyaya anywhere but in works on Mirnamsa, 
"Leaving the milk suitable to the dyspeptic, he enjoys the sour gruel." The nyaya is found in this form in the Akshapada Bection of Sarvadars'anasangraha (P. 118 of Bib. Ind. edition and p. 134 of Jivananda's ed.) as follows: "q 
" 
ii 
Prof. Cowell translates it thus: "But if you give up the view that liberation is the manifestation of happiness, and then accept such a view as that which holds it to be only the cessa- tion of pain, does not your conduct resemble that of the dys- peptic patient who refused sweet milk and preferred sour rice- gruel ? Your satire, however, falls powerless, as fitter for some speech in a play [rather than for a grave philosophical argu- ment]." There can be little doubt however that Madhava took the nyaya from Udayana's Atmatattvaviveka where it appears (on page 56, line 5,) as "tfrf fofre ^tft^rere* &tik" I know of no other instance of ifc, and it is nob in Raghunatha's Laukikanydyasangraha. 
Indological Truths 
23 
The maxim of the bald ( or bare-headed ) man, and the woodapple. Vardhamana ( iii. 195 ) explains it thus: u?n?T 
II Bhartrikari, in his Ntti* s'ataka 90, brings the bald man under a palm tree: 
This maxim belongs to the same class as 3^3,^ofta and 
, which see. 
The maxim of ruminating on ether. Equivalent to beating the air. It is found twice, in the Sarvadars'anasangraha. First, in the Ramanuja section (page 57 of Jivananda's edition, and 47 of Bib. Ind.): ^^^qvf^???!^^", which Prof. Gough renders " All this is about as profitable as it would be for a ru- minant animal to ruminate on ether." Secondly, in the Panini section (pages 162 and 143 respectively): " g[% 
rendered by Prof. Cowell by "All this is only the ruminating of empty ether." In the Nydyamanjari page 453, it appears in a slightly different form, in the expression "ani^r fofwfofls^;" and in S'dlikd p. 154, and Ny&yamnltaranda, page 129, we meet with *TJT 
The maxim of a continuous rush of sheep. It is used to indicate the blind following of others like a flock of sheep. So the Vdchaspatyqm, which says: "?Tf(%$nTrosffaT 
Indological Truths 
24 
The expression occurs in Chap. viii. (page 214) of the Kavya- praMs'a where a very helpful note of Mahes'achandra's will be found ; and also in Chap, vi, page 188, of the Sahityadarpanvii which however, Mr. Pramadadasa Mitra has rendered, " in pursuance of established custom." 
It is found, also, on pages 86 and 125 of Abhinavagupta's commentary on the Dhvanydloka, and in the opening part of Kdvyapradipa viii (p. 327). There seems to be much difference of opinion as to the correct form of the first word of the maxim, since it appears in the four varieties of 
The maxim ofthetongue [smeared] ivithtreacle [in order to dis- guise an unpalatable draught]. The Vdcliaspatyam thus explains 
its use: 
' ' * 
An excellent example of this is found in Kdvyapradipa, p. 7:- 
It is employed in a similar manner by Abhinavagupta in his comment on Dhvanydloka iii. 30, and by the author of Pada- manjari in the early part of his work (the Pandit x. 254); and, somewhat less clearly, in BhdmvM, pages 342, 534, and Nydya- vdrtileatdtparyatika, pages 438, 441. 
Indological Truths 
25 
The maxim of the cattle and the bull. In the Pawcue, lor October 1867, Rajarama S'astrt expounded it thus: u?j^ JJT: 
II That given in the Vdchas- patyamis somewhat fuller: "aR^^r JTTT%tn^sfq' 
5TfI%:" II In his exposition of viii. 28, where six classes of women are enumerated as having a claim to the king's protection, Kulluka says: "s^T xn^rai- ll The commentators Raghavananda and Govindaraja also quote the maxim in the same connection, and we have it in Kdvyapradipa vii. 11 (page 300). Vacaspatimis'ra, too, makes frequent use of it. It occurs in BhdmoM, pages 518, 536; and in Nyayavdrtika- tdtparyatika,, pages 11, 118, 119 and 404. It belongs to the same class as 5niI5rTq-ni and 
ll 
The maxim ofcowdung as a milky preparation. Some stupid person is supposed to argue that cowdung is made of milk, be- cause it comes from the cow; hence it is used to denote an utterly absurd argument or statement. It occurs in Vyasa's bhashya on Yogastitra i. 32. He says: " 
tl On which the Yogavdrtika remarks: 
ll See, too, Ny&yavdrtikatdtparyattkd, p. 435. 
It is found also in the Bauddha section of the Sarvadars'a- nasangraha (page 18 of Bib. Ind. and 22 of Jivananda's edi- tion ) in the following sentence: "* 
which Professor Gough renders Thus this argument which you adduce to prove that there is 
Indological Truths 
26 
difference between subject and object, turns out a mere absurd- ity, lilce milky food made of cowdung" 
The compound ifiJTW^rsffa ig included in Ganaratnamalio- dadhi iii. 196, but Vardhamana did not explain it. 
The maxim of day-break in the vicinity of the toll-col- lector's hut. A man, anxious to avoid paying toll, takes another road, but losing his way in the dark, finds himself, at day-break, in the vicinity of that very toll-gate 
! The saying is employed to illustrate ^^qrf^ff^j as Prof. Cowell puts it ; that is, failure to accomplish a desired object. It occurs in the Panini section of Sarvadars'anasangraha as follows: u^g 
;"-, which is thus rendered by Prof. Cowell: "But even on your own hypothesis that there is a certain thing called sphota which expresses the meaning, the same untenable alternative will recur which we discussed before ; and therefore it will only be a case of the proverb that ' the dawn finds the smuggler with the revenue-officer's house close by'. This, however, is only the inflation of the world of fancy from the wide difference between the two cases." 
S'riharsha, too, used the simile in his KhandMnakhanda- Jchddya ( page 35 ): <%ff C^ROT^ STrw*g<T'ra5riTO?[% *5f <srf sr*Traf*rft %5f" || See also Siddhdntales'a, pages 40 and 116; Vivaranaprameyasangraha, page 62; Advaitabrahmasiddhi, pages 63, 146, 219, 371; Citsukhi, i. 12; ii. 24 (Pandit iv. 518; v. 510 ), and Kusumdnjali iii. 19 ( page 496 ). 
The maxim of the letter made by the wood-worm ghuna. This worm bores holes in wood and in books which sometimes assume the shape of a letter of the alphabet ; hence its use to 
Indological Truths 
27 
intimate the occurrence of something quite accidental. Here is Vardhamana's ( iii. 195 ) description of it : sjoTtf^GTT^sife- Isr^i^nTStR1 ^n^r^. i <ff^^r T^^T^F ^mfasTO^r <jTpir$inrten^" n 
The simile is found in the opening part of Prasanna- rdghava ( page 9 ) as follows:" 3 
STTtT vfa* ^'" II Also in R&jataraugini iv. 167 : " ^?^RT?H*IT f^fT f^ffi $R 13 ^fr**, I 
fit HoiWETC^" H Mdgha iii. 58 may also be refeiTed to. 
The maxim of the moon and its light. Used of two insepar- able things. It is found in Anandagiri's S'anlcaravijaya, page 124:" 3H! 
The maxim of the.punishment of Mdndavya for the crime committed by robbers. The story of the Rishi Ani-Mandavya is told at length in Adiparva cvii, cviii. Whilst he was practising severe austerities, in conjunction with the mauna-vrata, some robbers concealed themselves and their plunder in his As'rama. The king's guard found them there, and, believing the sage to be implicated in the affair, carried him off together with them and impaled them all together ! Mandavya was eventually re- moved from the stake, but its point ( sjtfj ) remained in him ; hence the name, given him by the people, of Aiu-Mandavya. The maxim is found in the Puriiaprajna chapter of Sarva~ dars'anasangraha ( page 73 of Jivananda's edition, and 62 of Bib. Ind. :tt 
II But its earliest occurrence is in Atma- toMvaviveka, page 70, line 15, where we read " 
Indological Truths
﻿28 
II and it was from this source that the Khandanakara, too, derived the nyaya together with several pages of context ! Compare pages 633-636 of S'riharsa's work with pages 70 and 71 of Udayana's. 
The maxim of the men with umbrellas. The thought here is of a crowd of men, many of them with umbrellas up, and so all seeming to have them. Its application will be apparent from the examples which follow. We have one in S'ankara's bhashya on Katha-Upanishad iii. 1 ( "^ fqr?^" &c - ): 
II Again, in his bhashya on Veddntasdtra 3. 3. 34, where the same text is expounded:"^ 
On the former of these two passages, the commentator Gopala Yatindra says: 
I have met with the maxim in the Kuvalaydnanda also under the figure gjgrer, and in Anandagiri on BrahmasiUra- Ihdshya 1. 2. 11 ; 1. 4. 12. 
But the nyaya is found long before S'ankara's time, and perhaps originated \vith S'abara, in whose bhashya on Jaimini 1. 4. 28 we read "qrr SI%OTT Jl^m^^ Sl%<HT^ ^^V'; and in Tantravdrtika 1. 4. 13 
II 
The maxim of darkness and the lamp. This is found in the Veddntasiddhdntamuktdvali ( page 125 ) where we read: 
Indological Truths 
29 
*f 3 15 ^T : <R*Ktfnn^W^5Rn" H " Hence the well-known illus- tration of darkness and the lamp: Thus that dullest of dull- heads who would cognize Nescience by means of a pramana, would forsooth go looking for darkness with a brilliant lamp." This verse is most probably based on that of Sures'vara in Taittiriyavdrtika 2. 1. 177 : 
The maxim of the burnt cloth. When a piece of cloth, or a leaf, is thrown into the fire and consumed, its outline is still visible in the charred remains; and this the Vedantists use to illustrate the unreality and unsubstantially of all phenomena. It occurs twice in Nrisimhasarasvati's commentary on the Veddntasdra, namely on pages 55 and C6, as follows : ''^T 
:" ll ( Page 55 ). ^^r^T^?T ^^TT2- farssn^ ^Rsftr 
" 
II ( Page 66 ). 
* 
II 
The maxim of the stick and the cakes. If a number of cakes ( chapatis ) are attached to a stick, and the stick is carried oft' or eaten by mice, the inference is that the cakes have shared the same fate. The application of the maxim is obvious. In the Sdhityakaumudi ( xi. 8 ), and in the Kuvalaydnanda ( page 244 ), it is used to illustrate the figure stsfafo and 
respectively. 
Indological Truths 
30 
Sdk. ) 
^?: 3>T ^FT^T 
See also Brihaddranyalcopanishad-bhdshyavdrtika, page 909, verse 135. 
The maxim of a lamp on the threshold. A lamp so placed gives light both inside and outside the house, and is therefore used as an illustration of anything which fulfills a double purpose. S'abara refers to such a lamp in his bhashya 011 Jaimini 12. 1. 3 : " 
^SJT Jirent $3: STfrT: HT^RRT^TJWTifs^- T3?tfo"' There is a similar expression, too, in Kuvalayd- nanda, page 97. Another good example of the nyaya is found in the commentary on Saptapad&rtlii, page 52. The text stands thus: " ^RRvra ^I^^5?Tfl?cm^?Tf^ u srm^T^- ^^l4^ II *rtm?T?RJ7?9TT^?n% 3RTC^" ll on which Madhava Sara- svati remarks: 
My friend Professor Cowell pointed out another instance of the use of the nyaya in Anandagiri's S'ankaravijaya xi, page 82. The maxim is akin to 
* The author of Rasagangddhara finds fault with this definition, See page 487 of Durgaprasada's edition, Bombay 1888. 
Indological Truths 
31 
The maxim of the lost horses and burnt chariot. This is based on the story of two men travelling in their respective chariots, and one of them losing his horses and the other having his chariot burnt, through the outbreak of a fire in the village in which they were putting up for the night. The horses that were left were harnessed to the remaining chariot, and the two men pursued their journey together. Its teaching is union for mutual advantage. That the story is very old is clear from the fact that the saying is quoted in the 16th vdrtika (" gsratft ^T TSf jgr^re3Iffl(>") to Pdnini 1. 1. 50, and again in S'abara's bhdshya 2. 1. 1. It appears also in Sures'vara's Bfihaddr&nya- Ihdshyavdrtika 2. 1. 38, which reads thus : ^Tn*c?r ^WT^ I 5TFf JTI^TTO^q1 t^TH^f?^: ;TST3l^R3?g9*risf || On which 
Anandagiri says 
: "srRreiftor ftflt *Tn4a q^s& cut 
Ramtirtha, too, quotes the maxim in his comment on the Veddntas&ra (page 93, line 3 ) : '< rjST^T^si?1R?r 
' 
*S$<JIt 
fq^T^J found ' 
in ^frf The ^T%^qq^"> Pandit for of which the following translation May 1872: "The Vedic text is 'The world according of to progenitors the analogy is attained of two men, by works/ of whom can the be explained horses of the one are lost and the chariot of the other burnt [ for the horses of the latter may be yoked to the car of the former, and they may travel together ; and in like manner, constant and occasional works, though no special result has been recorded of them, may supply a cause for the attainment of the world of the progenitors, which requires some special works as a condi- tion ]." See also Tantravdrtika, pp. 15, 709, 832, and Bhdmati, page 81. 
II A young fawn cannot stand up against a full-grown lion. 
Indological Truths 
32 
found in the Akshapada chapter of Sarvadars'ana- sangrc WL ( page 136 of Jivananda's, and 119 of Bib. Ind. ) : 
which Prof. Cowell renders, " This pretented inference will no more stand examination than the young fawn can stand the attack of the full-grown lion." Compare "TT5qT*rcTr 
" II of S'dlikd, page 94, and see the nyaya &c." in Second Handful. 
n 
The Palds'a tree is not cleft when the axe is applied to the Khadira tree. The saying is used to indicate that two objects are essentially distinct. I have met with it in three of Vacas- patiuris'ra's works. 
It occurs in Bhdmati 2. 2. 28 ( page 438 ) in the following connection, 
^ ff 
Then in Yogablidsyatihi i. 7 we read : 
" 
II 
And very similarly in Nydyamrtikatdtparyatika,pa,gQ6*l: 
i sjf^; II But he is not the only writer who makes use of it, for in Adwitabrahmasiddhi, page 93, we read : "^TTWrto^fl% ^fwr^> qft qra^ t'^r^T^f *^^" II For earlier references to this nyaya, see the Supeiaddenda to the Third Handful. 
Indological Truths 
33 
The bride is not married for the destruction of the bride- groom. This is found in Brahmasdtrabhdshya 4. 1. 2, and in the Purnaprajna chapter of Sarvadars'anasangraha ( page 63 of Bib. Ind., and 75 of Jivananda's edn. ). It occurs also in Jivanmuktiviveka, page 101 ( line 4 from bottom ). In the Vdchaspatyam and in the Laukilcanydyasangraha, the max- im is given in the positive form, viz. "^crraTO ^RfRROTn" with the other as a possible variant. Taranatha explains ifc thus: "feqcpwnqr f3RT *tt W*^T SHcf: ^T^^ <T?C 
I 3*TT ^TfaSFcRTTcnf^^faN ! I^ I ?T 
" 
II We have a reference to "poi- son-damsels " in Kathdsaritsdgara xix. 82, which reads thus: 
Tf^nft: I SnffOTtr^t^ j:" || In a foot-note to his translation of the passage, Mr. Tawney says, " One of these poison-damsels is represented as having been employed against Chandragupta in the Mudra- Rakshasa. Compare the xith tale in the Gesta Romanorum, where an Indian queen sends one to Alexander the Great. Aristotle frustrates the stratagem." 
The maxim of the washing off of rnud. It is evidently de- duced from Panchatantra ii. 157, a verse intended to strengthen an argument against the possession of riches under any circum- stances, and which reads thus: "gjfm q^r fMffT 3^rT/<T Jf 3J*TT^T I srStTT^mi; Tf^ ^T^<reH ^^' II "If 
' man desires wealth for charitable purposes, even to him it will bring no good; for, better than the washing off of mud is the keeping away from it altogether." The nyaya is therefore the equiva- lent of our "Prevention is better than cure." In his bhashya on JBralimasvitra 3. 2. 22. S'ankara twice quotes the second line of the above couplet; and, in commenting thereon, Anandagiri uses the maxim three times, It is again applied twice by him 
5 
Indological Truths 
34 
on JBrahmasdtrabhdshya 4. 1. 16. as follows: "si 
See also Bhdmati and Bhdshyaratnaprabhd on the same, and Vivaranaprameyasangraha, page 97, line 14. 
The maxim of the lame man and the blind man. The con- ception is that of a lame man mounted on the shoulders of one who is blind, so that the former is furnished with the power of locomotion and the latter with sight. It is intended to illu- strate mutual dependence for mutual advantage, as exemplified in Sdnkhyakdrikd 21, the text of which, with Colebrooke's translation, is as follows: "g^wr ^3RT$ tw5*TT$ <TOT sn*R^ I r: *T*T:" || " For the soul's contempla- tion of Nature, and for its abstraction, the union of both takes place, as of the halt and blind. By that union a creation is framed." Vachaspati Mis'ra ignores the illustration, but Pandit Taranatha has a helpful note on it. He says: "gTfi 
tq$:" || The above karikd is quoted on the last page of the Sankhya section of Sarvadars'anasangraha, and is preceded by a very clear explanation of the maxim. 
The maxim of the moving of the bird-cage. An illustration of the power of united effort. In a discussion on prdna, under Veddntasdtra 2. 4. 9, S'ankara introduces this maxim and 
Indological Truths 
35 
explains it thus: " 
f 1T% siR^^'cI ^fw" II Dr. Thibaut translates the pas- sage as follows : " But, an objection may be raised, the thing may take place in the manner of the moving [ of the ? ] bird- cage. Just as eleven birds shut up in one cage, may, .although each makes a separate effort, move the cage by the combination of their efforts, so the eleven praiias which abide in one body may, although each has its own special function, by the com- bination of these functions, produce one common function called 
prana." 
The vigilance of the watchman after the house has been plundered by thieves. Equivalent to our proverb " Shutting the stable door after the horse is gone." It occurs in Khanda- nakhandakhddya, page 45 : " s 
He went to crave the leavings of the oil-seed, and liad in- stead to agree to give 16 measures of oil. Used of one com- pletely worsted in argument. I render fqnqr^J IB accordance with its meaning in Panchatantra iii. 99 ("3rq?^g !gfq'mifcir|;")' The maxim is found in the Purnaprajna section of the Sarva- dars'anasangraha ( page 63 of Bib. Ind., and 75 of Jiva- nanda ): " which Prof. Gough renders: " And thus it must be allowed that, in raising the objection, you have begged for a little oil- cake, and have had to give us gallons of oil." 
The maxim of the grinding of that which is already ground. Fruitless reiteration, unproductive repetition, The oldest in- 
Indological Truths 
36 
stance, known to me, of the employment of the nyaya, is by S'abara on Jaimini 9. 2. 3:"^ % ]%TCR*I %f4 5T^ 3g fteq1 m <Nore"' It occurs again in 12. 2. 1G, and in Tantravdrtika, pp. 54 and 477. We find it likewise in S'ankara's bhashya on Kena-Upanishad 32 :"nf% crm^rensfcT srer: 1*1^3: fis- fe 5T*: W\m> II) and in Sudars'anarya's com- ment on Apastamba-Grihyastitra xiv. 9 
where he says " 5^nq 
II Compare ^^i^T?znq in Second Handful. 
Trying to remove the dimness of a lamp l>y lighting another. Used of foolishly superfluous and misdirected effort. It occurs in Ehandanakhandakhadya, page 294: " 
3^?:" II IQ a footnote, the editor says: "sr^tq !T3W1^T 5n?T7 ^RT^TTT TcIflR^ g^^l^TJ 
In Upades'asdhasri xvii 41 ( page 215 ), we read: " 
i and, in Sures'vara's BriJiaddranyaJcavdrtika 4. 3. 501: " 
^rer:^ II See also Nydyamanjari, page 625, on Nydyasu- tra 5. 1. 10. 
II 
The maxim of the destruction of the chief antagonist. The principle that when the most formidable enemy has been defeated, the less formidable are already virtully overcome. In the bhashya on Veddntasutra 1. 4. 28 ( "^^ & 
we read: "SKT: sraR?T^H^i'<^n*TfTf?rf^Tf<T I 
u Here, there is undoubtedly a play on the word 5r^TT> the Sankhya theory of the Pradhana being t)ie chief antagonist met and overcome in the foregoing Sutras 
Indological Truths 
37 
and bhashya. The same expression appears again in the bhashya on Stitra 2. 1. 12, and the maxim is found, too, in the Ramanuja chapter of Sarvadars'anasangraha ( page 54 of Jivananda's edition, and p. 45 of Bib. Ind. edition ), 
The maxim of an eternal series of seed and shoot. As the seed produces the shoot, so the latter in turn reproduces the former. Each therefore is a cause and an effect. The maxim is met with very frequently in the literature. We find it in Brahmasiitrabhdshya 2. 1. 36 ( on the eternity of the world ) as follows: 
I 
5 which is rendered thus by Dr. Thibaut: "Without merit and demerit no body can enter into existence, and again, without a body merit and demerit cannot be formed ; so that on the doctrine of the world having a beginning we are led into a logical see-saw. The opposite doctrine, on the other hand, explains all matters in a manner analogous to the case of the seed and sprout, so that no difficulty remains." It occurs again at the end of the bhashya on 3. 2. 9. Also in the Arhata section of Sarvadars'anasangraha ( page 31 of Bib. Ind., and 37 of Jivananda), in Ramafcirtha's commentary on Veddnta- sdra ( page 110 ), and in Pancapddikd, page 12, line 12. 
The maxim of the Brdhmans and the mendicants. In such a sentence as STTIIOIT WSif^KTaiT: qRcnsr^TSl the separate men- tion of the latter, who are really included in the former term, merely emphasizes their position as a special part of the general body. It is thus the exact parallel of the liT^te't'^n*? and of the 3rniT<JI3f3gr3Trcr. It is used by S'ankara three times in his exposition of the Veddntastitras, namely under 1. 4. 16, 2. 3. 15, and 3. 1. 11 ; but I forbear to quote his words, for without a 
Indological Truths 
38 
lengthy portion of context they would be unintelligible. It appears also in TantravdrtiJca, pages 423, 590. 
II 
The maxim of tlie Brdhmans and Vasishtha. This is of the same type as grr%W:rferMfc"Mre, which see. Satyavrata gives as a reference ' '^retr-qTraro/' * 6. Patanjali 1. 3. 3. But the reference is a pure delusion ; on Pdnini and I think I may safely say that the maxim is not to be found in any part of the Mahdbhdshya. It would not be unreasonable, however, to infer that the author of the Padamanjari had this nyaya in view when he penned the following: IT^ 
( The Pandit, vol. x, page 282 ). Compare cfjHhfr^^re m Second Handful, 
II 
The maxim of the Brahman-ascetic. The vmui is a Buddhist ascetic, and therefore not a Brahman, but the expression ai^uisKTUT a Brahman. implies The that maxim though is used now by a the Buddhist authors he of was the formerly Kdvya- prakds'a ( page 68 ) and the Sdhityadarpana ( article 257 ) in exactly the same connexion. After giving an example of 'sug- gested meaning 
' in the the author form of 
' semblance of contradiction 
' 
of the latter work says: " 
$n?ui;*n3n^NR^5T^ra " 
9 which Mr. Pramadadasa Mitra renders thus: "Here, from the absence of the particle srf^ after the words grfrRf &cv the semblance of the ornament-named 'contradiction' is suggested. The suggested meaning, though strictly what is ornamented, is figuratively spoken of here as the ornament, with reference to its being an ornament in ano- ther condition as we use [ i. e. when it is expressed, not suggested ], just the word Brahman-mendicant, which, though it 
Indological Truths 
30 
etymologically means an absurdity, viz. a mendicant, or one not a Brahman, who VMS a Brahman. " 
is a Brahman, tropically signifies one who 
II 
Although the garlic has been eaten the disease is not cured. This proverb is applied as follows by Nrisimhasarasvati in his comment on the opening verse of the Veddntasdra: ";j 
It is found also in Veddntakalpataruparimala, page 37. 
The maxim of a beggar's obtaining a firm footing [in a pat- ron's house]. Perhaps approaching our "Give him an inch and he will take an ell." Taranatha explains it thus: 
' ' ^SJT 
It occurs in the Bauddha chapter of Sarvadars'anasangraha ( page 14 of Bib. Ind. edn. ) as follows : 
Here is Prof. Gough's rendering: "The Madhyamikas, ex- cellently wise, explain as follows, namely that the doctrine of Buddha terminates in that of a total void ( universal baseless- ness or nihilism ) by a slow progression like the intrusive steps of a mendicant, through the position of a momentary flux, and through the ( gradual ) negation of the illusory assurances of pleasurable sensibility, of universality, and of reality." 
I have met with one other example only, namely in Yenkata- natha's Tattvamuktdkaldpa, page 254 : " 
Indological Truths 
40 
s" II The subject under discussion here is For the cognate expression qt^iWlfcPI see the Second Handful. 
The nyaya of a gem or charm &c. [ as an obstructer or ex- citer of fire &c., by its presence or absence ]. This obscure nyaya is not in Raghunathavarma's collection, but is defined as follows in the Vdcaspatyam, page 4166 : 
srf^r 
I am much indebted to Mr. Arthur Venis for the following note elucidating the nyaya : " In their analysis of the notion of cause and effect many Indian writers distinguish between those cases in which the processes that intervene ( avdntara- vydpdra ) between the cause and its final product ( kdrya ) are known by ordinary experience ( lohasiddha ), and those other cases in which the intermediate stages are not thus known. Of the latter cases, while we know as a fact ( say these writers ) that, for example, a mani or a mantra will pro- duce a certain effect or prevent it from coming into existence, we are quite unable to explain the rationale of the process in terms of ordinary experience. All that can be said in such cases is that the mani or the mantra has the power ( s'akti ) to produce this or hinder that result. This postulate of a power transcending ordinary experience is the ^ffoT^Tf^nsT) aud its proper application ( pravritti ) is to the class of causes thus roughly described. If I remember rightly, another, and to us westerns a more interesting, example of this nyaya is the dou- ble fact of attention to something and attention away from something else. The lover, intent on discovering his mistress ( kdmini-jijndsd ), is psychologically dead to all that does not 
Indological Truths 
41 
concern her. But how should his attention to her cause atten- tion away from all the world beside ? Here, says the Indian psychologist, analysis of the how can proceed no further. The postulate of the ufafl^r niust be applied here; or, in other words, we can only say that attention to a thing has the power to cause ( s'akti ) attention away from something else." This question is discussed in Kusumdnjali i. 10, and Prof. Cowell's translation of the Jc&rikd and Haridasa's comment will be found helpful. I have met with the nyaya in the Sanks'epa- s'driraJca iii. 87, 88, 91; in TattvamuJctdkaldpa iv. 103, and better still, in v, 99 ; and in Vidvanmandana, page 59. 
The maxim of a frog's leap. Used by grammarians and others to express the passing from one rule to another over in- tervening ones. I noted it in the following portions of the Mahdbhdshya : 1. 1. 3 (vart. 2); 5. 2. 4 (2); 6. 1. 17 and 3. 49; and 7. 2. 117. I have met with it also in Jayaratha's commentary on Alankdrasarvasva 20 ("fcreq^rm^istfiaf^:"), where he says: 
See, too, Bhdmati 1. 3. 39, and Ballantyne's Aphorisms of the Nydya, ii. 80. 
The maxim of the central lamp. The idea is of a lamp in a central position shedding its light on all sides. It occurs in the Mundaka-bhdshya 1. 1. 
i ?TI^OIT^ *rr^foPT?*n3rm ^r ftnm" n Also in Ramatirtha on Veddntasdra (page 129): "fl^sr^IT" ^3r *RI?m *rr' 5 which is thus ren- 6 
Indological Truths 
42 
dered by Prof. Gougb ( in the Pandit for Feb. 1873, p. 212): " The term triad of sheaths has a double connection [ with both the preceding and following clauses], after the manner of a lamp placed in the middle of a door [ and throwing light both inwards and outwards.]." The following from Nydyamanjari, page 212, further illustrates the nyaya : "aj| ^fe^RI ^ewftaV II Akin to this is r> which is explained in the Pandit for Dec. 1867 as referring to the central ruby of a nose-ring which casts a lustre on the pearl on each side of it. 
To know the thing to be measured you must know the measure. This is quoted in the opening part of the Akshapada section of Sarvadars'anasangraha: " 
|| Prof. Cowell's translation is as follows: "In accordance with the principle that 
' to know the thing to be measured you must first know the measure,' proof ( pramana ) is first enunciated, and as this must be done by defining it, we have first a definition of proof." We find it too, in Tattvapra- dipikd (or CitsukU] ii. 18, as follows: "flmtftaiMfyipfafefcf &WIT^ 
\ rreTT8jm%*7R tftaT^Rfi f^I^" U Compare also the following from *Sankshepas'drira7ca (i. 487): " TT 
II See, too, Vivaranaprameyasangraha, page 86, and Sdnkhyakdrikd 4 ( " 5T?ri%i%: 
The maxim of the extraction of the interior spike of the 
*Its author, Sarvajnatmamuni, was a pupil of Sures'varacarya. See Mr. K. 13. Pathak's valuable paper Bhartrihari and Kumarila ( 1892 ), page 24. 
Indological Truths
﻿43 
Munja grass. The following verse from the Pancadas'i ( i. 42 ), with an extract from Ramakrishna's comment thereon will fully explain the meaning and application of the saying: 
n I srf 
I The illustration is a very ancient one, since it is employed in S'atapatha Brdhmana 4. 3. 3. 16, and in Katlia Upanisad vi. 17. The latter instance is as follows: " ?f CT33fol3rff'gwrf^^T^f ^<Jr." For the former, see this nyaya in the Superaddenda to Third Handful. It is found also in Brihaddranyakavdrtika 4. 4. 1277, 
The maxim of borrowed ornaments. Appearing in borrowed plumes. It is well illustrated by Naisadhacarita vii. 56: 
g^sfterfrrfj-i+i q ^T^JM rfT^F^^rra frrer^ i srv^^ ^xi: ^fof ?TTf^cI^ ^^TI^^" II On which Mallinatha comments thus : 
. ( Pan. 4. 4. 21 ) \ m33\*m3 Q^Vmtfoft the above form the nyaya is found in 
I have met with it in Khandanoddhdra, page 62, and in Kdvyapradtpatikd of Vaidyanatha Tatsat, page 173. 
This occurs in Abhinavagupta's comment on DhvanydloJca iu. 16 (page 159) in the following sentence: "^ ^ytgjr^^n^- and in the first edition I said that it 
Indological Truths 
44 
could only mean the maxim of an expanse of clods of earth [ as in a roughly ploughed field ]. Regarding however srerrc as a mislection for sr^cTC ^ would mean the maxim of a stone and a clod of earth, and would be synonymous with 3T$treytg;:*Tro of the dictionaries. Mr. M. R. Telang ( of the Bombay High Court) has however kindly suggested the following, with which I was quite unfamiliar. He says : " SSTE means a pebble and 3TC3N[ a table showing the varieties of metres &c. formed by different arrangements of the short and long syl- lables in prosody, music &c. The Indians make use of this process to find out the number of varieties of any number of given things. So the meaning of the nyaya can be better ex- plained by the expression the maxim of the process of per- mutations and combinations. 
It may be asked what ^ig (a pebble) has to do with permuta- tions and combinations. In finding out the number of varieties of any number of given things, a pebble is used for marking certain figures according to the Indian process with the help of sren*} <a^*te> TEuTS &c. These processes are well known to any one conversant with books on Indian music or prosody. The following references to books on the subject will support my statement. Vide ^rna^T^ Chap, i verses 61 to 69 (pages 57-60 ); suffi^'fa Chap, i ver. 144 to 154." 
Better is a certain kdrsJidpana than an uncertain nishlca. This and the proverb immediately following are found in the second chapter of Vatsyayana's Kdmasutra ( page 19 ), and are the equivalents of our saying "A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush." 
H 
Better is a pigeon to-day than a peacock tomorrow. See above. 
Indological Truths 
45Rf^lM^^ II 
Cutting o/the tongue while" trying to get a fine plantain. This is found in the Piirnaprajna section of Sarvadarsana- sangraha (page 64 of Bib. Ind, and 75 of Jivananda's edn.) as follows; 
Gough renders it thus: "Thus the statement of those ( Advaita-vadins ) in their thirst to be one with the Supreme Lord, that the supreme excellence of Vishnu is like a mirage, is as if they were to cut off their tongues in trying to get a fine plantain, since it results that through offending this supreme Vishnu they must enter into the hell of blind darkness," 
The maxim of worms bred in poison ( or, in manure ). Apte's Dictionary alone gives us this nyaya which he describes as follows : " It is used to denote a state of things which though fatal to others, is not so to those who, being bred in it, are inured or naturalized to it." In this case it might represent our " What is one man's food is another man's poison." Apte gives no reference to a passage where the maxim is used, and I am indebted for one to that veritable ratndJeara, Dr. Bohtlingk's Indisclie Sprilclie ( 6164 ). It consists of a quota- tion from Vriddha-Cdnakhya, a work which appears to exist in MS. only. It runs thus : 
The Doctor renders the last line by "Wozu lebst du, o 
Indological Truths 
46 
Freund ? Ich lebe nach Art des Mistkafers ( d. i. Ich suche das Beste heraus)." IE this is correct, the nyaya must be ex- pressive of "living in clover,"* or, amidst "marrow and fat- ness!" 
The maxim of the poisonous tree. This appears to be based on the second half of Kumdrasavribhava ii. 55 ( or Pa-nca- tantra i. 245 ), which runs thus: "feqfgnsfa *faJ mq tjTjJTflTWTrnj^ " "It would be improper to cut down even a poisonous tree, after cultivating it oneself." This is used as a maxim by the author of Khandanakhandakhddya ( page 727 ) in the following sentence:"^^ <ni!:...*renft>3 fr 
There is another capital instance of it in Upamiti- bhavaprapancd Kathd, page 715: " %\ fr fW^ sft 
!^T^ f^ i f^fajtsf^t 4^4 ^^f rai*Jra " 
ti 
The maxim of wave-undulation. This is used by the author of the Bhdshdpariccheda ( verses 165, 166 ) to account for the production of sound. He says " gr 
II Almost the same words are used by Vedantin Mahadeva ( latter part of 17th century ) in his comment on tidnkliyastitra V. 103:- fqjg ^sgr^^^^-^^ ^?^g^^-^T. *R ^T ?Jl?r|?t l^f: nt^oi *J1KT " "^ut sound comes to the seat of hearing in the same manner as the undulating waves [of water], or as the anthers of a [globulous] Kadamba- flower and is thus apprehended by the ear." The translation, is Dr. R Garbe's. 
Indological Truths 
47 
The maxim of the request of the aged spinster. This Is re- corded in Mahdbhdsya 8. 2. 3 as follows: 
II This would be applied to a senteuce having a variety of meanings. In Tantravdrtika, 2. 2. 2 (page 452) we meet with it as f^jnfra^srnfa ? an(^ *n ^ao Pandit for December 1867 ( page 156 ) we find exactly the same kind of thing under the heading f^sTTfTOIW^re:. This worthy was not only old but blind, and his request was " 
Wishing to grow, you have destroyed your root This is Prof. Cowell's rendering of the saying as it appears in the Sarva- dars'anasangraha ( page 27 Bib. Ind., p. 33 Jivananda ) : 
| In the Vdcaspcttyam, however, we have the literal and more usu- al meaning of the nyaya, namely "Whilst seeking to obtain interest, the creditor loses [ that and ] the capital too. " 
f%rsf*Tf^r ?TPT: 
srfT%: ii See also Khanda- nakhandakhddya, p. 31; Pancadas'i, vii. 81 ; Veddntakalpa- taru, page 321; and Syddvddamanjari, page 19. An amu- sing illustration of this saying is found in Kuvalaydnanda, under the figure 
Indological Truths 
48 
|| Raghunatha has two other maxims of the same kind, namely, " Jprf^f^T ^ *nr?^T vrmfa IS:", and " ^W- 
The maxim of the man and the arrow. Vardhamana ex- plains this, as follows, in his comment on Ganaratnamaho- dadhi iii. 196:" 3?rear T%S' JTI*HW <J^ sfclcT: *T ^ fff: | ^HT^ 3R3*Hten^" II A-u arrow is discharged from a bow, and at the same moment a man rises up from behind a wall and is killed by it. It illustrates, therefore, a purely accidental and unforeseen occurrence, and must be classed with the 
and others of a like nature. 
The maxim of the pebble and the [man's] emerging [from the water ]. This, like that immediately preceding, is found in Vardhamana's work, and on the same page. He explains it thus:" sr4u ^ fsrar s^rer ^r^rst <r^ ^fc*r5nfan^" n At the moment that the pebble is thrown, a man who has been diving or swimming emerges from the water and is struck by it. This, too, therefore, belongs to the ^gn^^ofTq and 
category. 
The maxim of the carter who would be beheaded rather than pay a hundred, but ivill at once give Jive score! It 
Indological Truths 
49 
occurs in the Purnaprajna section of Sarvadars'anasangraha ( page 71 of Bib.' Ind. and page 83 of Jivananda's) as follows: 
II "I f you say that you accept the falsity of the universe, but not its unreality, you are simply acting like the carter who would lose his head rather than pay a hundred pieces of money, but at once gives five score ! For falsity and unreality are synonymous. But enough of prolixity." 
It is found also in Atmatattvaviveka ( page 31 ), from which Madhava probably took it. In Tattvamuktdkcddpa ii. 71 (page 244) it takes the form of " 5ra*r%srcT: srarehci^fm") and there is still another variety of it in Khandanoddhdra, page 74, namely "f^R^sft ^T^off * ^TT% q^TTg^Rrj ^TT%. Compare with this the following from Nydyamanjarl, page 432: ajsjjf. 
II 
A snake in the head, and the doctor in another country 
! This occurs, in Prakrit, in Karptiramanjari iv. ( page 100 ). It is found in somewhat similar form in Mudrdrakshasa i. 21, also in Prakrit. The chlidyd is as follows. 
I 
The maxim of the parrot and the Nalikd-trec. Illustra- tive of causeless fear. In Udyoga-Parva xcvi. 42 we read I on which the commentator Nilakantha says : " 
Indological Truths 
50 
I have met with it also in a MS. ( No. 233 of 1882-83 in Deccan College, Poona ) of Narayana's commentary on Gopdlottaratdpamya-Upanishad and 22 of Bib. Ind. 8 ( corresponding with 21 edition ), where, expounding the words &c.," he says : " WT^IW 3<|^TK^II 
The maxim of seizing oxen by their horns. That is, by way of specification, and not in the sense of our proverb 
' Taking 
the bull by the horns!' krishna's commentary 561-2. The text runs on thus: This S'ankarananda's is "511^ very uW fa<*nf![*r*<TO: <gra clearly ST^ Atmapurdna put BPlrtl*w WSTfRf u in^Rftma- ^^ 1^ **% H iv. " 
On the latter verse, Ramakrishna says 
: 
' 
I ( Pan. 3. 3. 108-9 ) 
So too, in Sures'vara's shadbhdshya 1. 4. 866: on firaw maxim which in ^^^T Nilakantha Anandagiri ^I^T>T% :' vartika on 
" ^r^5m% says:-" &c-" The T same sense is on Udyoga-Parva XLV. 9 ( f^ 
ta.ched to 
where we read: 
ll A fourth instance of the employment of this maxim in the same sense is found ^r^Tlt ment on ^m^s^ S'dndilya-siitra ^WJTTf^^^n 87: "* fTRRnrcrfcr ??f:" U in the metrical com- ^^T^W^n^ I 
The passage is translated by Prof. Cowell as follows : " It will not do to hold that the connexion between the cause and its effect may be that 
Indological Truths 
51 
called 
' Intimate relation/ and not that called 
' Identity/ because it is a much more cumbrous assumption than ours and involves the connexion of 
' difference ;' and by our own we easi- ly get at the true meaning of the various S'ruti passages, seizing them one by one, as oxen by their horns." In a foot- note he adds : " That is, such passages as 
' Uktha is Brahman/ ' Praiia is Brahman 
' &c. S'ringagrdhikdnydya is a proverb sometimes explained as 'catching an unruly bull first by secur- ing one horn and then the second/ and sometimes, 'driving many oxen into a stall, by seizing them one by one by their horns'." In Bhdmati 3. 2. 22 ( page 566 ) we have the phrase 
again 
: " T*U JT^T^ TT nf *m" II Mr. F. W. Thomas has pointed out to me the which is quoted in the commentary on Dandin's Kdvyddars'a ii. 368. I think its usage must be similar to that of the above. 
The maxim of the hawk and the pigeon. Vardhaniana, in Ganaratnamalwdadhi iii. 195, explains it in the following way : " ^R35'fcr*ftf?3' ^^*Tt |*T1T: * q^5^?t" II This must be classed therefore with 5^3^^ and others of a similar kind. We have a -^q^qtcfT^^t^^T^f given in the table of contents which forms the opening part of the Afahdbhdrata, and the story will be found in Vanaparva cxcvi. There is another in chapter cxxxi. 
II 
The maxim of the mother-in-law who said, 'Be off' Thia quaint illustration appears in Sures'vara's Naishkarmyasiddhi 
Indological Truths 
52 
i. 28, as follows : "3Tp*T<TT*g<T'T?TT^ 
U "And since you now express agreement with that which we also acknowledge, your protracted discussion was as unreasonable as was the mother-in-law's saying [ to the mendicant ] 
' Be off.' 
' The commentator, Jnanottama, ex- plains this in the following manner : " 
5r9irgr" II "After abusing her daughter-in- law for refusing to give alms to a wandering mendicant, the mother-in-law called him back, and, when he had come, said to him, 'There are no alms, be off/ thus refusing also herself! 
' 
The maxim of a lion's glatice. This is based on a lion's habit of looking in front and behind, after killing its prey, to see if there is any rival to dispute possession! It is applied, says Taranatha, where a word in a sentence is connected, with what precedes and with that which follows it. It is not, how- ever, restricted to this. The expression occurs four times in the Taittiriya-Prdtis'dkhya, namely in ii. 51, iv. 4>, xiii. 3 and 15. Prof. Whitney remarks as follows on the first instance of its occurrence : " The 
' and' of this rule [mfatft|], the commenta- tor says, brings forward, on the principle of 
' the lion's look 
' 
( a distant glance backward ), the already defined organs of pro- duction of the various mute series." It is found also in Nila- kantha's comment TUT 7T^:) 
' on " H3gm$te*T*JI*M Vanaparva ccxxi. 1 
^H and fa JpsftftfcT" I u It was a favourite maxim of Vacaspatimis'ra's, have met with it eight times in three of his writings. It occurs in BJtdmati 2. 3. 6 ( page 473 ) ; in Sankliyatattvakau- inudi, 7 ( page 86 ); and in 97, 199, 230, 322, 403, 405. Nydyavdrtika-tdtparyatilxl, An example of a different pages kind is 
found in Hemachandra'sPa/*is/'i3/6/a>aruan, i. 63: 
' 
'f 
Indological Truths 
53 
The maxim of the needle and the boiler. It is explained as follows in Moleswprth's Manithi dictionary : " A phrase used as an illustration upon the occasion of two matters of which the one is superlatively simple and easy, or altogether insignificant, and the other indefinitely greater, more difficult, or more im- portant, arising at once to be done ; and of which it is intended to intimate that the trifling one should be despatched first." It occurs in the opening part of chapter iv of Kdvyapradipa, and again on page 70. Also in the commentary on Sdhityakaumudi iv. 1 , where the same MriJca is expounded. The following is from the Saptapaddrthi, page 21. The text runs thus: 
fs[^: i smrssmr ^ i srsmrfa *r^Rft f^HNrar i STOT " 
II On which the commentator remarks : "sr- 
fa || There is another good example of the maxim, with a lucid translation by Dr. Ballantyne, in the introduction to Book ii of his Aphorisms of the Nydya. 
The maxim of the rice in the cooking-pot. " In a cooking-pot all the grains being equally moistened by the heated water, when one grain is found to be well cooked the same may be inferred with regard to the other grains. So the maxim is used when the condition of the whole class is inferred from that of a part" (Apte's Sanskrit Dictionary). It is therefore equivalent to "Ex uno disce omnes." Patanjali seems to have laid the foundation of the nyaya in the following words, in Mahdbhdsya 1. 4. 23 ( vart. 15 ) : " w\$ %&.. 35^; ?sn<&\ ft^&TW" u Then we find it in Jaimini 7. 4. 12, the sutra with a portion of S'abara's 
bluisya being as follows : 
Indological Truths 
54 
Other instances of its occurrence are Tantravdrtika 3. 5. 19; Veddntakalpatarv^ip&ge 446; Kalpataruparimala, pages 115, 468, 667, 685 ; and Tattvamuktdkaldpa, 293. Of similar im- port is the following line from Hemachanclra's Paris-istaparva vii. 94: "f^Rffa H<n4 3TRf?cT f 
The maxim of the driving in of a post. As a post is driven into the ground by repeated efforts, so a position is strengthened by the bringing forward of a succession of facts or arguments. It occurs three times in S'ankara's bhashya on the Vedantasutras, as follows: "*T 
l. 34. " 
f%?TT^^%" 3. 3. 53. 
3. 4. 2. But S'abara seems to have originated it in his bhashya on Jaimini 7. 2. 1. 
One's own body does not kinder one. It is found at the end of the Akshapada section of the Sarvadars'anasanyraka, as follows : fJn^R 5T?3cT interfere with ";r ^m^ffT^ 
=3 God's ^HcT^W own " independence Nor ?Tfsfar: need ^TO you [as ^5?RWT^ object He ?T that this would thus *f^TT% would seem 
to depend on others' actions ], fcince there is the well-known saying, One's own body does not hinder one ;' nay rather it helps to carry out one's aims." This is Professor Cowell's trans- lation. 
Other instances of its employment are Bh&mati 3. 4. 20 (page 682); Tdtparyatzlcd, pp. 72. 90; Tdrkifairaksdtikd, page 50; Nydyamakarandatilcd, pp. 201, 215; and Khandanoddhdra, pages 58, 62. 
Indological Truths 
Indological Truths 
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA LIBRARY Los Angeles This book is DUE on the last date stamped below. 
1 & SET* 
V.D-URI. 
Form L9-Series 444 
Indological Truths 
Indological Truths 
UC SOUTHERN RE 
ffoooavoss 
5
﻿SANSKRIT BOOKS WITH ENGLISH NOTES, 
Price. Postage. R. A. K.A.P. Laukikanyayanjali ( a collection of popular sayings) 
by Colonel G.A. Jacob Part 10 6 010 Part II 12 010 Part III 1 4 020 Vedanta-sara of Sadananda, with English Notes by 
Colonel G. A. Jacob... ,.1 8 026 
Abhijnana-s'akuntala of Kaiidasa, with English 
Notes by N. B. Godabole B. A. ... 2 026 Pancha-tantra/ka of Vishnus'arman with English 
Notes by N. B. Godabole B. A- ... 2 8 040 Mudra-rakshasa of Vis'akhadatta, with English Notes 
byK. T. Telang, M. A. L. L. B., C. I. E. ... 1 14 040 Mrichchhakatika of S'udraka, with English Notes 
by Pandit H. M. S'arma M. A 2 030 Ritll-samhara of Kalidasa, with S'ringnratilaka and 
explanatory English Notes by N. B. Godabole B.A. 06010 Rik-sangraha with Sayana-bhashya and English Notes, 
by V. G. Bijapurkar M. A 2 020 Meghdllta of Kalidasa, with English Notes by N. B. 
Godabole B. A 12 016 Ratnavali of S'riharsha-deva, with English Notes by N. 
B. Godabole B. A 8 010 Bhatti-kavya of Bhatti, with English Notes by N. B. 
Godabolo B. A. ( 14th Sarga) 04006 ( 15th Sarga) 04006 Malavikagnimitra of Kalidasa, with English Notes 
by K. P.Parab 12 010 Hitopadesh with Englisb Notes by N. B. Godabole B. A. 1 016 Tarka-sangraha of Annam-bhatta, with his own 'gloss 
an.d an English Translation 6 010 
A life of the late Hon. Mr. JUSTICE Ranade 4 OyO 6 
TUKARAM JAVA; i, 
Proprietor, Nirnaya-sagar Press, 
Kalbad'evi Road. BOMBAY. 
Indological Truths 
038 
V.2 
01 
1EOOND HANDFUL OF POPULAR MAXIMS. 
Price 12 Annas. 
Indological Truths 
Indological Truths 
Indological Truths 
Indological Truths 
* II 
: 11 
A SECOND HANDFUL OF POPULAR MAXIMS 
CURRENT IN SANSKRIT LITERATURE. 
COLLECTED BY 
Colonel G. A. Jacob, 
INDIAN ARMY. 
Author of " Concordance to the Principal Upanishads, " " Manual of Hindu Pantheism," &c., &c. 
SECOND EDITION-REVISED AND ENLARGED, 
PUBLISHED BY 
TUKAEAM JAVAJI, 
PROPRIETOR "NIRNATA-SAQAR" PRESS. 
1909. 
Indological Truths 
[All rights reserved by the Publisher.] 
Registered under the Act XXV of 1867. 
Indological Truths 
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION. 
The issue, in Benares seven years ago, of an edition of Raghunathavarma's Laukikanydyasangraha, has made it un- necessary to reprint the Preface to the former edition of the present Handful, seeing that a good part of it was devoted to a description of that then-unpublished treatise. For the same reason I have omitted the appended list of nyayas contained in Raghunatha's work, and which, at no small expenditure of time and toil, I compiled from the two MSS. in the India 
Office Library. 
The whole of the explanatory matter attached to the nyayas has been thoroughly revised for this edition, and, in some cases, has been re-written. In addition to this the book will be found to contain thirty-two new nyayas, some of them of considerable importance, and all of them more or less interest- ing. The six Systems seem to be the most attractive part of the field for the study of similes of the class which predomi- nates in these pages; but grammatical commentaries also, appear likely to prove a not unfruitful field to the painstaking 
explorer. 
For the reasons given in the preface to the Third Handful I would gladly have seized this opportunity of eliminating the word 
' Maxims 
' from the titlepage ; but it was not politic to change the name adopted ten years ago and repeated in each new issue. 
It is not probable that this will pass into a third edition during my lifetime ; but I trust that in its present form it may prove helpful to young students whose reading has not bene quite so wide as my own. 
REDHILL, SURREY, \ r A TApn-R 23 Sept. 1900. / G. A. JACOB. 
Indological Truths 
Indological Truths 
Idst of additional authors quoted In the 
following pages. 
Ayamaprdmanya of Yamunacarya Swamin (Rainanuja's Para- 
maguru= guru's guru); Medical Hall Press, Benares 1900. 
Atmabodha of S'ankaracarya, edited, with Commentary, by 
Fitzedward Hall; Mirzapur, 1852. 
Atmatattvaviveka of Udayana, with four Commentaries ; Bib. 
Ind. Series, Part i, 1907. See also First Handful. 
Bodhicarydvatdra of S'antideva, with the Com. of Prajna- karamati, edited by Prof. L. de la Vallee Poussin ; Bib. Ind. Series, 1901-1907. Incomplete. Gaudapada's karikas on Mandukya* Upanisad ; Anandas'rama 
Sanskrit Series, Poona, 1890. 
Indian Thought, a quarterly Magazine edited by Dr. G. Thi- 
baut and Prof. Ganganatha Jha ; Allahabad, 1907. 
Kiranavali of Udayana, on Pras'astapada's bhdsya ; Benares 
Sanskrit Series, 1885 and 1897. A mere fragment. 
Klrtikaumudl of Somes'varadeva, edited by Abaji Vishnu 
Kathavate ; Bombay, 1883. 
Laukikanyayaratnalcara of Raghunathavarman ; India Office 
MS. 582. 
Madhyamakavritti of Candraklrti on Nagarjuna's karikas, edited by Prof. L. de la Vallee Poussin ; Bibliotheca Bud- dhica, St. Petersburg, 1903-1907. Incomplete. 
Mahabhdsya with the Pradlpa of Kaiyata, and Nages'a's Uddyota; edited by Mahamahopadhyaya Pandit S'ivadatta D. Kudala; voL i (Navahnika); Nirnayasagar Press 1908. A fine edition. 
Maliabhdsyapradlpoddyota of Nages'a Bhatta, in course of 
Indological Truths 
LIST OF BOOKS. 
publication in Bib. Ind Series, Calcutta ; Vols. i and ii; and part of iii, already issued. Medinl, a dictionary of homonymous words, edited by Soma- 
nath Mukhopadhyaya ; Calcutta, 1869. 
Nitis'ataka of Bhartrihari; Nirnayasagar Press, Bombay, 
Samvat 1947. 
NydyadlpdMali of Anandabodhacarya, published together with Nyayamakaranda in Chaukhamba Sanskrit Series, Be- nares, 1907. 
NyCiyamaldvistara of Madhavacarya ; Anandas'rama Sanskrit 
Series, 1892. 
Nydyamanjarlsdra, a Commentary on Nydyasiddhdntaman- 
jarl ; The Pandit, 1907. 
Nydyasiddhdnjana, of Venkantanath ( of Ramanuja's School ); 
Medical Hall Press, Benares, 1901. 
Pancapddikdvivarana of Prakas'atma Yati ; Vizianagram San- 
skrit Series, Samvat 1948. 
Paramdrthasdra of S'esha; Lucknow, 1876. Paribhdsendus'ekhara, Text and translation; Bombay San- 
skrit Series, 186874. 
Prabandhacintdmani of Merutunga ; Bombay, 1888. Transla- 
tion by Mr. C. H. Tawney; Bib. Ind. Series, 1901. Pramdnamdld of Anandabodhacarya, published with Nyaya- 
dlpavali, as above. 
Sdhityadarpana of Vis'vanatha Kaviraja, edited by Dr. Roer ; Bib. Ind. 1851. Translation by Dr. Ballantyne and Mr. Pramadadasa Mitra ; Bib. Ind. 1875. 
S'dlikd, or Prakaraiiapancikd, a treatise on Mimamsa accord- ing to the school of Prabhakara, by S'alikanatha ; Chau- khamba Sanskrit Series, 1903. Originally published in the Pandit, 1866 7. Portions of the work are missing. SarnbandliavdrtiJca of Sures'varacarya, translated by S. Venka- 
taramana Aiyar, B. A.: Medical Hall Press, 1905. 
Indological Truths 
WST OF BOOKS. VII 
Sarvdrthasiddhi, Venkatanatha's vritti on his own work Tat- tvamuktakalapa, for which see First Handful of Maxims. 
S'lokavdrtika of Kumarila, with Parthasarathi's tika ; Chaukhamba Sanskrit Series, Benares, 1898. Translation by Prof. Ganganath Jha ; Bib. Ind. Series, 1907. 
S'ribJidsya of Eamanuja, with Sudars'anacarya's tika, reprinted from the Pandit, 3 vols. 1889-91. An edition of the text only, edited by Rev. J. J. Johnson of Benares, is now nearing completion in the Pandit. Translation by Dr. G. Thibaut in Sacred Books of East Series, 1904. 
Tarkabhdsd of Kes'ava Mis'ra, with the tika entitled Nydya- pradlpa of Vis'vakarman ; Medical Hall -Press, Benares, 1901. 
Tattvabindu, a treatise on Mimamsa, by Vacaspati Mis'ra; 
Medical Hall Press, Benares, 1892. 
Tattvadvpana of Akhandananda Muni, a commentary on Pan- 
capadikavivarana ; Benares Sanskrit Series, 1902; 
Vaiydsikanydyamdld on the Vedantasutras ; Anandas'rama 
Sanskrit Series, Poona, 1891. 
Vdkyapadfya of Bhartrihari, kandas i and ii, Benares Sanskrit Series. 1887. An edition of kanda iii, otherwise styled Pmkirnaka, has been commenced in the same Series. 
Vedantaparibhdsd, with the S'ikhdmani and the tika of Amaradasa; Venkates'vara Press, Bombay, 1901. Trans- lation of the Paribhasa by Mr. A. Venis in the Pandit, 188285. 
Vidhirasdyana, a work on Mimamsa, by Appai Diksita ; Chau- 
khamba Sanskrit Series, 1901. 
Vishnu Purdna, with S'riratnagarbha Bhatta's Candrikd en. titled Vaisnavakuta ; Krishna S'astri Gurjara's Press, Bom- 
Indological Truths 
CORRIGENDA. 
Page 26, line 8. For "ts" say "as". Thisunsightly error crept 
in after the corrected proof had left my hands ! 
Page 28, line 16. For ^j^f read qw<4\. Page 30, line 1 1 from bottom. After m insert 
Indological Truths 
A SECOND HANDFUL OF POPULAR MAXIMS. 
Proclaiming the name of a son before he is lorn. That is, counting your chickens before they are hatched. The nyaya, in a negative form, is found in the Nydyamanjarl, page 345: 
37 
Even a slight difference [ between two or more things or expressions] establishes the fact [that they do differ, and enables us to discriminate between them ]. After ex- plaining the ^n^jj^r^pT and nine others of similar purport, Raghunatha says: " 
The nyaya occurs in Mathuranatha's commentary on the opening paragraph of 
Atmatattvaviveka (page 19 ), where, after stating that, accord- ing to the Buddhists, moksa is brought about by the know- ledge of the non-existence of soul, he says : "ddiVMj^ | A^IWKfg 3Tt$rer ^5 ^R" *C^d I STRlW^f^t ^^ s^i^rf^i^n^oi: II ^% I *T ^ tt ^<lcW<i(k^4 ^I^^U 
Indological Truths 
Better even a doubtful condition of things than a crushing defeat. This occurs in the Nydyavdrtikatdtparyatikd 5. 1. 43. ( page 491 ): " itf% &P T *$<ft ddl^ 
II On page 473 of the same, and in Nyayamanjari, page 620, it appears %: II It is not in any of the lists of nyayas to which I have had access, but Raghunathavarman has two of the same purport, namely " JTROTPT ( which see below ), and " muii^T sqrfa: "; andj in Nydyamdld- vistara 6. 2. 7. Madhava gives us "sreRgTurm^jHiCN;" II All of these seem akin to our " Half a loaf is better than no bread. " 
The method of ittuwry attribution followed by its with- drawal. This nyaya belongs entirely to the Vedantists, but I follow Raghunatha in admitting it here. The two terms are explained as follows in the Veddntasdra: "Illusory attribu- tion is the attributing to the real of that which is unreal ; as a snake is imagined in a rope which is not a snake." "The with- drawal is the assertion that the whole of the unreal, beginning with Ignorance, which is an illusory effect of the Real, is no- thing but the Real; just as a snake, which is the illusory effect of a rope is nothing whatsoever but the rope." This rendering is from my Manual of Hindu Pantheism,, pages 44 and 83. On page 42, there is the following note which includes a quota- tion from page 209 of that valuable book A Rational Refuta- tion of Hindu Philosophical Systems: 
"12. Illusory attribution &c. ( adhydropdpawxla ). 
In order to describe the pure abstraction Brahma, the teacher 
Indological Truths
﻿3 
attributes to him, or superimposes on him, certain qualities which in reality do not belong to him, and then afterwards withdrawing them, teaches that the residuum is the undiffer- enced Absolute. When the Vedantins speak of the origin of the world, they do not believe its origin to be true. This mode of expression they call false imputation ( adhydropa ). It con- sists in holding for true that which is false, in accommodation to the intelligence of the uninitiated. At a further stage of instruction, when the time has arrived for propounding the esoteric view, the false imputation is gainsaid, and this gainsay- ing is termed rescission ( apavdda )." 
See also a long note on page 172 of the text of the Veddnta- sdra. The verse in the Vivekacuddmani, there referred to, should be 140 instead of 170. 
The maxim of a looking-glass for a blind man. It is found in Upamitibhavaprapancd Kathd, page 836, as follows: 
\ f i: " 
|| See also S'esanantacarya on Nydyasiddhantadlpa, page 22, line 2. The Laukikanydyaratndlcara gives the fol- lowing example:"^^ <nfa% , ^ ?nfo *nf sr^T STTW rRT SJTtfcT 1%14 I sfcRTWlt feClH^ ^ifa: f% ^STfw " 
II I have no doubt that the reference is to the Yogavdsishtlia, but the verse is also found in the Hitopades'a (iii., 115). See, too, under 
One who leans on a blind man will fall with him at every step. This is akin to the saying " If the blind lead the blind, both will fall into the ditch." It occurs in Bhdmatl ( page 20 ) 
Indological Truths 
as follows: "; 
I 
|| Compare the following expression in Venkata- natha's vritti on his TattvamuJddlcaldpa T: " 
II iii. 50: " ^% ^|^^ Though not exactly parallel with the nyaya, be the following out of place verse of Jayanta's ( page 120 ) will not 
here: " ^*M3llfcMI-^T f^W qrJ 
Noisy boasting Ufa that of an [ unskilful ] archer whose arrows always miss the mark. This simile occurs in the Atmatattvaviveka (page 49), but was no doubt borrowed from Magha ii. 27: 
" The chatter of a talkative man who has no knowledge of affairs, is as useless as the swaggering of an archer whose arrows always miss the mark." 
The simile of crying in the wilderness. Used to imply wasted effort. Molesworth defines it as "A term for unregard- ed or unavailing complaint or supplication. " The following verse from Namisadhu's comment on Rudrata's Kdvydlankdra viii. 37 includes not only this nyaya but also Raghunatha's 
Indological Truths 
probably his 3^4^1^1*1; for Dr. Bohtlingk, who quotes the verse as from Pancatantra, gives ffinsgWK^ui: as a variant 
See also Pancatantra i. 393; Kirandvali page 5', and Kusu- manjali, voL ii, page 176. 
He has the right who has the want, the power, and the wit This nyaya is found in the Jairnini section of Sarvadars'ana- sangraha as follows: "gjsff ^r?Jf f^gMf^^d ^ ^I^T ^f- " u fessor Cowell translated it thus: "According to the old rule ' He has the right who has the want, the power, and the wit,' those who are aiming to understand certain things, as the new and full-moon sacrifices, use their daily reading to learn the truth about them." 
The saying is found in a more complete form in Vaiydsika- 
nydyamdla 1. 3. 9, namely, "grs 
which is itself a reproduction of the following passage in S'dnkarabhasya 1. 3. 25: 
Dr. Thibaut renders it thus: "The Sastra, al- though propounded without distinction (i. e. although not itself specifying what class of beings is to proceed according to its precepts), does in reality entitle men only ( to act according to its precepts ); for men only ( of the three higher castes ) are, firstly, capable ( of complying with the precepts of the S'fistra ); 
Indological Truths 
6 
are, secondly, desirous ( of the results of actions enjoined by the S'astra ); are, thirdly, not excluded by prohibitions ; and are, fourthly, subject to the precepts about the Upanayana cere- mony and so on. This point has been explained in the section treating of the definition of adhikara ( Purva Mlmanisa vi. 1)." For the last-mentioned, see under srf^PRTRT in the third Handful This question of sroTc^ &c. will be found also in S'ankarabhasya 1. 1. 4 ( page 54 ); 1. 3. 26, 33, 34; and 2. 2. 10. 
II 
The simile of the slaying of one half [of a body, whilst the other half is kept alive ! ]. Raghunathavarman defines it as tollows: 
3gnn*lrflfd 3w4:" II The nyaya is therefore expressive of absur- dity, contradiction, or incongruity; and so, in some respects, resembles the arvlHtflqi|K|. The earliest example, known to me, of the use of the term is in Kumarasambliava iv. 31, where Rati complains that, by destroying Kama, Fate had slain half of herself. The verse stands thus:" fcRni fomv&KJ ^3 irf bNH^ ftgaidi i swmRiPi isr^rar^1 Jrsnra TCRTT ^ft " u Mallinatha points out that as the slaying of a part involves that of the whole, Rati here announces her own destruction also, as is clearly implied in the second half of the verse. Its employ- ment here by Kalidasa, however, is in a literal sense, whilst the philosophical writers apply it figuratively. 
In the latter part of S'ankara's bhasya on Brahmasiitra 3. 3. 18 we find the expression "^ u4%JRT *T*r^RT", and I have noted it in Tantrrawrtika, pages 84, 89, 97 and 202. The first of the four passages is the following: "srfrfr* %fei%5 * ^rT- JrR*3Wr: I fert$ <cM4i5MftrfrT ^K^mq, " 
II In this passage, as well as in the other three, contradiction or inconsistency 
Indological Truths 
is clearly implied. So, too, in a passage in Nydyakandali, page 6, line 3; and in Khandanakhandakhadya, page 685. One more example will suffice, namely Brihadaranyavdrtika 1. 4. 1276: " ^ =^TvJ<^i 5% <nta?i*i 1%^%^ I ^^|*H f^1 
^T?TT sh^j: ^t^f^f^d^l^d: " 
II Anandagiri explains this in the manner stated above by Raghunatha, viz. " 
Failing to obtain a lovely woman, affection is seen [to have been lavished ] on animals. This very stupid nyaya ia expounded by Raghunatha as follows:" ^ifaebi^ifrsg'TTff 
- < 5^rnr: I 4j-d=bll ?: ll I have met with it only in the Atmatattvaviveka (page 130) and in Anandabodhacarya's Pramdnamdld, page 2. 
The simile of a she-mule's being in foal Raghunatha ex- plains it thus:" dHgj M*HfeT:*<mtTM |c^4> ^R 1& 
|| The following verse, bear- ing on this subject, is found in Hitopades'a, ii. 135, Panca- tantra, ii. 32 and iv. 14:"^^ 3 srf^ 3^: ^Ml^^fd I f ^+N i;Tfrf Jnl?T^?rf1r ^nri " 
II As Dr. Peterson points out in his Note on the verse from Hitopades'a, the second line is found in Adiparva (Bombay edn.) CXL. 83 (not 75, as wrongly printed ), and in S'antifxwva CXL. 30 ( not 347 as stated ). In a footnote to Indisclie Sprilche 58, Dr. Bohtlingk quotes Nilakantha's comment on the verse from S'antiparva* 
Indological Truths 
8 
SRJW wfa srfol^." Of like import are two other nyayas quoted by Haghunatha, namely qr^ft- i^rjjm and ffacnu!Mnr. As to the former of these, compare the following, Vanaparva CCLXVJII. 9 ( Bombay edn. ): 
n This verse is quoted by Johnson in his Notes on Hitopades'a II. 147, and he adds, " In the Gulistan, the Persian poet Saadi declares that the young of the scorpion eats its way out through the mother's entrails"; and in te*flsi*3J VedoMdkalpataru, ftf$ra ^dMl-Md. page 354, " Udayana line 2, we are told "ffaj^jT- ( in AtmatattvaviveJca, page 67, line 9 ) seems to assert the same thing of the crab: 
The simile of the opium-eater and tltefislierman. I have not met with this in actual use in the literature, but include it on the authority of Raghunathavarman, whose interpretation of it, however, seems most by of him to mean the West as " an Post intoxicating " 
( " improbable. ^|W plant, aftafaf^Ff: known The word in ifr^ft the sr^ language TTSTTW- is said 
vjlViquj^" phers; but, ). in This Bate's meaning Hindi of dictionary, aT% is unknown ^T to is the said lexicogra- to mean " the poppy-plant ; an infusion of the poppy formerly much used as a slow poison ; " head or capsule; an intoxicating whilst Fallon defines it drug." We must as "Poppy- take srnf therefore in the sense of srf^fcr which is the original of the modern sr^RT, opium. The story on which the maxim is said to be based is as follows: 
STTT I 
|| This nonsense is meant to teach the identity of the individual with the one Self! 
Indological Truths 
II 
That which at the beginning and the end has no [real] existence, has none either during the intervening period. The Vedantists of S'ankara's school hold that existence is of three kinds, namely, pdramdrthika ( true ), of which Brahma is the sole representative, vydvahdrika (practical), to which all phenomena belong, and prdtibhasika ( apparent ), which in- cludes such things as a snake surmised in a rope, or nacre mis- taken for silver. The second and third kind, therefore, have no real existence from the beginning to the end of their sup- posed existence. 
Raghunatha says regarding it:" 
ll He may have taken the nyaya, like so many others in his book, from the Yogavdsistha where it is found as the first line of 4. 45. 45; but its real source is Gaudapada's karikas on the Mdndukya Upanisad. It occurs twice there, namely in ii. 6 and iv, 31. 
Watering a mango-tree, and, at the same time, satisfying the Manes with a libation. Bringing about two results by one operation. Its earliest occurrence is in the Mahdbhasya, where it appears twice. In 1. 1. 1 ( page 14 ) it stands thus: 
I 
instance is in 8. 2. 3. 
The nyaya in its consolidated form is found in the following passage of the Nydyamanjarl ( 5. 1. 39 ), page 634. 
It is not in any of the dictionaries or lists of nyayas. 2 
Indological Truths 
10 
Questioned as to mango trees, he speaks of Kovidara trees. This is nyaya 223 of the second part of Raghunathavarman's large work, the Laukikanydyaratndkara, and is applied by him as follows (page 41 9a of India office MS. 582): "^SJT 
iridMi^cfc+iiTfi'!!: MldMI^I- 
is found in 22 ( page 145 ): "^mi^m 
kalpataru 1. 4. 1 (page 201 ): "^ 2 <T ^&?Mt 
II There also an excellent example in the Nyayavartikatatparyatika, page 187, line 16, and another on page 545 of the comment on Tattvamuktdkaldpa. Its source, however, is Mahdbhdsya 1. 2. 45 (vart. 8):-" 
Butter is life. This scarcely deserves a place amongst maxims, but I follow Raghunatha in admitting it. It is one of the stock illustrations of writers on Alankara, and is found in Namisadhu's comment on Rudrata's Kdvydlanlcara vii. 83, as follows: 
31'3W 
I have traced it, however, as far back as Tait.-Samhitd 2. 3. 2. 2, and have met with it again in Mahdbhdsya, 1. 1. 59 ( vart. 6 ), and 6. 1. 32 ( vart. 6 ). For the last passage see " ^TsTJpf srerSTT 33*: " in the Third Handful. Sures'vara too furnishes an excellent example of it in his large vdrtika 1. 5. 1848:" qft^T 
II 
Indological Truths 
11 
The illustration of one who is satisfied with sweetmeats in prospect. It is found in a verse quoted in Nyayakandati, page 130: 
T H 
The same verse is quoted on page 37 of Khandanakhanda- khddya, and is translated by Prof. Ganganatha Jha (in the new periodical, Indian Thought) as follows: "But, says an objector, from your theory it would follow that those who enjoy merely imaginary sweets, and those who eat real sweets, would have exactly the same experiences of flavour, strength, nutritive effects, and so on. He, we reply, who flatters himself with the hope of this objection invalidating our view, truly himself feeds upon imaginary sweets (fomaifi 5nvny<4minft<HHc> )" In Nyayadlpavali, p. 7, we read "^uii 
II 
The illustration of the arrow-maker. Used of one wholly engrossed in his work, and unconscious of his surroundings. It is based on the following verse of S'dntiparva, chapter 178:- 
qrnj; " 
(I S'ankara makes use of it in his exposition of Vedanta- sutra 3. 2. 10 ["gr^s^MRi; q^iMiq;." In the case of one in a swoon ( there is not entrance into either of the states of sleep &c. ), so, by the only remaining alternative, there is a semi- entrance (into sound sleep and another state)]. He says: 
" 
II Anandagiri 
Indological Truths 
12 
refers to the same nyaya in his comment on Sures'vara's large Vdrtika 1. 5. 106 ( page 816 ). See, too, Nydyamalcaranda- tlk(i, page 78. Compare with this the picture drawn by John Banyan of "a man who could look no way but downwards, with a muck-rake in his hand. There stooda Iso one over his head with a celestial crown in his hand, and proffered him that crown for his muck-rake ; but the man did neither look up nor regard, but raked to himself the straws, the small sticks, and the dust of the floor". 
The arrow. simile of It is found the gradual diminution in Brahmasutrabhasya of 3. the 3. 32: speed " 
of JTfrT- an *&m *4<Umfl g^fcl IWTTT%IT%:" ranyavdrtika- 1. 4. 1529 ( page || 736 ) we Then, in Brihadd- 
read as follows: 
" The experience of passion and other mental conditions, owing to the continuance of the body caused by the remnant of fruc- tescent works, is like the [ diminishing ] speed of a [ potter's ] wheel or of an arrow." Upon which Anandagiri remarks: 
II 3T2TT fW H<T<oHI$IMI<^Hiy^l^4 *t7?m 
' 
^PT^THSg^nTt ^TfrTT^T I f *STTTO g(Mlfe<a4;" II The quo- tation is Veddntasutra 4. 1. 19. In S'ankara's most interesting exposition of sutra 4. 1. 15, we meet with the expression 
in the same connection. 
The idea of something higher is to be superimposed upon something lower. This is Dr. Thibaut's rendering of the nyaya as it occurs in Brahrnasutrabhasya 4. 1. 5 ( the sutra being 
Indological Truths 
13i <VM i 
STTO': I T the following reply. The contemplation on Brahman is exclu- sively to be superimposed on Aditya and so on. Why ? 'On ac- count of exaltation.' For thus Aditya and so on are viewed in an exalted way, the contemplation of something higher than they being superimposed on them. Thereby we also comply with a secular rule, namely the one enjoining that the idea of something higher is to be superimposed upon something lower, as when we view and speak of the king's charioteer as a king." Vacaspatimis'ra, in his comment on the above in the Bhamatl, changes the form of the expression to " ft 
an(i perhaps Kamanuja had this in mind when, in his very short comment on the sutra, he wrote 
The simile of the snake whose fangs have been extracted. The illustration is used by BrihaddranyaJcopanisJiadbMshya Sures'vara in his vartika on 
1. 4 1746 ( page 776 ): 
It is wrong to quarrel with that on which one's livelihood depends. It is found in Paribhashendus'ekhara 85, as follows:- 
" 
II Professor Kielhorn has rendered it thus: " <-|P^md 
' a combination 
' is the junction of two ( things ; that which is taught in ) a rule ( the applica- tion of ) which is caused by such ( a combination ), does not 
Indological Truths 
14 
cause ( the application of ) another ( rule ) which would destroy that combination. This ( Paribhasha ) is founded on the maxim that one must not be hostile to that to which one owes one's 
existence." 
There are references to the nyaya in the following works: Khandanakhandakhadya, page 128; Veddntakalpataru, pages 231, and 556 ( especially the latter ); Parimala, pages 10, 11, 12, 451; TSyayamakarandatika, page 149. 
The illustration of the camel and the stick. The equivalent, apparently, of " Hoist with his own petard 
" 
( Hamlet, Act iii, Scene iv ), The following is Raghunatha's exposition of it: 
<?md f<if-^i4+i 11111 Mmin' <i-+< <i 
II It occurs in 
the following passage of the Atmatattvaviveka ( page 54, line 16 ): "<|| There is another instance of it in Veddntakalpa- taru, page 118 (where it appears as the ^g^d-mq ) ? and again in Nydyadipavali page 6, line 11. 
II 
The simile of rain on a saline barren waste. Its application is similar to that of amuffl^H, which see above. Hemacandra has a good example of it in his Parisis' taparvan viii. 417: 
Tn ''*< <^ii^M<'^*t3'3,i ei^ 
Indological Truths 
15 
In Anus'dsanaparva xc. line 4314, we read: " 
ii 
JVo one tries to accomplish in a round-about way a thing which can be effected counterpart of gj^p Vacaspatimis'ra in by direct ^^T^ f^^T his Nydyavdrtikatdtparyatllcd. means. &c-> This nyaya is the ar>d is used twice On page by 
195, we read:" ^ ^ ^r^W bl<um^4fi<4di ^c(^|Again on page 203: " i NHi*i('Hit> ' H A still older example is found in S'dlika, page 86: 
J a- n 
See, also, TarkabTidsd, page 48, line 5. 
H 
Bare assertion is no proof of the matter asserted. This is Professor Gough's rendering of the saying as found in the Bauddha chapter of the Sarvadars'anasangraha ( page 10 of Jivananda's eda ): " q-f^ qjfsicMI 
r i T srw: i II The following is from the Laukikanydya- sangraha: " ^r^cHi^^O1 Mkt^l 
|| The nyaya "^% ^i%^wrapJira%%:'' is given in Raghunatha's list as one of similar import. Compare Nydyavdrtika, page 345, line 11: "sr ^ 5r%g7 5rf% 
Indological Truths 
16 
u 
Whilst avoiding one kind of fallacy, another kind ap- pears! This is explained by Raghunatha as follows: "^ 
<m^ v* ( fo (^ 1. 1 M 4d " 
II The work here entitled Bauddhddhikara is styled Bauddha* dhikkdra in Hall's Index ( pp. 81, 82 ). It is more generally known as AtmatattvaviveJca ; and the passage in question is found on page 108, as follows:" 3^3 gff 
II The same passage is clearly referred to in Citsukhi I. 24 (Pandit, vol- v. page 110 ): " % 
T " 
II So, too, Venkatanatha in the comment on his Tattvamuktakalapa- iii. 22 ( p. 289 ), and again in his Nydyasiddhdnjana, page 100. For a clear and concise definition of the three terms ^T^^lP-l^, ^^mf&< and f^, see Apte's Practical Sanskrit Dictionary, s. v. 
The illustration of a cow [tied] in an enclosure. This occurs in Khandanakhandakhddya, page 632: "q 
The commentator explains as follows: " 
^i^id: u add that the long passage beginning with the words "f ^T%," n page 632, down to the words "^^rr %f' on page 637, is taken ver&atfira from Udayana's A tTnatattvaviveka, pages 70 to 72. It includes another, and probably the earliest, example of the use of the nyaya "4*mr^T 4Hu*oi|fti|g:", for which, see the first Handful of maxims. 
Indological Truths 
17 
The simile of the golden ornament on the neck A person is supposed to have a golden ornament round the neck and yet to be unaware of it until some one points it out ; a kind of illustration greatly in vogue amongst Vedantists, who tell us that although we are already Brahma, and free, we are not aware of the fact until instructed by a competent teacher ! For the translation of a passage of the Veddntaparibhashd bearing on this, see pages 130 and 131 of my Manual of Hindu Pantheism. The above nyaya is found at the top of page 130 
of Atmatattvavivelca. 
The simile of the fruit of the plantain tree. For explanation of this see spa^fift'T^ferTO'. Another instance of it is found in Naiskarmyasiddhi iv. 14: "ai^NN^aifa ^^T cfcW W." See, also, Bodhicaryavatdra i. 12. 
The simile of the woodapple on the [ open palm of the ] hand. Said of something unmistakably clear "as plain as a pike-staff"! It occurs in Sures'vara's large Vartika 2. 1. 95: 
Again in 2. 5. 136 of the same: " 
third instance is found in 4. 3. 1334, and there is another in the vartika on the Taittiriyopanwhadbliasliya, page 200. Of exactly the same import is the ^^fin^^^i^r, for which see the former Vartika 3. 1. 14. 
Indological Truths
﻿Abundance of labor produces abundance of fruit; from great pains come great gains. It occurs in the following passage of Vidyaranya's Vivaranaprameyasangraha, page 
T**n*j- 
I Compare S'abara's 10. 6. 62. and 11. 1. 15. It is quoted in Parimala, page 600. 
The simile of the man who eats from a brazen vesseL Raghunatha explains it thus:" jjqr ft 
The nyaya is taken from Jaimini's sutra 12. 2. 34, where S'abara interprets it as follows: "efri^+flfjHrji 
f% " u The principle here laid down is that of some one's doing something which he is not bound to do, in order that he may not hinder another who is required to do it* The converse, that is, of a man's abstaining from doing something, possibly harmless in his case, lest another should do the same and suffer harm. " If meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world standeth, lest I make my brother to offend, " 
Examples of the nyaya are found in Tantravdrtilea, pages J393, 577, and 907; in Vidhirasdyana, page 50; in Bhdmatl, page 478; in Vedantakalpataru, pages 314, 425, 502, 517; and in Parimala, pages 462, 572, 666. 
Indological Truths 
19 
The simile of the crow's and owl's night-time. What is day to the former is night to the latter, and vice versa. This characteristic of the owl is often referred to by the poets, as, for instance, in Bhartrihari's Nttis'ataka 93: 
The nyaya is found is Sures'vara's large vartika 1. 4. 313: 
Anandagiri comments on this as follows: 
'TTT hH ^T rT^n ^T^n^T^5TTI I l^fT Nij<^tc|(^%" II The quotation in the second line of Sures'vara's verse is from Gltci ii-69 which reads thus: "^n f^RTT ST^rRt <T^Tt ^rmfi ?Pnft I *I*ri 3mn% ^nf^ ^TT PRTT q^T^t 5^:" II In Naiskarmyasiddhi iii. Ill the nyaya is quoted as ^c&bfctallcT^. The passage stands thus: 
4HJ'5l 
<Wi^l*m^.l (:*lir :5S^TT3TrSl ^ 4 WiR II 
The principle of the reproduction, in the effect, of certain qualities, in the proportion in which they exist in the produc- 
Indological Truths 
20 
ing cause. In the Veddntasdra, section 12, we read: " 
II Q which, the commentator Nrisimhasarasvati remarks: 
:" II For full notes on ^r^ioi, see page 176 of the Veddntasdra referred to above. 
The illustration of the redness of cotton [produced by smearing the cotton-seeds with red lac ]. One of the stock illustrations of the Buddhist when seeking to establish the doctrine that all existence is momentary (^onri^T^). For the examination and refutation of the tenet, see S'ankara on Brahmasutras 2. 1. 18, 2. 2. 20 &c.; and the opening part of the Arhata chapter of Sarvadars'anasangraha. The nyaya is contained in the following verse: 
This is quoted in Syddvddamanjarl, pages 155 and 193 ; in Manibhadra's comment on karika 5 of Saddars'ana- samuccaya; in a slightly altered form, on page 1501 of Brihaddranyalcavdrtika; in Nyayamanjarl, page 443 ; in the vritti on Tattvamulddkalapa i. 29 ; and in the Arhata section of Sarvadars'anawnyraha, where Professor Cowell renders it: "In whatever series of successive states the original impression of the action was produced, there verily result, just like the redness produced in cotton 
:>. accrues the We find the 
frml*UHH*lPdiglT< in Nyayamanjarl page 465, in the con- cluding portion of the author's ^UI^^H^I^, and the following extract from the Atmatattvaviveka (page 102) explains the process: q^r miq*i=w5+<s<:f HKg.cn *ii4Hi^m 
Indological Truths 
21 
fM t r^f^TT." In the closing verses of the EUiqUsH^K (S'lokavdrtika, page 267) Rumania deals with this Buddhist illustration in connection with a citron (^jf^O instead of the cotton plant; and we meet with it again in Bliamatt 1. 1. 4 ( page 95 ). 
What lias a seller of ginger to do with ships ? Possibly the equivalent of "No cobbler beyond his last." It occurs in the fol- 
lowing passage of Atmatattvaviveka, page 62, line 10: 
A wise man should not imagine that he can remove with a Jinger-nail that which can only be cut down with an axe. A caution against under-rating the strength of an enemy. It occurs in Upamitibhavaprapanca Katha, page 1044: 
^xiit^W^fll ^^TRn^^J?! T HC'^dJ II 
Compare Udayana's saying in KiranavaU, page 74:" 
Like a decoration without a wall [ to be decorated; or, like a 
Indological Truths 
22 
painting without a canvas ]. An unreality, like a hare's horn &c. It is found in the Nyayamanjarf,, page 103, in a disquisi- tion on 
A much older example is contained in Sdnkhyakarika 41: 
t f^TT " 
ii 
There is a similar thought in Aniruddha's comment on Sdnkhyasutra iii. 12. He says: "qincTRT tor ^tsfW!% 5T- grmd^T 5jcf^sffrn% JT^IT: ^nci; i ^ %cf?^ i q^n^^11! I%TT T ^ITT f^TT% f^TT q- W ^r^" II See also Mallinatha on Tarkikarahsa, page 111 and 176. 
The simile of milk and water. Used to illustrate the most intimate union of two or more things. The oldest example of it known to me is in Mahabhasya 1. 2. 32: 
." Writers on Alankara employ it to exemplify the figure called Sankara (Commixture), in which there is a combination of other figures. It differs from Samsrishti (Collocation) which is compared to the union between rice and sesamum, which is less intimate and easily distinguishable. The author of the Alankarasarvasva- (page 192) says: 
Indological Truths 
23 
Similarly too in Sarasvatikanthdbharana ( page 262 ): 
: i 
ST 3 STrKT 
It will be noticed that here there is mention of a third kind of combination which is likened to that of man and lion. The 
three kinds are noticed in Kuvalaydnanda, also (page 337), as follows:" st 
The simile of pigeons alighting on a threshing-floor. Used by writers on Alankara to illustrate the production of a certain effect by the simultaneous action of numerous causes. In Sdhi- tyadarpana ( 739 ) we read:" qg^pfteifl *&!* fc ^^f *m*% I *s& ^MIIdcbMNMccfe<; ^uq^isf^ %q;" II "The conjunc- tion is when notwithstanding the existence of one cause suffi- cient to bring about an effect, there are represented others pro- ducing the same, according to the maxim of the Threshing-floor and the pigeons." See this, also, very concisely put, in Alankdrasarvasva, page 161, and in Kuvalayananda, p. 240. There is further reference to this nyaya in Mallinatha on Magha x. 16, and in Nyayamdldvistara 11. 1. 3. 
Indological Truths 
24 
A lamp which lias gone out will burn up again if touched with sulphur-powder. The use of this illustration will be seen from the following passage of the vritti on Tattvamuldakalapa ii. 65: " ?T W^3 5$ni^ 
The simile of the partition of the flesh of an Iguana whilst it is still in its hole! Used to illustrate an impossibility. Ra- ghunatha says of it: " 
MMd^." It occurs, in the form given above, in Khandanakhandakhddya page 640: 
I! 
The simile of the slioes on the neck. This qtlaint iiyaya appears to be used when an opponent is compelled to accept certain conclusions or else adopt an utterly absurd alternative- It occurs three times in CitsuJcfii. The first instance is in i. 11 (Pandit, voL IV, page 484), as follows: 
rdi-Hi4 srft 
i || This verse is quo- ted in the second chapter of the Vedantaparibhaslid, and a 
Indological Truths 
25 
translation of it, and of the comment on it, by Professor Venis will be found in the Pandit for 1883, page 660. I subjoin that portion which contains the simile. "For the existence of these things cannot be surmised anywhere but in their sub- strates ...... , and if the existence of these things, in their sub- strates, cannot be surmised..., then the unreality of things is the only conclusion (forced upon us), much in the same way that a man must hang his shoes round his neck if he will not wear them on his feet." The other two examples are in i. 26, and ii. 16 (Pandit, vol v, pages 112 and 435). It is found also in Atmatattvaviveka, page 45, in Khandanoddhdra, pages 7 and 124, and in Upamitibhavaprapancd Kathd, page 284, in the erroneous form "7^5 inf^i." 
The explanation given by Eaghundthavarman differs en- tirely from the above, and is extremely far-fetched and unsatis- factory. He says:" ^^dl^MMM^qr^R1 M**mE>*lfr * ST- 
l l 
The robbers have got away with the booty ; who is able to intercept them ? This saying is quoted by Vacaspatimis'ra in his comment ( on page 59 ) on Nyayavartika 1,1. 2. " snrnrt- 
37 ^fi \ ?r 
3 1% d^^id i*qM<^?><<4 I T^TT^: 
I lfd " 
II It is found also in Khandanod- 
dhara, page 119. 
4 
Indological Truths 
26 
The simile of a lighted lamp inside a vessel. Raghunatha points out that a lamp so placed illuminates only the interior of the vessel, and he applies it to one whose knowledge of Brah- man is of a low order. The maxim is used very differently, however, by Anandavardhana in his Dlivanydloka iii. 33 ( page 190), ts the following extract will show: " 
Abhinavagupta, when explaining Dhvanydloka i. 12, refers to this passage in the following words: "^ ir 
5T f^Ni:" II According to these great author- ities on Alankara, therefore, the nyaya teaches that as the lamp continues to burn after it has lighted up the interior of the vessel, and is indeed essential to the continuance of that illumi- nation, so the expressed meaning of a sentence is absolutely essential as a basis for the figurative meaning which it also 
conveys. 
This has the same meaning and application as the q&frMPT?^ which see the first series of maxima It occurs in Sures'vara's large VdrtiJca 4. 4. 248, and 6. 2. 155, as follows: 
II Similarly, in his vartika on the Taittimya- bhashya 2. 1. 221 (page 86):-"^,%^^ ^: I ^Tn?T9l^?TFciT ^Rfr^f^Rt ^?: " 
II It is found too in a third work of his, namely Naiskarmyasiddhi i. 42. Also in the Jain treatise Prabandhacintamani, page 62, as follows; 
Indological Truths 
27 
In Upamitibhavaprapancd Katha, pages 52, and 418, ifc appears as aKqgqJUlgMH- In Klrtikaumudl vi. 43, we have the compound a^g^H&ifedKfelfeKI^K^;. Tlle word ar^T? has become TZ in Marathi, as in 
The simile of the [continued] revolving of the potter's wheel. Followers of both Sankhya and Vedanta have asked why, on attaining to right knowledge, a man is not immediately liberated. Kapila's answer is contained in Sutra iii. 82. 
" 
|| On which Aniru.ddha sas:" *ror 
|| Srahmasutrabhashya 4. 1. 15 teaches the same thing from the Vedantist's standpoint, and propounds the very important doctrine that whilst accumulated and current works are destroyed by true knowledge, fructescent works, which brought about the present existence, are not. Therefore the Jlvanmukta has to continue here until death just as the potter's wheel continues to revolve until the impetus given to 
it exhausts itself. 
"!M^K*I ^r* n 
The maxim of giving up the fabulous gem Cintdmani, and tttfdng instead a mere piece of quartz! Its application is 
Indological Truths 
28 
obvious. Raghunatha applies it to the man who abandons the search for the knowledge of Brahma in order to enjoy the pleasures of this life. S'dntis'ataka 12, in Haeberlin's Antho- logy, bears on this: " 
II So, too, Hitopades'a ii. 60: 
There is an additional example in Upamitibhavaprapancd Kathd, page 420:" f 
Then, lower down on the same page, this and eight other figures are employed to illustrate the folly of one who, though acquainted with the Jaina creed, still clings to evil. The whole passage is reproduced for the benefit of those who have not the book to refer to. "?n 
& " 
II On page 170 there is yet another word of Siddharsi's in regard to the Cintdmani, namely " 
Movement upward on the part of a quiescent intelligent being is dependent on [ the action of ] some other being of in- telligence. I should call this an axiom rather than a maxim ; but as Anandagiri terms it a laukika-nydya I include it here. It occurs in his comment on Bralimasutrabhdshya 4. 3. 5, as follows : " 
u 
Indological Truths 
II 
The simile of particles of the Kataka nut [placed] in water [ in order to clear it ]. Manu refers to it in vi. 67 thus: 
" 
|| In the Laukikanydyasangraha the nyaya is explained as follows: " qvn 
II The larger work, the Laukikanyayaratnakara, adds the following quotation in support of the definition: "sg% ^NcMK; I aigjM4^N sftt i ^c^r ^nr *m ^^ ^d'M^^ n" Tlie "worshipful feet" are those of S'ankaracharya, and the verse is Atmabodha 5. 
Sures'vara has given a capital illustration of the application of this in his large Vartika 4. 3. 975-6 (page 1553): 
There is an interesting example, too, in Hemachandra's 
Paris'istaparvan ii. 4: 
Venkatanatha, however, does not altogether hold with this simile ; for in the vritti to his Tattvamuktakaldpa ii. 50 ("page 215), he says: 
Indological Truths 
30 
II 
Broth cooked for the son-in-law is also useful for tlie unex- pected guest. This, like the ^gfl^lf3Tm aud many others, resembles our proverb "killing two birds with one stone." I have met with it only in Kuvalaydnanda (page 98) under the figure ffT9. The passage is as follows: "VT% ^?T ^TT5TTHT- 
This passage also illustrates another of 
Ragunatha's nyayas, namely Jjgi4*m*)ftd<fl cfrTST T 
Like instructions, for obtaining Takshaka's crest jewel as a febrifuge ! An illustration of utter impossibility. It occurs in the Nyayabindutika, page 3, line 9, in a passage regarding the anubandhas. It runs thus: "gr?r^Tj sfcret 5^: I 3TJ%$ 3 
i<iaMTtMn1'iX*i|vJl 
u" I am indebted to Professor C. Bendall for pointing out this passage to me. It is applied by Vacaspatimis'ra, in the same sense, in his Tatparyatika, page 3 and in the Nyayakanika, pages 338 and 417. 
The simile of the bird named Tittibha [ Parra Jacana ]. It is baed on the story of this bird as given in the Hitopades'a, and is used as an illustration of ridiculous conceit. The verse 
which paves the way for the story is ii. 137: 
Indological Truths 
31 
The maxim of buttermilk for Kaundinya. This is one of Raghunatha's grammatical nyayas, taken from Mahabhasya, and is intended to indicate a special exception to a general rule as in the sentence snmwft ^T ttm rT3J sftf^^TPT, where an exception is made in the case of Kaundinya though included amongst the Brahmans. It occurs in Brihaddranyavdrtika 1. G. 71 (page 881 ): 
On which Anandagiri comments as follows: 
I have noted down seven instances of the occurrence of this 
illustration in the Mahabhasya, namely, 1. 1. 47; 6. 1. 2 (4); 6. 2- 1; 6. 4. 163 ( 2 ); 7. 1. 72 ( 3 ) ; 7. 2. 117 (2); and 7. 4. 61 (4). It will suffice to quote the first, as the other six are practically the same: "<^feciw CSFcf: I ^t% f 
See, also, Nagojl Bhatta's pari- bhdsa LVII, and Professor Kielhorn's translation of the same. Other instances of it will be found in Vdkyayactiya, ii. 352; S'lokavartilca, page 617 (verse 15); Tantravartika, page 262 (last 2 verses); and Bhiimati, 3. 3. 26 ( page 628 ), 
Thou ridiculest the man who taking his gold ties it up in 
Indological Truths 
32 
a corner of his garment, and then thyself talcing the gold tiest it up in the skirt of the sky ! It is found in Atmatattvaviveka, ( page 58, line 3 from bottom ), as follows: "d 
1 1;fl <* 1+1 Rf II 
The simile of a thief [who engaged himself] as a cooh His inability to perform the duties, however, led to his discovery and arrest. This is intended to teach the folly of undertaking to do something quite beyond our powers! Sures'vara is the only author in whose works I have met with it. The following verse, which contains it, appears in his large Vartika (page 610 ), and also in that on the Taittirlyopanishadbhashya (page 169), the preceding context, too, being identical in both 
cases: 
The followin is an extract from Anan- dagiri's comment on the former passage: 
' 
|| The same commenta- tor's explanation of the nyaya as it appears in the latter work is somewhat different. He says: "c 
<l'3l^<jM*?1tcM+t rc(';<4< I 
The nyaya occurs again on page 181 of the Taittiriyavartika: " 
Indological Truths
﻿33 
A thief's offer of his limbs for examination when the gold lias been found under his armpit! This occurs in the Jai- mini chapter of Sarvadars'anasangraha (page 134 of Bib. Ind, edition, and page 152 of Jlvananda's) of which the following is an extract: " 
II Professor Cowell's render- ing of the passage is as follows: "As for the argument urged by Udayana in the Kusumanjali, when he tries to establish that immediate and vehement action does not depend on the agent's certainty as to the authoritativeness of the speech which sets him acting...... all this appears to us simple bluster, like that of the thief who ostentatiously throws open all his limbs before me, when I had actually found the gold under his armpit," 
The simile of rice and sesamum seeds. Used to illustrate an easily distinguishable union of two or more things, in con- tradistinction to the more intimate and indistinguishable union exemplified by the commingling of milk and water. For examples, see tfttffc^rTO. Also Rudrata's KdvydlanJcdra x. 25. 
The simile of the raising [with the hand, one scale] of a balance. That, of course, causes the other scale to go down; and so the simile is used to illustrate the bringing about of two or more results by one operation. It occurs in the follow- ing passage of Pancapadilea ( page 38 ) : " 
I 
Indological Truths 
34 
commenting on this, Prakas'atman says; " 
Other good examples of it will be found in Nyayavartilea 3. 2. 12 (top of page 412), the substance of which is reproduced in Nydyamanjo/rl, page 456 ; in S'lokavdrtikat'ika, page 311 (where it is seen in conjunction with the Mnq ^^|d ^-M fa^TT^Pr) ; and in Vivaranaprameya, page 99, line 4. 
The simile of the grinding of chaff. Used, like 
of any unnecessary and useless effort It occurs in Padmapada's PancapddiM, page 68, as follows: " 
Also in the Hitopades'a iv. 13: " 
Sures'vara too makes very frequent use of it. We find it on pages 676, 1036, 1334, 1505, and 1572 of his large Vwrtika; and on page 176 of his Taittirlyavdrtika. 
The nyaya is not in Raghunatha's book, but he has others of the same meaning which I have not met with in the litera- ture; namely ^c^^^N, and jrt^JT idea is expressed in the following sentence of the Nydyaman- jari ( page 645 ): " 
Indological Truths 
35 
This saying is explained by Taranatha as follows: " 
STflrT:" II It would therefore seem to mean "Let this evil fellow, my opponent, chuckle over his ap- parent success in this argument, but what about so-and so?" I have met with it in Advaitabrahmasiddhi, page 14, in the following sentence : " ?TTT^^T ft^fWuirrfr I TT JRft- 
II It occurs again on page 16. In the Bhumatl, page 243, we have it in the form as follows: 
I t^T TRTT^ ?T?TT 5^3 q^srran^T ^r4: ll" This is de- cidedly the clearest example. In his translation of Haridasa's comment on Kusumdnjali i. 3, Prof. Cowell's rendering of the nyaya is " the principle of satisfying an opponent." 
The illustration of the caterpillar. This illustration is used and explained in Brihaddranyakopanishad 4. 4. 3 as follows : 
U I include it because it is found in Raghunatha's list; but it is of no practical value. 
The simile of straw, arani wood, and the burning gem [ as means of producing fire ]. The kind of fire produced by each varies (just as that of a lighted lamp differs from that of burn- ing wood or cowdung); and the method of production, too, is 
Indological Truths 
36 
different; that being in one case blowing, in another attrition, and in the third the rays of the sun. The application of the nyaya will be seen from the following passage of Nydyamanja- rlsdra, page 3, line 5 : "srei ^S^T: %u||<flujflMl3< NaM^f^n? 
For an interesting discussion as to the 
' capacity 
' 
(^rf^fc) residing in straw &c., see Kusuman- jali pages 58-72, and Prof. Cowell's translation, pages 6 and 7. The nyaya is not included in Eaghunatha's collection, but is explained in the Vdcaspatyam ( s. v. sqro) as follows : 
.'" II 
II 
The simile of a man carryiny a vessel full of oil [and who is to be put to death if he spills a drop of it ! ]. This curious illustration is given in Bodhicarydvatdra vii-70, and applied to one who has adopted the ascetic life: " 
One slwidd abandon an individual for the sake of a whole family. This is reads thus: "sn^fe the first $4441*7 pada mrr^n^^ of Hitopades'a i. ?T^[ I Zlli 115 which ^TT^fm 
anwn^ 'jf^f snfa;" II It is quoted by Auandagiri, in his com- ment on Brahmasutrabhdshya 1. 1. 22, as follows: "<fl^%^ 
| Raghunatha expounds it thus in the Laukikanydya- sangraha: "wr^T^ 
Indological Truths 
37 
**fT3T: STflRicr" II Further on he says, "? 
-^I'MNfMdf HlfcHcfd" II A nyaya of similar import to the one under consideration is " ^n^T *Tg<W 3T* which see below. 
The simile of the fire which has consumed the fuel [ and therefore goes out ]. This immediately follows the ^^3^- JUJ^H in Raghunatha's list, and is meant to teach much the same thing. He says 
: " ^ntftenrrft ^T *nsM*JT i&tfft WtT% <rofcT "i^ci^" || We have an instance of the employ- ment of the figure in S'vetds'vatara Upanisad vi. 19; and again in S'ankara's bhashya on Brahmasutra i. i. 4 ( page 76 ), and Sures'vara's large Vdrtika pages 1593 and 1840. The follow- ing is Paramdrthasdra 77: "sre 
I RJR^ ^: ^TcTTT VTSTnT: " 
II 
The simile of a man with a stick [ or, men with sticks]. The first instance, which I know of, of the employment of this nyaya is in a curious passage of Patanjali's on Panini 8. 2. 83, for reference to which I am indebted to Professor Kielhorn. It occurs also in the Nydyavdrtika on sutra i. 37. In this, and in the preceding sdtra, there is a definition of uddharana, in the course of which the term d<4^Nl occurs. In regard to this the Vartikakara remarks: 
3T 
Indological Truths 
38 
The following from Vachaspatimis'ra's Tattvabindu closely resembles the explanation given of the 
II 
The maxim of the Asuras, Ddma, Vyala, and -Kata. This is expounded by Raghunatha in the following manner: 
II "Vasishtha," means the Yogavasistha, in Book 4 ( chapters xxv xxxiv ) of which, we have a detailed account of these six Asuras. The verse quoted by Raghunatha is not found in the printed edition exactly in that form, but 4. 34. 36 
reads thus : 
n 
There is one of similar import in the opening part of then4 history, and Mr. M. R. Telang has pointed out a third in the closing part of chapter xxiv. 
The simile of Arjuna. Used to show that something, though once done, may be done again, as in the case of Arjuna who defeated the Kuru race after Krishna had already defeated 
Indological Truths 
39 
them. Raghunatha says: " E>MJlvi4f(|yi 
Vedic sentences de- stroys that error termed the world, which had already been destroyed by eternal knowledge (Self, Brahman): just as Arjuna slays again the Kuru race already slain by Vasudeva." The verse is Sankshepas'drvraka- ii. 38, and the translation is that of Mr. Arthur Venis in the Veddntasiddhdntamuktdvali 
(page 174) where the verse is quoted. 
The simile of grain and its husk. The earliest example of this figure is in the Brahmabindu Upanishad, verse 18: 
II This verse, with others of similar import, is quoted in Pancadas'i iv. The following, from BhdmaU, page 54, appears also, without any acknowledgement, in the first chapter of Sarvadarsanasangitiha : " 
i ?fsrarr i 
I TSTT ^T ^ffAi^un 1m <*ii"Hitm<i H ^I^^I^M ^iim^iM m^tia II 
Vacaspatimis'ra, however, was not the originator of the illustration. It occurs four times in the Mahdbhdsya, namely, 1, 2. 39; 3. 3. 18; 3. 4. 21 ( vart. 2 ); and 4. 1. 92. The following is the passage, the substance of which is reproduced in the Bhdmatl and Sarvadars'anasungraha : " 
I 5ET TT^r^t mW^I^PT ^r*^*w<i+l^<i^fd." See, also, Nagojl Bhatta's paribhdsd 73. The nyaya seems to have a different application in Marathl literature. Molesworth's defini- 
Indological Truths 
40 
tion is as follows: "The law of the corn and its straw. Conquer the king and you conquer his subjects; accomplish or acquire a matter and you attain all it sustains or involves." 
i (^<Ioi 
A Brahman does not become a Kirdta by living MI the S'dlagrdma ans ! This is mountain equivalent filled to our with saying, hundreds "A horse of those does barbari- not be- 
come an ass by being born in the stable of the latter." Compare, too, S'ankara's " q- fpsj^TR TT T^TaPOTSTfJfcM^i^SWI <4^4 fd 
' ' in 
Brahmasutrabhdsya 1. 4. 1. The saying as given above is found in Vacaspatimis'ra's comment on Yogabhdshya i. 5; and he makes use of it again in his Bhdmati i 1. 5 ( page 126 ) in the sentence " 
.'> ii 
H 
A thing does not become imperceptible because perceived by one wlw has ascended a mountain peak This saying, quoted from Tantravdrtika 1. 2. 2. (page 6), appears in the Nydyam- anjari (page 422) in the course of a discussion on thesddhutva and asddhutva of words. The passage is as follows ; " 
II " Jayanta quotes it on pages 90 and 222, also. 
Indological Truths 
41 
The simile of the union ofman and lion. Used to illustrate a particular kind of Alankara consisting of a combination of figures. See the quotations from Sarasvattfcanthabliarana and Kuvalaydnanda, under 
II 
Blame is not employed in order to blame something that is blameworthy, but rather to praise something other than that. This is the form taken by the nyaya in S'abara on Jai- mini 2. 4. 20. In Tantravartika, page 16, it appears as "^ 1% T%^r fr*z ft&sg SR3& sift 3 l%^f ^tg^," and Anandagiri quotes this reading of it in his comment on Brihaddranyak- 
opanisadbhdsya 2. 5. 16. 
The following passage from Agamaprdmdnya, page 51, ad- mirably illustrates the meaning of the nyaya: " 
fc ff 
I 
iv. 124) | 
dQ ?TT5q: IqM! II 
Indological Truths 
Another reference to the nyaya will be found i 
jarl page 273. 
A hyena does not find a suitable opponent in a young fawn. This may be contrasted with the saying "^ f|- zfrm- STT%?rcT *R1%." It is found in the Nyaya- vdrtikatdtparyatlkd, page 33: '^^R^T 1% fosj: 
I T if *RTcf <rcj: sffrnrsn tHtaro 
u 
fZo "woi refrain from setting the cooking-pots on the fire because there are beggars [ who may come to ask for some of the contents ], nor do they abstain from sowing barley be- cause there are wild animals [ which may devour it ]. This oft-quoted saying appears three times in the Mahdbhdsya, namely in 1. 1. 39 ( vart. 16), 4. 1. 1 ( vart. 15 ), and 6. 1. 13 (vart. 13 ), and this is probably the original source of it. I have met with it in two of Vacaspatimis'ra's works, as follows. In the Nyayavartiltatatpavyatlkcij, page 62: "fr 
I 
" 
II Similarly, on page 441 of the same. In Blitf.- matl, page 54, we read: "t 
<=TT ^ i&ftfa ^TT^T 5nfvf?ft^ " 
II '-The same passage, with a good deal of the preceding context, reappears, without acknow- ledgment, in the Charvaka chapter of the Sarvadars'anasan- graha. We find the saying in a modified form in the Panca- 
Indological Truths 
63; " 
l" It appears in this form in Jivanmuktiviveka, ( page 8 ) also, and is there ascribed to Anandabodhacarya. See his snTM^TT^T page 21. Then we Jiave the well-known verse, Hitopades'a ii. 50: 
. 
Not even by the employment of a thousand different pro- cesses can S'ydmdka grain be made to germinate as rice. Vacaspatimis'ra was fond of this kind of saying. That above is from his Nydyavdrtikatdtparyattfed, page 55, and another of the same class occurs twice in the Bhdmati. On page 180 ( 1. 2. 18 ) " ^% 3TT3 crzrp: ffrdsfNMHa," and on page 704 ( 4. 1. 1. ) "ST ^r f*3fl*lia<Ll|^l ^rn^" II Compare, too, Manu ix. 40: SRTf[T% " 
II They all remind us of those sayings from another part of the Orient: " Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?" and again, "Whatsoever a man soweth that shall he also reap." 
ST ft Not even a thousand blind men can protect a house from robbers. This is another of the sayings of Vacaspatimis'ra, and is found in his tika on Nydyaviirtika 1. 2. 2 ( the definition of sreqr ). To see the aptness of the saying it would be necessary to transcribe a lengthy passage of the bhdshya and vdrtika ; but the scholar can easily refer to them himself. 
Indological Truths 
44 
T ff IJ 
The edge of a sword, even though very keen, is not employed to cut itself. The nyaya is found in this form in Syddvddaman- jarl, page 89, in combination with that which immediately follows; and Mr. Thomas, the Librarian at the India Office, tells me that he has met with the two together in Nagarjuna's ^rps- glPUntm k^ there the sword-nyaya takes the form of "q- ft 4sKcUmrareTRT ^JTTSTR t?rT *WTt vr^-" In Madhyamaka- vritti, page 62, it again occurs in conjunction with another simile: "srorfq1 TRT d^lfayi^l ^i 
r| &c." For the latter, see Third Handful. Further instances will be found in TdtparyatlM, page 255; Nydyamakaranda, page 131; and others of a like nature in Venkatanatba's Sarvdrthas'lddhi, page 391. 
No young actor, however well-trained, is clever enough to get on his own shoulder. This is Mallisena's version of the nyaya, as cited in conjunction with the cognate one above. In Brah- masutrabhdsya 3. 3. 54, S'ankara quotes it as "jf % ^z: i%- /RT: dH^^^farrgqT^-" In the vartika on Taittirlyabhasya, page 108, Sures'vara puts it thus: " 
|| Other varieties are the following. " 
, Bhamatl 1. 3. 41 ( page 277 ); Khandanakhan- 
dakhddya, page 592; and, finally, "^ f| ?^m^41 ^rrm", Vidydsciyari on Khandana, page 57. It will thus be seen that no two authors agree as to the form of the maxim ! 
Indological Truths 
45 
ft II 
A lamp does not illuminate until it [ i. e. its light ] reaches the object to be illuminated. It therefore comes under the head of JTPsrejrffr, for which, and its opposite, see Nydyakandali, page 23. It occurs in the Nydyamanjari on 5. 1. 7 (page 624): 
I 
i%" 11 Also in Tdrkikaraha page 271:"^ 
r." Then in Sarvarthasiddhi (on TattvamuJctd kalapa i. 32 ) we read: " 
;." Compare Nagar- juna's karika vij. 11: "anrr^1 5T=fm *ri% ^T f%^f ?W: I 
One person does not remember what another has seen. This is the first pada of Kusumdnjali i. 15, the whole verse being as follows: 
R u 
Professor Cowell translates thus: " One does not remember what another has seen; the body remains not one and the same from decay; there cannot be transference of impressions, and if you accept a non-momentary existence there is no other means." The karika, however, is hardly intelligible apart from the preceding context of which it is a sort of summing up. The nyaya did not, however, orginate with Udayana, since it is quoted in Vyasa's Yogabhasya iii. 14, and in Nydyabhdsya 1. 1. 10. It is found, too, in Syddvddamanjari, pages 61 and 154; also in Nyayamanjari, page 437, line 10. 
Indological Truths 
46 
Not even a thousand blind travellers can discover the road 
[to be taken]. This is contained in Bhclmatl 1. 1. 5 (page 124), in the following passage:"^ % mv^MchM^ 
It is better to leave this untranslated. The 
is found in Vyasa's Yogabhdshya ii 24, as follows: 
cqu^^mi^i^fTi^Ki^Ki I *>MMI iri<4i*ru'^P:ft?T% I 
i II OQ tnis Vacaspatimis'ra remarks: " a^ 
J^*NK^MHlq^?T% " 
II The nyaya, as given above, is found in the NydyavartiJcatdtparyafrlka, page 29: 
II See, too, Citsu- Idil ii. 26 ( Pandit, voL v. page 514 ) where reference is made to Yacaspati's use of the nyaya ; and the same objection is taken to it by S'riharsha in the Khandanakhandakhadya, page 354. 
Professor Venis tells me that the Benares pandits regard this as a shortened form of the RTSjilKM'HK'JMN (for which, see the First Handful of maxims), -and that it means "unduly exten- ding one's claim or one's position generally." Its equivalent in MarathI is qr^T i^Rtjf , which, Molesworth tells us, means " to establish one's self freely and fully : to extend one's power far and wide." He gives, as an example of its use. the MarathI 
Indological Truths 
47 proverb " ^51^ f^ft aft^ft vj?^ q^t," which is the equi- valent of our " Give him an inch and he'll take an ell." In the passages, however, in which I have met with the expression, it seems to imply a dogged adherence to a position in spite of pre- vious failure, and when there is little prospect of future success. Two passages in Upamitibhavaprapanca Katha pages 798 and 907, seem to confirm this: 
II There are 
two other instances of it on pages 656, 657 of the same, and it occurs three times in the Nyciyamanjarl, as follows. On page 113: 
On page 121 : " $ 
: II 
?TT%:" II OQ page 504: "f 
: I T^3 II There is one instance of it in Khandanakhandalchadya ( page 31 ) also: ''q1 ^ T," which is rendered by Prof. Ganganatha Jha: "Nor will you escape from this predi- cament by talcing the long step of assuming an infinity of different kinds of real existence." Indian Thought, page 17. 
u 
Leaving the sweet morsel he licks his hand I It is found in Pancapddika, page 49, as follows : "g 
" n In Raghu- natha's list it appears as fqiit %^l M" %!%. We m y compare it with the saying "$tf 
Indological Truths
﻿48 
The simile of a father's conforming to [the ways of] his little child. This is set forth as a model for the knower of Brahma, that, by a lowly and humble demeanour, he may attract the ignorant. It is thus explained in the Laukikanydya- sangraha 
: 
?** *i n 'T 
larger work the following passage is quoted by way of illustra- 
tion: 
37 
^ II 
II The "elder" is Vidyaranya, and the verses are Pancadas'l vn. 286-288. 
Pis'dcas should be answered in the Pis'dca language. This nyaya is found on pages 214 and 410 of Sarvarthasiddhi ( on Tattvamuktakaldpa ii. 49 and iv. 13 ), in the first instance in conjunction with "argn^^ffr ^fe: "> with which it is clearly synonymous. See "z 
The simile of a stout cudgel Such a stick, hurled at a yelping cur, may at the same time strike and silence other dogs near it; and so the nyaya seems to be used somewhat in the sense of "Killing two birds with one stone." It is thus de- fined by Raghunatha: " qcpcnfeNtidft*m 
Indological Truths 
49 
II The simile is employed in this sense in Advaitabrakma,' siddhi, page 100: "q- $ft 
I 
It is akin to gviM +i g^ Pi^ l^rer!^ which see in First Handful. 
The simile of a lamp. We have here another of the many lamp-illustrations. In Mahabliasya 1. 1. 49 ( vart. 4) an adlii- kara is said to be of three kinds, and in the first it is likened to a lamp in the following words: "c 
the opening part of 2. 1. 1, where the question is asked '%: tpf. nwrf%^r:)" the paribhdsa, and not the adhikfira, is likened to a lamp, in the same words as above. 
Nflges'a (in vol. iii. page 8 of the Uddyota} quotes the following verse: 
?nfrr ^tacrnj; i 
n We find the same figure in Jaimini's sutra 11. 1. 60, which S'abara explains thus: "sr^qr ^pf^SM^ ^^RTTt ^TflorRT^r- In dealing with this adhikarana Madhava substitutes the figure of a single dancer amusing a number of spectators. See the srfesqrq- in Third Handful. 
This nyaya, which is quoted by Amaradasa in his tika on Vedantas'ikhamani, page 262, is apparently another form of the more concise m^srf^fcr which, as it occurs in the Yoga section of Sarvadars'anasangraha, is rendered by Prof. Cowell 
7 
Indological Truths 
50 
"Express negation." In a footnote ( on page 250 ) he explains it thus : " Where the negation is prominent it is called lyrasajya- pratishedha ; but where it is not prominent we have the pary- uddsa negation. In the former, the negative is connected with the verb: in the latter, it is generally compounded with some other word; as, for example, (a) 'Not a drum was heard, not a funeral note '. (b) 
' Unwatched the garden bough shall sway '. The former corresponds to the logicians' atyantdbhdva, the latter to anyonydbhdva or bheda". 
In the Vacaspatyam the nyaya is quoted under 
as follows : "sTCTPT iwfrh *m*ll(lw)frl <MN<:MklM^: I 
TIT MlfllM^d 
' 
^1 
According to this, then, the meaning of the nyaya is "that which has been applied or asserted is subsequently withdrawn or denied." 
Both the forms of negation are contained in Mahabhdsya 1. 4. 50 &c., in Vakyapadiya ii. 86, and in Sures'vara's large vartika 3. 9. 73. Verses defining the two are quoted on page 214 (Chap, vii.) of the Sdhityadarpana, and renderings will be found on page 254 of Mr. Pramadadasa's translation. Compare Molesworth's definitions of the terms. 
The principle that whatever lias no result of its own, but is mentioned in connection with something else which has such a result, is subordinate to the latter. This is Dr. Thibaut's rendering of the nyaya as it occurs in Brahmasutrabhdshya, 2. 1. 14 ( page 443 ), "A Mimamsa principle. and he A explains it thus in a footnote: 
sacrificial act, for instance, is in- dependent when a special result is assigned to it by the sacred texts ; an act which is enjoined without such a specification is merely auxiliary to another act." The source of the nyaya is 
Indological Truths 
51 
S'abara 4.4.19, and Madhava applies it in tara 4. 3. 16 (sutra 37). I have met with it also in Nydya- vdrtikatdtparyafikd, page 178, line 2; and in Vivarana- prameyasanyraha, page 117, line 11; and page 147, line 9 from bottom. 
The simile of the capture of a crane. Raghunath explains it thus: A man wishing to secure a crane puts butter on its head, which, when melted by the sun, goes into its eyes and blinds it, so that he can then take hold of it ! He clearly took this explanation from the Tattvadlpa/na, a commentary on the Pancapddikdvivarana ( itself a commentary ), and I subjoin a portion of each. Vivarana, page 283, line 4: 
: 3JJTDTT 
:"|| On this the Dlpana, page 779, bottom line : " 
^T." Then follows his application of the nyaya. Both writers evidently regard it as an illustration of something ridiculous; and to me it recalls the nursery tradition that the way to catch a sparrow is to put salt on its tail ! Raghunatha, however, classes it with nyayas deprecating a roundabout way of doing a thing. Amongst these he gives the T, where a man whilst looking for a stick with which to kill a snake, comes upon an axe; but, instead of using that against the enemy, he goes out to cut a stick with it. In Vivaranaprameyasanyraha, page 262, line 9, we again find the 
Indological Truths 
52 
The illustration of ivhispering in the ear of a deaf man. A good example is found in Upamitihlui'oaprapanca Kathd, page 1062: 
Compare the following from Nyayamanjari, page 405 : 
." Also the expression "^Rfc^ JTFHT^" m Naiskarmya,- siddhi iv. 21. For similes of a like kind, see auu^lic^rm^. 
rfl 
The simile of a lamp in a vessel ivith many holes. Raghu- natha explains it as follows: 
frf" II The above is verse 4 of S'ankara's poem, to the exposition of which Sures'vara devotes 37 verses in his Manasollasa. 
The illustration of the lowering of one part of a load [ and so easing one's burden]. This is found under Tantravd/rtika 1. 3. 22 ( page 222 ): "frifcq&lsjMMTt 
Ganganatha Jha renders the passage thus: "When a certain conclusion to the contrary has been laid out in an exceptionally 
Indological Truths 
53 
strong manner, if one proceeds to immediately point out the true theory, it involves a very hard work; and hence with a view to lighten this burden, the present sutra proceeds only to weaken the contrary view by throwing it open to doubt." 
Jayanta Bhatta reproduced this on page 419 of the Nydya- manjarl as follows: <(^Tr^^i 
*ft 
The illustration of the three Asuras, Bhftna, Bhdsa, and Dridha. See this explained under 
The simile of the bird Bhulinya. It is supposed to say "md stihasam," "don't do anything desperate", and then does desperate deeds itself ! The purport of the nyaya would therefore seem to be, "Practise what you preach." There are two references to this bird in Sablidparva. The first is in XLI. 18 (Bombay edition):"^ Jnwm%t ?m%r 3f =^ft JTFrft I JT^TW ^TT^f ygnft y$f&$W$Mvn" II This is explained by the second passage ( XLV. 27-32. ): "sm %tf 
^^ n i rsr ^TFH: ^T^T ^ra: PS^IIT; u ^ u ?rr 
Il^Tftr^r^ *TT II ^ II ^1 % 
u ^o u jw: srru 
l T% ^1^31% *r^n ^T:" u vi u the Calcutta edition of 1834, the chapters are XL and XLIII res- pectively. Raghunatha's remark on the simile is as follows ; 
Indological Truths 
54 
" For the following interesting example of the application of this nyaya (though the bird is not mentioned by name ) I am indebted to my friend Mr. C. H. Tawney, C. I. E. It is found on pages 138-9 of the Paris'istaparvan:" 3 
u 
u ?\j^ 
HT:" u i\ivs u An interesting conversation on the inconsistency of not practis- ing what one preaches ( though not in connection with this nyaya ) is found also in the Bhagavata Purana x. 33. 27-40. 
The simile of the reflections of a madman. The story con- 
nected with this is told in the following passage of Atmatattva- viveka, page 64:" d^ 
Pancatantra V. 41 ( Indischc Spruclus 1221 }. 
Indological Truths 
55 
27ie supposition that the light of a gem is itself the gem. This follows Mr. A. E. Gough's explanation of a slightly varied form of the nyaya which is found in the Bauddha section of Sarvadars'anasangraha. He adds that, in this case, "we may yet handle the gem, because it underlies the light, while, if we were to take nacre for silver, we could not lay hold of any silver." The correctness of this view is established by an important passage at the beginning of Pancadas'l ix, which treats of sq^ as a means of arriving at a right know- ledge of Brahman. Such meditation, being directed towards Brahman with qualities, is of course erroneous, inasmuch as that Impersonality has no qualities; but it nevertheless leads to the underlying nirgumot Brahman, just as the mistaken notion regarding the sparkle of the gem leads to the discovery of the gem itself. This is styled fHife.-a-H, an error which has a corresponding reality underlying it. To mistake the distant shining of a lamp through the keyhole of a door for a gem, is an illustration of fe*Hif%$RT, an error entirely devoid of an underlying reality. The passage is as follows: " 
I 
: \\ ^ \ 
^RT ^^ II ^ II The commentator, Ramakrishna, ascribes verses 2-5 to a vcirtika; whilst Citsukha Muni, in his comment on verse 2 which is quoted in the Nydyamakaranda ( page 148 ), names Dharmakirti as its author. This is not improbable; for Dharmakirti is known to have composed vartikas on the works of Diguaga, a famous Buddhist writer of the sixth century ( See Mr. K. B. Pathak's paper "On the authorship of the Nyayabindu" ). In Nyaya- manyart, pages 24 (line 1 ), 33 ( line 4 from bottom ), and 158 
Indological Truths 
56 
( line 10), the nyaya is found: as ^fuiMUmfui^fe^. Then on page 308 ( line 9 from bottom ) there is the following passage which corresponds with the extract from Pancadas'l, namely: 
lift^T JHTTTf 4-J (ur^^l McfdJfM: I ^ rj 
The nyaya occurs again on page 317. 
Other references to it are S'alika, page 22, line 4; Nyilya- Tcandall, page 190; Atmatattvaviveka, page 45; and Tarkikn- raksd, page 16. 
The illustration afforded by the sale ofyems. It is intended to teach that, in disposing of precious stones, one who under- stands their value will derive greater advantage than one who is without that knowledge. This would undoubtedly be the case if the seller were a S'abara and the buyer a dealer in gems ! The illustration is S'ankara s, and is used by him in his exposition of CTihandogya 1. 1. 10, which sets forth the value of an intelligent use of the syllable Om. The passage is as follows : " ^^ft f^ft ^Itat^^ *TJ * ^? I ^TRT 5 %TT mfa^i =* I^ f^PTT ?Rt%. -^ BfrforR *R%." An objector here urges that the result of an action does not depend upon the intelligence of the performer of it, but on the due perfor- ance of the act itself, and he supports his view with the follow- ing homely illustration " 
The Sidhantin disallows this, and gives another illustration : " 
The nyaya is quoted, in a slightly different form, by Anandagiri in his comment on BrahmasutraWidsya 3. 3. 42 ; and again, by Amalananda, in the same connection, in company with the drug-illustration. 
Indological Truths 
57 
Mistaking bamboos for snakes on the part of tliose whose eyes have been smeared with the fat of frogs. This curious illustration, taken from S'lokavdrtika, page 520, is found in the following passage of Tatparyatllc/a, page 314 : " 
q- 
:" II 
The S'lokavdrtika passage containing the nyaya forms the second quotation in the following excerpt from Sarvdrthasiddhi on Tattvamuktdkaldpa ii. 64 : " 
gf^^Tfti " 
|| Another instance of the nyaya is to be found in Parimala, page 43, line 9- 
: II 
The simile drawn from fish. It is used to illustrate the oppression of the weak by the strong. In Raghunathavarman's list, it follows the <Wlm4-d-m^, and he explains it thus: 
*ilc<<4-s4l<f|<cl J I ^T 5THT 
d^ 
' 
II T 3RT fa^i?UI?miWfft 5RTF7T4: " 
II The verse quoted here is 
Indological Truths 
58 
Yogavdsistha 5. 37. 7. There is a good example of the usage of this nyaya in ^Kdmandaklya-Nltisdra ii. 40 which reads thus: "m^miftud^l SHT^T fw?N<:4i: I ^31^1% Tf^Rft Jfl^fi PZHT: M<4<&" II My friend Mr. Tawney has given me a reference to the commentary on i. 13 of the same work, and also to Kathdsaritsdgara cii. 63 which I here subjoin together with his translation ( voL ii, page 390): "mt$HKM4> f%l%^r sfrrsfo ^-H^cTi | *F3RT^: fj|: ^ff ^k^^l^^K^ " 
II " There is no race in the world without a king; I do believe the gods introduced the magical name among men in their alarm, fearing that otherwise the strong would devour the weak, as great fishes eat the little. " Kulluka gives "^ 4< as a various reading in the second line of Manu vii. 20, and adds " STsT j<A^Hl ^^c-Mk^^R^ *Tc^J|^ ^ ^Tf^JrE^" II For this, also, I am indebted to Mr. Tawney. 
One who has been seized in order to be put to death, [ gladly] agrees to the amputation of a limb [as an alternative} The nearest approach to this nyaya of Raghunatha's is found in the following verse of Bodhicarydvatdra ( vi. 72 ) 
: 
On the former part of this, the commentator says: 
:<a )H (rt 
Indological Truths 
59 
The bee that knows the excellence of the perfume of jasmine cares not for darbha grass. This is found in the following passage of Upamitibliavaprapancd Kathd, page 1031 : 
ii<rii nc 
The simile of a grain of soot in a heap of spotted beans. Perhaps akin to a needle in a haystack. It seems to have originated in that very ancient drama the Mricchakatika where it is found ( on page 40 ) in the following Prakrit passage : 
In vol. ix of the Harvard Oriental Series, Dr. A. W. Ryder ( in imitation of the ^rarO renders it thus: "But mashter, it's pitch dark and it's like hunting for a grain of soot in a pile of shpotted beans. Now you shee Vasantasena and now you don't " 
The nyaya is quoted in Udayana's Kirandvali, page 79 : 
Isl^" ? and again on pages 208 and 451 of Venkatanatha's Sarvdrthasiddhi, the latter being as follows : "^SIT muufl ?T*ft *T*TT 
Indological Truths 
60 
If Mithila should be in flames nothing of mine would be burnt up. This is the second line of a verse in S'dntiparva t chapter 178, the first line being "3^ ^ ^^^ ^ f%PT". It is used to indicate the freedom from anxiety of one who has nothing to lose ; like Juvenal's "Cantabit vacuus coram latrone viator." S'ankara quotes the phrase in his exposition of the words "^ ^r^ sft*Rf |" in Brihaddranyakopanishad 1. 4. 15: 
?T ^T ^URT f4>^^l^ ?TS^ " 
II It appears also in the following verse of the Khandanakliandakhadya, page 278:Enquiring as to a suitable date for the shaving of one's head when one has already performed that ceremony ! It occurs in the following passage of the Nydyamanjari, page 
c 
%Irf 
" 
II This saying was explained to me by my learned friend the Principal of the Government Sanskrit College at Benares. It is similar to two given by Raghunathavarman, namely, "^%^ 1% SfT&r^j" and "T 1% f%^TfR?TR ^TT^gT 1%^." See also ^^CT ?r^rw^En in the Third Handful. 
Indological Truths 
61 
The simile of [ molten ] copper poured into a mould [ and assuming its shape ]. Raghunathavarman expounds it thus: 
This verse is S'ankar- 
acarya's Upades'asahasrl xiv. 3, on which Ramatirtha com- ments as follows : 
I may add that the nyaya which immediately follows this in Raghunatha's list, namely srsfSjafan^FT, 
'1B based on the very next verse of the Upades'asahasrl ["sr^f^t ^T *W\ 5^: &c."], and his explanatory remarks are taken verbatim from Ramatirtha's comment. The nyaya we are now examining ap- pears also in Brahmasutrabhashya 1. 1. 12 in the expres- sion "j^rTMp^Th^ddliJlRMld^N^", and in Taittirwjavdrtika 
( p. 94): 
rJ Cl I 
u 
Looking for the production ofgerms when the seed has been eaten by a mouse ! This seems to belong to the same category as the efritb^rdMflSTT. It occurs in the Bauddha chapter of Sarvadars'anasangraha ( page 14 of Jivananda's edn. ). The whole passage is too long for quotation, but the nyaya-por- 
tion is as follows : 
" - ||u 
Indological Truths 
62 
Even a [ cowardly ] crow can assume the bearing of an 3, when it comes upon a dead lizard ! This is the first line of Bodhicaryavatara vii. 72, the second being 
How true to nature this is ! 
He who causes a thing to be done by another is himself the real doer of it. "Facit per alium facit per se". This nyaya is of common occurrence. There is a good instance of it in Anandagiri's comment on Bralimasutrabhdshya 1. 2. 11. Ex- plaining Mundaka Upanishad 3. 1. 1, S'ankara says: " 
on 
which Anandagiri remarks : 
Hi'^Rfrt'Oid I Ts DKIICI <& f)<l 
:" II See also Tatparyatika, page 187, line 1. 
II 
Anything that has been made is .non-eternal. In other words, that which has a beginning has also an end; except of course, the Naiyayika's jr^HT^rraTj which has a beginning but no end ! The nyaya is found in the Nydyabindu, page 108, and its converse, ^d.McM d<t>dM%? on page 116. The following are additional examples of its use. Vivaranaprameyasangrahai page 240, line 3 : "sr 
lfa" II Nyayavartikatatparyattfca, page 187 line 8 from bottom :~"i 
Indological Truths
﻿|| Part of this latter passage is quoted in Citsukhi i. 23 ( Pandit, vol. V. page 27 ). 
By what means can a donkey overtake [so as to bring back] that which has been carried off long before by [one mounted on] a horse? This phrase, borrowed from Tantravdrtika ( page 730 ), is introduced into the Nyayamanjarl ( page 262 ) in the course of a discussion on the relative value and authority of S'ruti and Smriti, in the following verse : 
According to Kumarila, a man who has accepted the teach- ing of s'ruti will not allow it to be upset by a contradictory smriti, and vice versa. This is expressed, as follows, in two passages of Tantravdrtika 1. 3. 3. (as pointed out by the editor of Nyayamanjarl ): "^ 
ifai<i ra<it T: 
f| nfli: Ml^^ld" 
II Page 92. Again on page 
94 : "zfif f T^f snWT^^T t*4in*i c' eM 4^*i in n^i>iin^n^ic43+ill^' 
Indological Truths 
64 
II 
This nyaya is found in Raghunatha's larger work, the LaukikanydyaratndJcar ( India Office MS. 582, page 185 a ), and on page 6 of S'ikhdmanitilca. Prof. Cowell, however quoted and explained it in a footnote to his translation of Haridasa's comment on Kusumdnjali v. 4. I quote a portion of the comment to elucidate the note. "You may not say that 
' the volition of the conscious agent is the cause in effort only, and not in all action generally,' because even though a particular kind of volition may be the cause in the case of effort, this does not preclude volition generally; otherwise, because a particular seed is the cause of a particular shoot, it would follow that seeds in general [ i. e. the class, seed ] could not be the causes of shoots in general" The following is the footnote. "This argument depends on two principles,-a. The same relation of cause and effect which exists between parti- culars, exists lilcewise between their respective classes, 'qftjlmt; fcKJ4KUi*JN<sicUWMqU[V and b - the general causes onlyproduce their effects wlien conjoined with the particular causes, 'grcrFT- .' Thus Archbishop Whately has made a book on Logic, man can therefore make logical books ; only in each particular case we require the concurrents, education, leisure &c." 
,4s is the YaJcsha so should be tlie offering. This is included in Raghunatha's list, but without any definition of its meaning. It is embedded, however, in the philosophical part of his 
Indological Truths 
65 
treatise, as follows:" 
15% ft * *muin 
I have found the nyaya in use in the following works of Vacaspatimis'ra's and of Jayanta Bhatta. In the Nydyavdrtika- tatparyatika, page 115 : "grf^RT^RT^^rr *& ufal^ ?&- fa I Tfr fT f ^TRT?^Toi: " Also in the Bha- matl 4. 1. 15 (page 723):"^ 
iMm^^c^t I 3ii 
" 
II Th0 two which follow are from the Nyayamanjari. Page 54 : 
d*Hi^ 
On page 637 : 
It occurs also in S'rldhara's Nydyakandali, page 144, line 13, and, finally, in the vritti on Tattvamuktdkalapa ii. 49, where it is immediately followed by " 
The general sense of the nyaya would seem to be that of " tit-for-tat ", " a Roland for an Oliver." 
Indological Truths 
66 
Conveying the meaning actually expressed [ and therefore needing nothing to supplement it ]. Kumarila puts it thus in Tantravdrtika 3. 5. 19 : "sjj^re f^PT: I 3 *rf% <NEte<skft ^Ng-gM^N ^sq-:" II Compare, too, the latter part of S'abara on 2. 3. 2. It occurs twice in Bhdmati. On 4. 1. 4 ( page 710 ) we read : 
Again on 4. 3. 4 (page 742 ) as follows:"^ 
U Anandagiri, too, quotes the nyaya in his comment on 4. 3. 4. He says: " 
: I 'IT^^R' qi^w^wirt 
II ^ is found also in the philosophical portion of Laukikanydyasangraha (L 0. MS. 1031, page 45 6. ): "^ 3 
" 
II See, too, Nages'a's Uddyota, voL i. p. 574. 
The illustration of the king's son [ who was brought up ] as a hunter. The story is that a young prince, abandoned by his parents at his birth, was adopted by a hunter and brought up as his own son. The boy remained in ignorance of his real origin until he was discovered by a kindly person and restored to his rightful position. S'ankaracarya seems to have been the first to utilize the tale, and he gives it as follows in his bhasya on BrihaddranyaJcopanisad 2. 1. 20 : 
Indological Truths 
67 
Sure'svara refers to this several times in his large Vartika. On page 71 we read: "ds>lfc^lEUna<4 nvranHtifoa; I ^f- ^r: ^fsn^ s^n^mw to^." Then, on pages 970-2, he devotes ten verses to the nyaya, and returns to it once more on page 1845. 
The author of the Siddhantalea'a ( on page 20 ) cites it as the "wnvi^^cntidiM^IHIilH?" and & is reproduced, in a slightly different form, in the comments of Aniruddha and Vedantin Mahadeo on Sdnkhyasutra iv. 1. See also Bhdmat'l 1. 4. 22. Kaghunathavarinan links with the above the i^+jq- 53TPT which tells of a lion's cub being brought up as a ram; but I have not yet met with it elsewhere. 
The simile of the manner of entering a royal city. It ia found in both of Raghunathavarma's treatises, but the following explanation of it is taken from the Vdcaspatyam: "fa^<Ad^l 
Raghunatha points out that we do not grasp the meaning of a long sentence as a whole, but that the sense of each word enters the mind singly, on the principle of 
Indological Truths 
68 
I have met with the nyaya in Nages'a Bhatta's comment on Kaiyata. In Mahabhdsya 1. 1. 58 ( under vartika 1 ) we read 
\ 
Kaiyata remarks on this : H^^r:"and on these worcs 
Nages'a says 
The passages here quoted will be found on pages 389 and 390 of vol. L of the edition of Mahdbhasya with the Pradlpa and Uddyota, published at the Nirnayasagar Press in 1908. 
This is the second line of a verse on page 372 of the Tantra- vartika. To make it intelligible I quote a portion of the con- text as interpreted by Professor Ganganatha Jha in his trans- lation ( page 511, last line ) :- " It has been urged above that, if the Apurva inhere in the Soul, then it becomes only an end in itself desirable by men. But this does not affect our position; because one thing becomes subservient to another only when its sole use lies in the serving of some purpose of this latter, and not merely when it rests in this ; for instance, though the Red Dye is carried by the camel ( and as such rests upon its back ), yet it serves the pwrposes of the Icing ( for whom it is carried )." 
The cvrculation within the body of poison which has entered the blood. Used as a warning against the beginnings of evil in however small a degrea The figure is found in Bodhicaryavatara vii. 69 : 
Indological Truths 
69x^Mitf 
The commentary runs thus : " 
*f: 
f|r 
mc<T*r ^rhi;." Compare "The beginning of strife is as when one letteth out water; therefore leave off contention be- fore there be quarrelling." 
The illustration of wood thrown into the salt-lake [ or mine ] Ruma. Tne Medinl kos'a explains Ruma as " iVfeT^cjun^ ", and it is said to be situated near Ajmere. The tradition is that anything thrown in there becomes saline itself. The earliest mention of Ruma, with which I am acquainted, is in the following verse of Tantravdrtika ( page 132 ) : 
Kumarila seems here to regard Ruma as the region in which the salt mines are situated, rather than as the mine itself; and this may give some ground for the footnote by the editor of the Medinl, ( Calcutta, 1869 ) where he defines 
In his translation of the above verse, Prof. Ganganatha Jha omits Ruma altogether. He says : "Just as in the case of salt mines, and in that of Meru the land of bright gold, whatever is produced in them, becomes salt and gold (respectively), so also in the case of the inner satisfaction of one who knows the Veda (which imparts Vedic authority 
to all that it touches)." 
Indological Truths 
70 
We have an example of the nyaya in Vacaspati Mis'ra's comment on TogasutraVidsya iv. 14. The sutra is "qr^Jrw^gr- 
on which he says : " 
^Idd^M^Ml =3 5TcfT7 ^T." Tnen Venkatanatha uses the illus- tration in Tattvamuktdkaldpa v. 28, and in his vritti thereon, 
as follows : 
In the vritti on ii. 1 of the same, the author says : " gu^iTi ^^^ I 
Popular usage overpowers etymological meaning. There is a capital illustration of this in the Vivaranaprameyasangralia .3 ( pages 134, 135 ) where Badarayana's first sutra is under discussion : " Ql 3)144141*^ RNft ^&'- \ 
cqil^m l*l cl*jSi 
s[if 5 f- II Tne following verse is quoted in the Nydyapradipa, a commentary on Tarkabhasa, page 5 : 
II The editor cites a very modern author who as- cribes the verse to Kumarila. See also Pancapadikavivarana, pp. 132-3; Vedantakalpataru, p. 207; and Anandagiri on Brahmasutrabhashya, 1, 3. 42. 
Indological Truths 
71 
The illustration of the sketch of the Bos Gavaeus ( Gayal ). Raghunathavarma explains and applies it as follows: 
on page 457 of Vacaspatimis'ra's Tdtparyatlkd, and again on page 363 of Veddntakalpataruparimala. reads thus : "3 grfeU 
The latter passage 
A third example is found in the following extract from Kaiyata on Mahdbhasya 1. 1. 46 : 
rt 
See also S'rlbhdsya page 322, and page 77 of Dr. Thibaut's translation. 
[The existence, or nature, of] an object is established by means of some distinguishing characteristic, and by a recognized form of proof [ such &c. ]. "TOT TFmTciifyggrfrT sr^sfrjRn^R as sense- perception, scripture 
^ ^^fe(lr; 
' ' u Or, just as and Godhead the wonders of creation establish the "eternal power " of the invisible Deity, to which Scripture also 
bears testimony. 
on Raghunathavarma page 28 of the Benares quotes the edition nyaya of in his the work: 
following passage 
Indological Truths 
72 
Commenting on the opening verse of the Veddntaparibhdsd, the author of the S'ikhdmani says: "^5 sTfrfBt 
Amaradasa's tlka on this begins as 
follows ; 
A plough is existence. That is, it is a means of existence; cause and effect being here identified as in STTg^H: ^e ny^ya is found in Sures'vara's Sambandhavdrtika, page 9, as fol- lows : q1^ iThi ^ ij i 
q-TT." On which Anandagiri remarks: " 
We may compare with this the phrase "The plough supports the bullocks", which occurs in Brahmasutrabhdsliya 3. 2. 4 : "zr?IT ST^J TRT- 
The simile of the measuring out [ or distribution ] of beans by the daughter-in-law. I am much indebted to Mr. Govind Das, Honorary Magistrate of Benares, for giving me what seems to be the real meaning of this hitherto-puzzling nyaya. He believes it to be the adaptation of a Maithila proverb with which the following story is connected. "A very miserly old Brahman used to have a fistful of grain given daily by his wife to every beggar who came to the door. The old man having 
Indological Truths 
73 
married his son, the idea struck him that if he got his daughter- in-law to do the distribution instead of his old and ugly wife, the smaller fist would measure out a smaller quantity of grain ! But, unluckily for him, the girl was very beautiful, so even persons who were not in need began to drop in, disguised as beggars, in order to admire her ! The result was that, while each measure was less, the total amount given away was very much more." 
It occurs in the AtmatattvaviveJca, page 87, line 12, as follows:- 
3^1*11 a ch*Hi<<* II 
The maxim of the destroyer and its prey. Used of two things which cannot exist together. It occurs in Taittiriya- vartika 2. 1. 66 ( page 53 ) 
: " jrf^TW ^[TT % f^nxrf^tf^R: I 
iT^T^TR ^MlkT 3Miv|idbWHl." Anandagiri explains it thus : "?T*IH^-*)i4M*lfi 
5fi*in ". See also Pras'astapada's Vais'e- shikabhdshya, pages 112, 113; and the latter part of Citsuklil iv. 4. ( Pandit vi. 390 ). Compare the en^crm^N of Nais* Jcarmyasiddhi I 55 (qmaUunft;), and iii. 85 
The illustration of a lion in a forest. Used of things which mutually aid or protect each other. This, and the jg4i*M<N which is of similar import, occur together in the following 
10 
Indological Truths 
74 
passage of the Veddntakalpataruparimala ( page 100 ) : 
Similarly, the lake shelters the alligator, and the alligator protects the lake. There is another reference to the 
on page 627 of the same work : 
{ %SIT ? 
^ta:" || The source of the nyaya is doubtless Udyogaparva xxxvii. 46, for the reference to which I am indebted to Professor Dr. R. Pischel. The verse is as follows : 
T tjnigii<4n <<iwi^<iwi T 
Compare also verse 64 of the same. 
The maxim of the discussion of matters with a view to obtaining a husband [ for one's daughter ]. It is thus explain- ed by Raghunathavarman :--"*flfeijfttm 
:" || I have met with the expression twice in the Panca- padika ( pages 72, 73 ), in a description of the erroneous views of common people ( such as the Laukayatikas &c. ) in regard to the atman. The passages are as follows: "t^foP^qiu^ -^jrMlfc 
II Again: "zff 
I *T 
I ST 
It needs a more intimate acquaintance with 3^^ than we Westerns possess in order to grasp the full significance of the nyaya, and I must confess to a certain amount of haziness as to 
Indological Truths 
75 
its exact sense in the passages here cited. In a later part of his treatise Raghunatha gives us the maxim "grfjfoTf^id^iMJJl" appended to which is the remark 
' 
rrssrw." The way in which he applies the latter will be apparent from the following excerpt from the philoso- phical portion of his work : "^ 
It Compare Kumarila's 
| qf* ^^rt ifr* rr^Tr^FTftfcRci:" II Tantravdrtika, page 169-70. Prof. Ganganatha Jha points out that if the would-be bridegroom was really of the same gotra, it would make the marriage impossible ! 
Retaining possession of a cow after it has been sold to some one else. This illegality is dealt with by Narada and Yajnavalkya in the " f^^lWM^MM^ui^", "The non-delivery of a sold chattel." In chapter viii. 1, the former defines it 
thus : 
The latter lays down the law on the subject in chapter ii. 254-8. Udayana's application of the above in Atmatattvavivelca, page 58, is as follows : 
I 
The drift of this is not very clear. 
Indological Truths 
76 
The illustration of the shaking of a tree. A man is supposed to be up a tree whilst others are standing below it. One of the latter points to a particular branch which he wishes to be shaken, and the others point out other branches for the same purpose ; so the man shakes the whole tree at once and thus satisfies every body by the one effort ! Raghunatha applies this in the following way: "?r%P*r 
ff 
larger work, Kaghunatha says that the simile is also found as and in this form I have met with it in Maha- bhasya, vol. i page 23 ( bottom ), " Also in 6. 1. 1 (vart. 13). 
Running away through fear of a scorpion, he falls into the jaivs of a poisonous snake! Avoiding Scylla, he falls into Charybdis ! The nyaya occurs in the following passage of the Nyayavartikatdtparyattfca, page 53: " 
II Ifc is found also in Kusumanjali ii. 3 ( page 328 ), in Vidvanmandana, page 4, and in Nydya- makaranda, page 223. Of somewhat similar import is the 
", which see. 
For this see the 
Indological Truths 
77 
The maxim of the make and the mungoose. The well- known innate antipathy of these two for one another ( Pdnini 2. 4. 9. ) is a commonly-used illustration of inherent opposition between two things. Mr. Tawney has reminded me of the story in Panchatantra V. 2. which speaks of the enmity between them in the following words : 
i; $dclHl" II The nyaya is employed by Udayana in Atmatattvavivelca, page 53, as follows : " In ^ 
M 
II It is more commonly known as 
The simile of the [ apparently simultaneous ] piercing [ with a needle] of one hundred lotus leaves. It is found under the figure <Hij^ in Euvalayananda, in connection with the following example : 
srer 
f^ff^TT 
In the Sahityadarpana, also, we have the same idea some- what differently expressed in the description of The following is the passage ( on page 102 ) with Mr. Pramada- dasa Mitra's translation :- 
Indological Truths
﻿78 
|| " Now, the perception of the suggested, caused as it is by, and hence succeeding, the percep- tion of the Accessories &c., has necessarily a process, but from its quickness it is not perceived, like the process of the appa- rently simultaneous piercing through of a hundred lotus leaves placed one upon another." The expression " 
is used by Aniruddha in his comment on Sdnkhyasutra il 32 ; and Dr. Garbe thinks that he took it from the Sdhitya- darpana. See his Preface to the Sdnkhyasutravritti. There are two examples of this nyaya in S'rldhara's Nydyakandcdi. On page 23 : " 
. snrt f 3 srren* *rVnmV The other is on page 158. 
A much older example is found in S'lokavdrtika, page 311 ( verse 157 ), to which I append Mr. Ganganatha Jha's transla- tion: "^ttl^MM^II^rh ^JSpr^T^tS^ ?TCT f: I ^8f^3 *^ ^ : M^M^^Irl WR." "You have brought forward the case of the lamp and the light emitted by it, as an instance of the simul- taneity of the cause and the effect But in this case also, there is a minute point of time ( intervening between the appearance of the lamp and that of the light), though this is imperceptible ; just as is the case with the piercing (with a needle) of the hundred petals of the lotus." Professor Jacobi has kindly pointed out an instance of it in Nydyavartika, page 37, in the form <jcM^^^Maiif^il<^^i from which, perhaps, Aniruddha took the nyaya rather than from the very modern Sdhitya- darpana. The same expression ^M.^^id^fd^'J--!^ ig found in the Jaina work Syddvddamanjarl ( page 92 ). Besides these, I have met with the nyaya in TdtparyatlJcd, page 334, line 2 (in the form ^ft^d<^lui\Tl^HM^^d^%^^ ); in Nyaya- manjarl, page 498 (as ^^^mij^McbTcb>t^^<^^^^); in Tarkabhdsdtlkd, page 24; in Tdrkikaraksdttkd, page 126 (as 
an(i in Citsukhl ii 9 
Indological Truths 
79 
Fifty [is contained] in a hundred. The greater includes the less. In the Vdcaspatyam the nyaya is thus defined : 
STfT%:" II I have met with it only in the Ve~ ddntakalpataru, page 121, line 12, where a highly technical pas- sage from S'abara 6. 1. 43 is discussed, regarding the pronounce- ment of the names of Pravaras at new and full moon sacrifices. A reference to Kunte's M^fcfardPlW, page 1776, would throw light on this dark passage. 
3llUirM^|<qi (I 
The simile of perfuming a dead body. For the application d illustration see ammflfrHm. 
The simile of the moon upon a lough. Molesworth defines it thus : "A Sanskrit phrase adduced as a simile or an illustra- tion when an object seen or a matter debated has its position or relation assigned to it as at, on, in consistency with &c. a parti- cular object or matter, simply from the appearance of conti- guity or connection which, under one line of view or one train of reasoning, it .ordinarily presents ; whilst actually and truly it is remote from it so widely as to preclude altogether affirma- tion of connection. We say the sun sinks in the ocean by the same law as we say the moon is upon a bough of a tree, speaking in both cases from the appearance presented." It is thus akin to the ar^rereftM^M^n. The following example is found in Taitiriyabhdshyavartika 2. 1. 232 (page 88): 
' sftar M&WJ^N^ I (fc*l*T &Uii*ta Jddlfe an? And in Vivaranaprameyasangraha, page 202, we 
Indological Truths 
80 
read : *t*q^ 5% J^T^^T^SiJT iiVt> r 
" 
II 
To do a %ingr once -is sufficient to satisfy the demands of the S'dstra. The nyaya is found in Mahabhd$ya 6. 1. 84 ( vart. 4 ), 108 ( vart. 3 ), and in 6. 4. 104 ( vart. 3 ). Also in S'abara 11. 1. 28, 35; and 12. 3, 10. It seems to resemble. the Marathi phrase qimi^dl, which Molesworth thus defines : "To be enough indeed for the supplying, serving, or fulfilling of any matter or point required by the S'astra, but without excess beyond; to exist in just sufficient quantity, or to be performed with just sufficient definiteness of action, as to warrant the name or designation borne, and to preclude disallowal of its existence or its performance; to be enough to swear by." The Sanskrit phrase occurs also in Vivaranaprameyasangraha, page 154 ( line 2 from bottom ) : " q 
See too Bhamatl 4. 1. 12, and compare 
A woman who has fallen once need veil her face no more. This occurs in Tantravartika, pages 703, 704, in the course of the discussion (under 3. 1. 12) of the meaning of the expression " snFrarr %T^4^I^^I *fhr J^mflr". On page 703 we read : 
The nyaya is quoted by Parthasarathi in S'astradipika 1. 4. 4 (page 177, line 6 from bottom ), while discussing the subject of words like Agnihotra 
&c., as the names of sacrifices. 
Indological Truths 
81 
Like produces like. Jayanta Bhatta denies that this is a fixed principle, on the ground that scorpions are produced from cowdung. He puts it thus (page 46G ): 
This "old wives' fable" regarding the scorpion was deeply rooted in the Indian mind ! It is found in Mahdbhasya, 1. 4. 30, and is used as an illustration by S'ankaracarya in his bhasya on Brahmasutra 2. 1. 6. Ramanuja followed suit. Udayana, too, has it in his vritti on Kusumdnjali ii. 2, and the com- mentator Haridasa remarks that a scorpion can be produced from cowdung as well as from a scorpion. 
Thanks, however, to the now well-established Law of Biogenesis, we are better informed at the present time. To quote Henry Drummond: "It is now recognized on every hand that Life can only come from the touch of Life. Huxley categorically announces that the doctrine of Biogenesis, or life only from life, is 'victorious along the whole line at the present day.' And even whilst confessing that he wishes the evidence were the other way, Tyndall is compelled to say, 
' I affirm that 
no shred of trustworthy experimental testimony exists to prove that life in our day has ever appeared independently of 
antecedent life'." 
II 
When there is doubt reason comes into play. This is found in Jnanottama's comment on Naiskarmyasiddhi iv. 8. He says : 
11 
Indological Truths 
82 
Akin to this is the nyaya " which is found in the earlier part of the same work ( namely in the comment on i. 29 ), and which Raghunatha expounds thus in his smaller work: " 
* 
II 
When the loss of all is intending, a wise man wiU give up half [ if by so doing he can save the other half ]. It occurs twice in the Pancatantra, namely in iv. 27, and v. 42, as 
follows : 
In the second passage, the final word is ^:^f 
:. See Dr. Biihler's note on ^ci|7l 3T&. The first half of this couplet is quoted in Kumarila's Tantravcirtika, page 91, bub there the 
reading is nvq1 
. 
No cognition is erroneous in respect of a thing as of certain properties ; but there may be error in regard to the exact form of the thing. For example, a man sees a glittering- object on the ground, and supposes it to be silver ; but it turns out to be nacre and not silver. There is no mistake in his 
cognition of the shining object, but his conception of the nature of the object is erroneous. The nyaya is found in Citsukhl 
Indological Truths 
83 ii. 18 (The Pandit, vol. v. page 496):"^ ^ 
Underlying the words 
' 
:" II on PaSe 25 of the Saptapadarthi, we find the following comment : " 
Another interesting example is to be found in Tattvamuktcl- kcdapa iv. 104. I subjoin the second half of the verse and a portion of the author's own vritti on it : 
^*! 
On page 403 of Vidyasagara's tlka on Khandanakliandakha- dycL the nyaya is ascribed to ^rter^ftaJR. I would commend to students a helpful note ( No 34 ) at the end of Professor M. N. Dvivedi's edition of the Tarkakaumudi, as bearing on the principle enunciated in this nyaya. 
In this contracted form the nyaya is quoted by the author of the Vcdantapcwibhasa, (chapter vii, page 411 ); in its entirety 
Indological Truths 
84 
it reads thus : "uftM f| ftfaftwr jjmjsfcmd:" \\ The following is Mr. Arthur Venis' rendering of it ( in The Pandit, vol. vii. page 460 ) : "An affirmation or a negation, when made of a subject together with its predicate ) applies to the predicate if a bar exists to the affirmation or negation being attached to the subject". An extract from Rational Refutation of Hindu philosophical Systems (page 232 ) may tend to elucidate the above. "When the Vediintins give to intelligence appropriated to the internal organ the name of subject of right notion, we are to understand, that the character which they ascribe to intelligence associated with the internal organ, really belongs to that organ. They have a maxim,-which all the other Systems subscribe to,-that 'An affirmation, or a negation, when predicated of anything together with its associate, if debarred from the object substantive, is to be referred to the object adjective'. In their opinion, the quality of being a cognizer cannot be assigned to the soul, and, consequently, is debarred from it." 
The nyaya is found in Tdtparyatikd, page 31, line 5, and in AtmatattvaviveJca, page 72, line 3 from bottom; but, in both cases, without the words "fc$|u| ^r% *TRf." It is quoted, too, 
in Laulcikanyayasangraha, page G9, line 15. 
TJiough possessing ten sons the mother-donkey carries the load ! This evidently well-known saying, taken from Tantra- vdrtiJca, page 807, is found in Bhdmatl 3. 4. 33 ( page 691 ) in the following connection : " 
Indological Truths 
85 
&T TT**T ^iff^fcf" II The saying is quoted by Ananda- giri also, in his comment on the same portion of the bhashya. See, too, Veddntas'ikhdmani, p. 168. 
The simile of Sunda and Upasunda. Used of conflicting and mutually destructive things. It is thus explained by Raghu- nathavarma in his Laukikanyayasangraha :-"3MTM HI3^131^. i *T*n tarssrt sfiinTu 
- r\ . ri 
< I "^ ffi 
The story of Sunda and Upasunda is told at great length in Adiparva ccix-ccxii, but is condensed into six verses in Ka- thdsaritsdgara xv., of which the following is Mr. Tawney's translation : "There were two brothers, Asuras by race, Sunda and Upasunda, hard to overcome, in as much as they surpassed the three worlds in valour. And Brahma, wishing to destroy them, gave an order to Vis'vakarman, and had constructed a heavenly woman named Tilottama, in order to behold whose beauty even S'iva truly became four-faced, so as to look four ways at once, while she was devoutly circumambulating him. She, by the order of Brahma, went to Sunda and Upasunda, while they were in the garden of Kailasa, in order to seduce them, And both those two Asuras distracted with love, seized the fair one at the same time by both her arms, the moment they saw her near them. And as they were dragging her off in mutual opposition, they soon came to blows, and both of them were destroyed." The simile is met with in Stlnkhyatattvakaumucfa 13, as follows: "^ i^M<fa*iy*fl<*l 3&TT: ti 
See also 
Indological Truths 
86 
klya Nitisdra, ix. 61. In Sarvarthasiddhi ( on Tattwmukta- l-alapa ii. 53) we have the expression "^ This nyaya is used, says Raghunfitha, when the things in opposition are of equal strength; but when they are of unequal strength, and the weaker go to the wall, the Matsya- nyaya is employed. 
. *-*-r '^jjfcjp^* 
The simile of SiibJwga and the mendicant. The following is Raghunatha's explanation of it: " 
5TWT 
*1 ** 
This seems to me very unsatisfactory, but I can suggest nothing better. The only work in which I have met with the nyaya is the Atmatattvavivelca ( page 54 ), where it is wrongly printed as It would need a long extract to make it intelli- gible, so I must refer the reader to the work itself. 
The simile of the ascent of a staircase. Used of knowledge arrived at gradually, by easy steps. "Line upon line, precept 
Indological Truths 
87 
upon precept, here a little and there a little." There is an instance of its use in Bkamati 1. 3. 8 ( page 201 ): " 
i II 
The illustration afforded by Saubhari. The story of this sage is told in Book 4, chapter 2, of the Vishnu Purana, and, with less detail, in Book 9, chapter 6, of the Bhagavata Purana. We there learn that, after remaining immersed in a piece of water for twelve years, the Muni was so much im- pressed by the happiness of the little fish which disported them- selves around their great progenitor named Sammada, that he determined to marry and raise up progeny himself! He accordingly went to king Mandhata, the father of fifty charming daughters, and asked for one of them in marriage. Taken somewhat aback by the appearance of this old and emaciated suitor, but fearing to displease him, the king replied that it was the custom for princesses to select their own husband, but that if any one of them chose him as such, he could take her to wife. He was accordingly conducted to the ladies' apartments; but, on the way there, he transformed his repelling person into one of handsome and youthful appearance, and the consequence was that each of the fifty maidens fell violently in love with him and demanded him as a husband, and so he married them all ! Each of them lived in a beautiful mansion by herself, surrounded by every luxury. After a time, the king went on a visit to them to see how they fared. The first one pointed to her lovely surroundings and told of her husband's goodness to her, but added that there was one thing 
Indological Truths 
88 
which troubled her very much, namely, that her husband was always with her, and therefore her sisters could never enjoy his society at all. The king then visited each of the others in turn, and heard exactly the same thing from each ; and so the necessary inference is that the sage entered into fifty bodies at one and the same time, and this is the sole point of the nyaya 
! 
It occurs in Bhamatl 4. 4. 11 as follows : 
Venkatanatha is the only other writer in whose works I have met with it. On page 65 of the Nydyasiddhanjana we read: 
II In his vritti on Tattvamuktakaldpa iii 22, where the same subject is discussed, we find the following: 
It occurs again in the text and comment of verse 31. 
II 
The simile of the redness of the crysled. Such redness is owing to the proximity of a red object, such as a rose &c. The illustration is much used by writers on Vedanta &c. For exam- ple, we read in Paramarthasara, verses 16 and 61: 
cTTT ^TRtf WT: II $1 l 
So, too, Aniruddha on SdnJchyasutra ii. 35: "q"TT 
i%^"ll See also At- mabodha, 14; and a verse, by some unknown author, quoted in 
Indological Truths 
89 
the Panini section of Sarvadars'anasangraJta ( page 144 Bib. Ind., and 163 in Jivananda's edn. ). In the Kuvalaydnanda ( page 289 ) under the figure s^f^i, we read: " 
|| See also Vivaranaprameya, page 214. 
Nature is hard to overcome. This is no doubt based on 
Hitopades'a iii. 56: 
Kaghunatha applies it in the following manner: " 
The expression occurs also in the following verse of the Kusumdnjali ( i. 7 ): 
The snake stupified ly its own poison bites its own body! This saying is found in Udayana's Atmatattiaviveka, page 67, line 6 : "*r!% f| * ^T %l%T^t T^^T^T: i ?T%C^ST ^IH^^I i 
i 
12 
Indological Truths 
90 
The simile of the relation as master and servant. "It is used to mark the relation of the feeder and the fed, or the sup- porter and the supported, subsisting between any two objects." Apte's Sanskrit Dictionary. It is of very common occurrence. For instance, in S'ankara's bhashya on Brahmasutra 2. 1. 4 in a discussion as to the relation between Brahma and the world, he says: "^% STR^" *JHM*l4N*U*?TT^t ^TW% I ^f 
Also in 2. 3. 43, we read: " 
See, too, Ramatirtha on Veddnta- 
sdra 19 ( page 141, last line ). 
II 
The simile of an alligator in a lalce. Used of things which mutually aid or protect each other. See 
Indological Truths 
SOME OPINIONS OF THE PRESS ON THE FIRST HANDFUL. 
"There are few books which give the results of so much reading ia so small a compass as this little pamphlet of some fifty pages. As its name indicates, it is a collection of those popular maxims, or, as Dr. Buhler calls them, " inferences from familiar instances," which one 
hears so frequently in conversation with Pandits Similiar collec- tions have been frequently put together...but we very rarely find in these any reference to the use of nyayas in actual literature. The great value of Colonel Jacob's work is that at least one such reference is given for every maxim quoted. He has drawn principally from works on philosophy and on rhetoric, branches of Sanskrit literature which he has made peculiarly his own, and the modestly styled 'Handful' is only one more example of the labourious care and love of accuracy for which its author is distinguished. 
The book is useful to other than Sanskrit scholars The 
student of Tulasr Dasa, or of Malik Muhmmad, will find many an. 
obscure passage illumined by this true dehall-dipaka, throwing light, as it does, both upon the past and on the present." 
Journal of Royal Asiatic Society ( July 1901). 
"Under the title 'Laukikanyayafijali,' or 'A handful of Popular Maxims', Colonel G. A. Jacob has published and explained a number of those allusions to popular and, at the time, no doubt, well-known proverbs or stories which abound in Sanskrit literature. These nyayas find their parallels from our own language in such common savings as 'like the pot and the kettle', 'like the hare and the tortoise' etc. The proverbs or stories to which they allude are perfectly well- known and need no explanation. In the case of their Sanskrit 
Indological Truths 
counterparts, the memory of their origin has not always been preserv- ed or has become obscured. The list now published consists of those examples which Colonel Jacob has been able either to trace to their source or to partly explain. Let us hope that this useful little work, the result of many years of reading may, in his own words, 'become the nucleus of a very much larger collection'." 
Luzac's Oriental List ( March-April 1901 ). 
"From what we have written above, we think our readers will see- what a useful little book Colonel Jacob's is, especially for those who- wish to address the people of this land in forms of speech and with thoughts that are familiar to them. 
Prakas'ak ( Kolhapur, March 1900 ). 
Printed by B. R. Ghanekar at " Xirnaya-<agar 
" Press, by the publisher- 
Indological Truths
﻿Indological Truths 
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA LIBRARY Los Angeles This book is DUE on the last date stamped below. 
AU624i97t 
Form L9-Series 444 
I 
Indological Truths 
Indological Truths 
UC SOUTHERN REGIONAL LIBRARY FACILITY 
A 000020054 3 
Indological Truths 
TT. 
tjf- 
i 
-I- 
1%. 
1%.
